






















































Hansard: March 28, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 38A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1053 
 March 28, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to present a petition on behalf of a number of residents 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the folks 
of Broadview and Whitewood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Cypress 
Hills concerned about the impending closure in a day or two of 
the SaskPower office in the community of Shaunavon. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to cause the government to take the 
necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today several pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Frontier, Claydon, and 
Shaunavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from Fairlight, the Fairlight and Maryfield 
areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway 310, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Fishing Lake, and Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you and good afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. I have another petition asking that full service be 
maintained at the Saskatchewan Power office at Rosetown. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are concerned 
that the banks cannot accept payment if the customer doesn’t 
have documentation, a service which the office provides. The 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I see the signatures on this petition are from three 
communities — of course the community of Rosetown but as 
well Radisson and Milden. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this great day to 
be a farmer, I rise to present a petition signed by citizens 
concerned with the alarming practice of transferring patients 
from one ambulance to another on the highway. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of people in my constituency 
who are very concerned over the condition of Highway 18. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the citizens of Lake Alma. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who 
are very concerned about this government’s addiction to gravel 
and turning highways back to gravel as they’ve done on a 
section of No. 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
the Earl Grey area families and businesses. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Dysart, Bulyea, Punnichy, and Duval. And I’m 
pleased to be able to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure 
everyone’s wondering what petition I have today. But today I 
have several pages of a petition with citizens concerned about 
the safety on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, 
Saskatoon, St. Gregor, Bruno, Dana, Kelvington, Buchanan, 
Naicam, and Quill Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens opposed to a possible 
reduction of health services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek and Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build an elementary school 
in Arbor Creek-Willowgrove. 
 

The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, come from northeast 
Saskatoon — from Buckwold Cove, Adaskin Cove, and Wright 
Crescent. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very concerned that a 
withdrawal of the lab services of Lafleche and District Health 
Centre would cause undue hardships to residents, particularly 
seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of the area 
including Lafleche, Meyronne, Kincaid, Glentworth, and 
Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the rural 
school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Limerick and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition from citizens that are concerned with 
the deplorable condition of Highway 368 from 4 miles south of 
Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. Brieux. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s signed by the good people of Carrot 
River, Humboldt, St. Brieux, and Colonsay. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Department of Highways 
section shop in Watrous remain open so as to ensure the 
safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan Highways 
employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present a petition 
in the House today regarding maintaining full service of the 
SaskPower office in Rosetown, the town which my in-laws are 
from. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Rosetown. I 
so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise and join my colleagues in presenting a petition to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Rosetown, and I’m pleased to present it today. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment: 
what new department expenditures in the ’07-08 budget is 
one-time spending? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the Minister of 
Learning, the Minister Responsible for Public Service 
Commission; Culture, Youth and Recreation; First Nations and 
Métis Relations, Immigration, Northern Affairs, Government 
Relations, Saskatchewan Property Management, Highways and 
Transportation, Labour, Agriculture, Environment, Finance, 
Industry and Resources, Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development, and Community Resources. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: of the additional 274 million 
now allocated to the health care budget, which initiatives 
are one-time costs? 
 

I also ask on day no. 43 the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: given the new initiatives in this 
year’s budget, what are the department’s forecasts in 
health spending for the next two years? 
 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of 
questions surrounding the issue of harassment. And I give 
notice to the government on day no. 43 the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how much money was paid out 
as a result of firing related to department employee 
harassment [got to get that right] in the fiscal year 
2001-2002 all the way up to 2006-2007? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: of the harassment complaints 
filed in the 2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were 
verified? 
 

And that continues on up to the year 2006-2007. 
 
I ask the government the following question on day no. 43: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many department 
employees were charged with harassment for the fiscal 
year of 2001-2002, going up to the years 2006-2007? 
 

And my . . . No, not quite the last group. I will give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many harassment-related 
complaints were filed in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
And related questions going up to the year 2006-2007. 
 
And my final set would be, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many department 
employee harassment cases resulted in conviction, 
disciplinary action, or firing in the fiscal year 2000-2001, 
all the way up to the fiscal year of 2006-2007? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many government employees were charged with 
harassment for the fiscal year 2006 and ’07? 

 
And I also give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many government employee harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 
2006-2007? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what is the total financial 
impact of a 1 cent variance in the Canadian-US dollar 
exchange rate upon the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
revenue projections for corporate income tax, corporate 
capital tax, and non-renewable resource revenue for 
2007-2008? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: will the minister identify both 
the total amount of one-time spending contained in the 
2007-2008 provincial budget, and all the individual 
one-time spending measures? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat: to 
date how many meetings has Tom Waller had with First 
Nations in his role as CEO of the Forestry Secretariat? 
What First Nations attended and when were the meetings 
held? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the House a group of young men 
and women who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They 
are members of the Hear the Youth committee of Prince Albert. 
And over lunch I and yourself, Mr. Speaker, and other 
colleagues had an opportunity to meet with the Hear the Youth 
committee, and they presented to us a document entitled Voice 
the Vision of Youth. An amazing piece of work, Mr. Speaker, 
that this committee has done in ascertaining the views of young 
people in the community of Prince Albert. 
 
And I want to thank them for their work and thank them for 
visiting the legislature this afternoon. And I would like, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce each of them and perhaps as I mention 
your name if you could just give us a wave to indicate who’s 
here. Brigette Jobin is here; Celeste Boran-Fetch, Melanie 
Demyen, Sabrina Demyen, Crystal Whiteman, Chris Sauve, 
Kurt Sauve, Matt Wareham, and Zach Nilson. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the Hear the Youth 
committee, Mr. Chad Nilson, who as you know happens to be 
the newly nominated New Democratic Party candidate in your 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, soon to be joining us on the floor of 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

the House. 
 
I would ask you to join us in welcoming the Hear the Youth 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Premier this afternoon on behalf of the 
official opposition in welcoming all of the young individuals in 
the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
As we hear from youth across this province, it’s great to see the 
initiatives that you’ve undertaken to represent not only your city 
but your fine community and area, and bring to the legislature 
your concerns about how we might grow Saskatchewan, how 
we might benefit from all of the input of youth. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition I’d like to welcome all of 
the young people from Prince Albert to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly two constituents of mine that are 
sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Ron Hitchcock 
and his son, Drew. Pleased to see you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you today and to all members of the 
Assembly guests seated in your gallery. We have some special 
guests here today. They’re seated with one of our interns, 
Jonathan Selnes. With Jonathan are his parents, Sharon and Bill 
Selnes from Melfort. They arrived last night and were part of 
the supper that we had with the interns. And later on today after 
question period the Selneses are travelling, are beginning their 
trip to Calgary. And in view of the weather, we certainly hope 
that they have a safe trip. And I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the Selneses to the 
Assembly. Through the internship program, interns have the 
opportunity to serve on both sides of the House with a member 
and I’ll be very fortunate indeed to have Jonathan serve with me 
when the changeover occurs. So I’m very pleased to see his 

parents join him today and look forward to working with him in 
the months ahead. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I introduce to you and through you to all my 
colleagues a fine-looking bunch of 51 grade 6 students from 
Father Robinson School in the heart of the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency. Father Robinson School is the largest 
elementary school in Saskatoon and I believe in the province — 
some 640 students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they do everything in a large way. They even brought 17 
chaperones with them and a couple of teachers. The teachers 
today accompanying them are Cheryl Green and Karen 
Cymbalisty. And the chaperones, Mr. Speaker, I have to read 
them; they’re all my neighbours. James McLean, Rosemary 
Nazar, Debbie Lischynsky, Peggy Dauvin, Donna Parker, 
Debra Wiegers, Warren Gherasim, Brian Classen, John 
Stanzeleit, Marian Miller, Angie Cunningham, Sharon 
Schramm, Sandra Dunn, Connie Wruck, Audrey Cote, and 
Karen Cox. 
 
Thank you very much for coming to your Assembly. I look 
forward to joining you for pictures and refreshments a little bit 
later on. And we do indeed hope that you have a safe trip home 
as well. I’ll ask all members to join me. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly I’d like to 
introduce two people that are very, very special in my life. 
Seated in your gallery are my daughter, Trisha Duckarmie, and 
her son, my grandson, Beau. Beau is up here today to visit the 
orthodontist so they just thought they’d stop in and watch the 
proceedings. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier. 
 

The Plains are Alive with the Sound of Music 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is about to kick off the biggest series of musical 
events this province has ever seen. 
 
This week’s Juno Awards, recognizing excellence in Canada’s 
music and recording industry, is being hosted by the city of 
Saskatoon. But it is just one of four major music events taking 
place in our province this year. 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

In September, Mr. Speaker, Regina will host the Canadian 
Country Music Awards. In October, Prince Albert will host 
Waniskâ, celebrating Aboriginal performers. And in October, 
Moose Jaw will host the Western Canadian Music Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all here this year and it’s standing room only 
in Saskatchewan in 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this first for Saskatchewan did not happen by 
accident. For the past several years, the cities of Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Regina have worked closely 
with our government to attract these major music shows to 
Saskatchewan. As a result of our coordinated efforts, ours is the 
first province ever to host four major music events in one 
calendar year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, our government has 
worked hard to make this a reality, investing in these events 
because we know they will bring long-lasting benefits to our 
economy and to Saskatchewan’s music sector as a whole. Mr. 
Speaker, the Juno host committee anticipates the event alone 
will generate $10 million in economic spinoff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the organizers of the Junos, 
congratulate all of the volunteers, and with them look forward 
to a weekend of great music in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Canadian Wheat Board Vote 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to read some quotes from Hansard for you today. And in 
this case, Mr. Speaker, it’s about democracy; it’s about calling 
our federal government to task, Mr. Speaker, so that they will 
live up to their own legal obligation and that before they make 
any significant changes to the wheat board they will hold a full 
plebiscite with a fair question. It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Canadian Wheat Board Act, section 47.1 stipulates 
that this is the right of Prairie farmers to choose their 
marketing structures and any proposed change to the 
Canadian Wheat Board must be put to a farmer vote. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s check those numbers. They were 
released today. Overall vote, 29,067 farmers voted. And of that, 
to retain the wheat board, only 37.8 per cent voted to keep the 
wheat board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prefer option to market to the Canadian Wheat 
Board or to a buyer of their choice, 48.4. To have the wheat 
board have no role in marketing, 13.8. What that tells me, Mr. 
Speaker, is 62 per cent of farmers want the choice to market 
their own grain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, let’s go on to Saskatchewan 

and check our numbers right here at home — 15,327 voted. Of 
those that voted, 45 per cent wanted to retain the Canadian 
Wheat Board. On the other side of the coin, 55 per cent wanted 
the choice to market their own grain. Contrary to what that 
Agriculture minister has been saying, farmers have spoke and 
they want choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Constituent to Run Boston Marathon 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One hundred 
years ago, Canadian Tom Longboat of Six Nations Reserve 
won the Boston Marathon, beating the previous course record 
by a full five minutes. It was an extraordinary feat, one that 
inspired an extraordinary woman, a constituent of mine, 
Shannon Louttit, to run in this year’s Boston Marathon in 
honour of the 100th anniversary of Tom Longboat’s victory. 
 
Shannon was not always a runner; she just began a few years 
ago after hearing the story of how in 1904 her 
great-grandfather, Billy Louttit, a Métis dispatch carrier for the 
Hudson Bay Company, ran 100 miles from Athabasca to 
Edmonton in 16 hours to get help for a flood that threatened the 
town. Athabasca now hosts the annual Billy Louttit Dispatch 
Triathlon in his honour. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, her great-grandfather’s story inspired Shannon to 
start running and the story of Tom Longboat inspired her to 
qualify for the Boston Marathon. In a few days, she’ll be 
leaving for Boston where she’ll not only run in the marathon, 
but also coordinate the celebration of the 100th anniversary of 
Tom Longboat’s victory. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this year Shannon and a group of six other 
Saskatchewan runners will be in Boston. Sadly though a fellow 
Saskatchewan runner, Bruce Sawchuk, who also qualified for 
the race, passed away suddenly this month. Shannon tells me 
that they believe his spirit will be there at the finish line urging 
them on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in wishing Shannon 
and all the Saskatchewan runners the very best in Boston. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night the Saskatchewan legislative interns held the first ever 
SLIP [Saskatchewan legislative internship program] steak night 
at Johnny Fox’s Restaurant here in Regina. The interns are 
fundraising for their comparative study tour to Ottawa; to 
London, England; and Edinburgh, Scotland. And, Mr. Speaker, 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

we trust that they’ll do some actual studying while they’re on 
their trip. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate all five of this 
year’s interns — Lucy Pereira, Jarita Greyeyes, Jonathan 
Selnes, Kiley Frantik, and Justine Gilbert — on hosting such a 
successful fundraiser. It was a packed house last night, Mr. 
Speaker, at Johnny Fox’s with MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] and staff from both sides of the House, 
Legislative Assembly staff, and former interns in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the internship program has proved to be 
a worthwhile exercise in ensuring that our young people learn 
about and experience the parliamentary process first-hand. 
Alumni of this program have gone on to work in the public 
service, both provincially and federally, and a few are even still 
working here in the building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s group of interns are exceptionally 
bright and have already contributed a great deal to this 
Assembly. I’d like to wish them well on their study tour both in 
Ottawa and abroad. And I invite all members of the Assembly 
to join me in congratulating the interns on such a successful 
fundraiser last night. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Open Door Society 25th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, for 25 years now the Saskatoon 
Open Door Society has been welcoming refugees and 
immigrants to the city and assisting them to become informed 
and active participants in Canadian society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s Open Door Society exemplifies 
community spirit and cultural diversity, not only helping 
newcomers settle in and become effective members of the 
community but also helping the community to become more 
welcoming and more hospitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve long admired the work of the Open Door 
Society and so I was extremely pleased to attend their 25th 
anniversary celebrations along with a number of my Saskatoon 
caucus colleagues — including the Minister Responsible for 
Immigration — last week. Mr. Speaker, it was a wonderful 
event, attended by hundreds of people representing the diversity 
and vibrancy of Saskatoon’s multicultural community. It was an 
evening of stories, Mr. Speaker, stories of refugees and 
immigrants coming to Saskatoon and successfully building new 
lives, making the city their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of the Saskatoon Open Door Society is 
critical to those success stories. They are among the first 
contacts for newcomers and help them to adapt, to integrate, 
and to reach out into the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the employees, board 
members, volunteers, and newcomers who, working together 
through the open door society, in the past 25 years have 
contributed so much to help make Saskatoon a great place for 

everyone to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Minister’s Responses During Question Period 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
time-honoured parliamentary tradition that the opposition holds 
the government accountable by asking questions in question 
period and that the minister responsible answers to those 
questions. But yesterday we beheld a spectacle in this 
legislature that was nothing short of bizarre. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party asked some serious questions about 
the Murdoch Carriere scandal and instead of providing answers, 
the member for Nutana looked as though she was preparing to 
return to her former role in the official opposition and was in 
fact auditioning to become the leader of the official opposition. 
The member tried to deflect from the scandal by suggesting 
questions the opposition should be asking. One talk-show host 
referred to her performance as desperate and beleaguered. If the 
minister wants to ask questions from this side of the House, she 
won’t have to wait long. Her time is nigh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the public should be outraged at the 
member’s response when she was asked by reporters about her 
refusal to answer questions on the Murdoch Carriere scandal in 
the Legislative Assembly. She said, and I quote: “We enjoyed it 
actually on our side of the House.” 
 
She may have enjoyed herself, Mr. Speaker, but she showed a 
complete disregard and disrespect for this legislature, the 
legislative process, and most particularly for the female victims, 
many of whom are tuned in on a daily basis to question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

McKercher Cup Mock Trial Competition 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
over the past weekend, the 7th annual McKercher Cup mock 
trial competition for high school students was held at the Court 
of Queen’s Bench courthouse in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this mock trial competition is organized by the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Bar Association and 
recreates the dramatic core of the justice system by having 
participants play the pivotal roles in a trial, including 
prosecutor, defence counsel, and witness. 
 
It’s an extremely effective hands-on learning activity, Mr. 
Speaker, that provides students with the opportunity to learn 
about the legal system while educating them about the Canadian 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, something maybe members 
opposite could be interested in learning about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to share with the Assembly 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

that Winston Knoll High School from my Regina Qu’Appelle 
constituency acquitted themselves extremely well in this year’s 
competition, coming in second overall. Holy Cross in 
Saskatoon came in first. Nicole Little of the Winston Knoll 
team also won the award for the best defence attorney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate volunteer Christopher 
Wietzel, the young lawyer who helped Winston Knoll prepare 
for their competition, coach Scott McKillop, and all the 
members of the team on a job well done representing 
themselves and their school at this year’s McKercher Cup Mock 
Trial Competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Lists for Orthopedic Surgery 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today in your gallery sits 59-year-old Adeline Gagnon. She has 
come to seek answers in her legislature. She’s been hearing the 
Minister of Health telling everybody that waiting lists, surgical 
waiting lists, will be shortening. But that’s not her experience. 
 
To her, getting a call for surgery would be like winning the 
lottery. She has been off work since November of last year. She 
is in constant pain. She requires shoulder surgery and has been 
told she’ll have to wait at least 15 months. She wants to know 
why she must suffer this pain and loss of income for over a year 
to get medical attention in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I can tell the member opposite, the people of Saskatchewan, and 
the guest in the legislature here today that indeed waiting lists 
are dropping and access to health care services in the province 
of Saskatchewan are improving. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just last week the Minister of Finance 
introduced a budget that provides the Department of Health 
with an additional eight-plus per cent in allocation that will 
further allow us to increase access by reducing waiting lists. 
Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the work that we have done. 
 
We know that we have more work to do but, Mr. Speaker, we 
have additional resources, and we will applying those resources 
to reducing waiting lists further. And I urge the member 
opposite, if he stands true to his philosophy there, to support the 
budget to ensure that we can move forward in the way in which 
we want to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
surgical care registry, as of December 2006, there are almost 

7,000 people in this province waiting for orthopedic surgery. 
That’s 7,000 people. So when the minister announces that he’s 
increasing the capacity by 160 a year for hip and knee 
replacements, it’s no consolation to somebody who’s waiting 
for shoulder surgery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact Mrs. Gagnon is now worried that she might even have to 
wait longer. She wants to know why this government is 
spending $350,000 to advertise a budget that falls far short of 
what people need in this province, and yet she can’t find the 
money for surgery that she so badly needs. She wants to know 
why she is going to be forced to work past her retirement age to 
make up for the lost income while she’s waiting for this 
surgery. 
 
To the Minister of Health: what is the government going to do 
today to address the issue of Mrs. Gagnon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to indicate to the member opposite that Saskatchewan has 
made a great deal of progress in recent years on orthopedic 
surgery. Mr. Speaker, we now do more hips per capita in 
Canada than any other province. And on knees, Mr. Speaker, on 
orthopedic surgeries, we’re now the second. We do the second 
most surgeries in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we have made a great 
deal of progress in this regard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite refers to the Surgical 
Care Network, a system that was put in place by this 
government in recent years, Mr. Speaker. The Surgical Care 
Network is looked at by other provinces with a great deal of 
envy, Mr. Speaker. They are all seeking the resources, the fiscal 
resources to duplicate what we are doing here in Saskatchewan 
in order to ensure that they have access to the types of data that 
they need to assist them in reducing their waiting lists, the same 
as we’re doing here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mrs. Gagnon has 
gone through all the hoops this government has set up. She’s 
called the quality care coordinator. She’s called her surgeon’s 
office numerous occasions. She’s called the surgical care 
hotline. They all give her the same answer, and that answer is 
absolutely unacceptable for someone that’s in as much pain as 
she is. They have just told her that she’s simply going to have to 
wait 15 months or longer while she’s in extreme pain. She can’t 
do the simplest things, and she feels that she’s being held 
hostage by this health care system. 
 
When will the government get its priorities straight and 
eliminate the $350,000 that Finance minister is doing to 
advertise his budget and start dealing with people’s needs in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite talks about the steps that the guest in the 
gallery here today has undertaken. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that it is appropriate that the member opposite advise her that 
she has taken the proper steps to ensure that she is getting the 
care that she ultimately requires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province does have quality of care 
coordinators in each of our regions who work with physicians 
to ensure that the waiting lists are addressed. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it is the physicians, the surgeons in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
who determine where people are on that waiting list, Mr. 
Speaker. Those surgeons are allocated at capacity within the 
operating rooms, and they allocate individuals based on an 
assessment, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite correctly 
identifies the process. We believe in quality of care, Mr. 
Speaker, and the member opposite needs to ensure that he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Adeline 
Gagnon has gone through all the hoops. She’s done everything 
this minister has asked her to do or their department had asked, 
and it’s still 15 months at least — waiting. She’s desperate. 
That’s why she’s here at her legislature today. She wants to 
know if she’s the only one, which she knows she isn’t. 
 
There’s 7,000 people on waiting lists for orthopedic surgery. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the longest waits for orthopedic 
surgery in the country. The Wait Time Alliance gave 
Saskatchewan last year a failing grade in this area. How will the 
budget address the issue of failing grades in orthopedic surgery 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Appreciate the question from the member opposite. You know I 
was listening to the radio this morning, and I was talking to 
some people in North Battleford this morning and, Mr. Speaker, 
last night it was reported that Leader of the Opposition was in 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and he was critical of the 
Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what the Leader of the Opposition said, Mr. Speaker, what 
he said, Mr. Speaker, was we don’t just criticize the 
government; we provide alternatives. Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite has an opportunity today to do what his leader says, 
Mr. Speaker. Stand up and offer alternatives to what is being 
done in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have 
taken a great deal of steps. We have applied resources available. 
We have cut the waiting lists in half, Mr. Speaker. We intend to 
continue to do that. 
 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Compensation for Forestry Secretariat Executive 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s been a number of occasions where this NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government has demonstrated that 
they’re very good at looking after their NDP friends. And many 
of its NDP friends come from the firm of Oliver Waller 
Zinkhan & Waller. Last year the NDP gave Tom Waller a 
contract to become the CEO [chief executive officer] in the 
Forestry Secretariat for six months. Could the minister of CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] tell us how 
much money did Tom Waller receive for six months of work? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CIC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have to take that question under advisement. I don’t have the 
specific number right here for them. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I said the 
NDP are very good at looking after their friends, and I am more 
than happy to help the minister out here. Tom Waller’s contract 
says that he was to be paid $200 an hour to a maximum of 
$180,000 for six months work. Mr. Speaker, that’s $30,000 a 
month. That’s about twice as much as the deputy minister of 
Finance, Health or Justice gets paid. 
 
The Forestry Secretariat has a budget of $1.3 million and a staff 
of just five people. How on earth can the NDP justify paying 
Tom Waller twice as much as the deputy of Health to run a 
five-person government agency? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to the 
House that the member has the numbers. It was . . . She 
received them through questions posed to the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Mr. Waller has been under 
contract since he left the Crown Investments Corporation as its 
president and has been the chief negotiator and the head of the 
Saskatchewan forest secretariat as we’ve been working with 
industry to attempt to find a solution for a very difficult 
circumstance, which is the circumstance around forestry 
industry in our province as well as in others. 
 
I can say to that member that Mr. Waller is a senior lawyer, and 
they have a lawyer in their caucus I think who can attest to the 
fact that the lawyer’s legal rates are well within the guidelines 
of what Mr. Waller’s contract is. That was by the way tabled 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has lapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know what’s 
even more troubling about this sweetheart contract with Tom 
Waller and the NDP is that the NDP said that he was to be paid 
$180,000 for six months work. However the Saskatchewan 
Party has received a response to a freedom of information 
request which shows that Tom Waller was actually paid 
$278,000 for his six-month contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s nearly $100,000 more than what he was 
supposed to be paid according to his already generous contract. 
Why was Tom Waller paid $100,000 more than his contract? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister responsible 
for the Sask forestry sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Waller’s contract 
was tabled with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, and the 
expenditures are very much defensible. He has been working 
many long hours for this government. 
 
Well, well . . . just a minute. Mr. Speaker, you know, the 
members, the members of this Saskatchewan Party are well 
known for dragging professional people in this province 
through the mud. It was short months ago you were accusing 
him, making allegations of criminal activity which were 
patently . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d remind the minister to direct his remarks 
through the Chair. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of that contract 
that the minister’s referring to, and it distinctly says, and I 
quote, “The maximum amount payable under the terms of this 
contract will be $180,000.” The answer to the written question 
that I submitted was that he was paid $180,000, but the freedom 
of information request said that he was paid $278,000. 
 
Two hundred and seventy-eight thousand dollars for a 
six-month contract works out to over $46,000 a month. That’s 
over three times the top salary of the deputy minister of Health 
to run a five-person government agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP possibly justify this outrageous 
payment to their NDP buddy, Tom Waller? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we will explain for 

the media and people of the general public the terms of the 
contract and the expenditures that Mr. Waller has made, all of 
which I would say are very defensible and, frankly, a very wise 
investment. I would ask if that member has talked with the one 
lawyer in their caucus in terms of what lawyers and negotiators 
of this type generally bill, and I think she would then 
understand the nature of these contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. I have watched them drag the 
former president of SGI through the mud in this legislature. I 
have watched them drag Mr. Waller through the mud in this 
legislature, accusing him of criminal activity, Mr. Speaker, 
which was patently false. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what this Saskatchewan Party is all about. It’s all about 
allegation. It’s all about innuendo. It’s all about the 
Saskatchewan Party attempt to forming the next government, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is not how they’re going to do it. Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest to you if there’s a waste of money, it’s 
what we’re paying these people to be the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister in charge 
of the Carriere scandal didn’t want to talk about the issue. But 
today the News Talk poll says that nearly nine out of ten people 
in the province think there’s still a lot of answers to be given by 
this NDP government, so we’re going to try again today. 
 
Murdoch Carriere’s nine harassment victims went to their 
supervisors, and they couldn’t get help. Then they went to the 
associate deputy minister and the deputy minister of the 
Environment, and they couldn’t get help. They went to their 
union, and they went to their departments, and they went to the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. And then they even 
went to the Premier — the Premier of the province — and their 
Premier wouldn’t even listen to them. The only time this NDP 
government listened was when the story hit the papers and was 
raised by the Saskatchewan Party. What is to stop this from 
happening again? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there are some facts I’d 
like to put on the table. Fact number one, the women laid a 
formal complaint in September ’02. Fact number two, Murdoch 
Carriere was suspended and had to leave the workplace in 
September ’02. Fact number three, on February 12, ’03, he was 
suspended without pay, demoted, sent to Regina, and he was 
suspended without pay for three months. Fact number four, Mr. 
Speaker, fact number four, he was fired on April 2, 2003. Mr. 
Carriere had not been in the workplace as soon as the complaint 
was launched, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

Ms. Draude: — Fact number five is that we know somebody 
told that . . . Murdoch Carriere’s victims came forward in 1994, 
and they were told, that’s just Murdoch — in 1994. This NDP’s 
government so-called zero tolerance harassment policy was in 
effect at that time. No one acted on the victims’ complaints. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps has the NDP government taken to deal 
with the individuals who ignored the harassment complaints? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
like to talk about 1994. Well it was in 1993 that this 
government formally introduced amendments to the 
occupational health and safety legislation that made harassment 
as an occupational hazard. And what did the member from 
Cannington do? He tried to delete that provision from the 
occupational health and safety legislation. Mr. Speaker, then, 
then he voted against the legislation. It was an NDP government 
that put harassment as an occupational hazard in the 
occupational health and safety legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way since 1993, Mr. 
Speaker. And in fact as I said earlier, Mr. Carriere was removed 
from the workplace. They say that he was in Regina in the 
workplace — simply not true. He was suspended without pay 
on February 12 for three months, and he never came back to the 
workplace, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts, Mr. Speaker, 
which these people don’t want to talk . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — NDP rhetoric doesn’t protect women in the 
workplace. If it did, Murdoch Carriere would have been fired 
with cause many years ago and wouldn’t have received 
hundreds of thousands of dollars from the NDP government. 
What steps has this NDP government taken to find out why 
their zero tolerance policy failed so very miserably? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has introduced a revised anti-harassment policy 
which we have tabled with the members of this legislature. It 
was revised after the Murdoch Carriere situation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I can report to the public is that in the 
future if there were a case of this nature in the public service, a 
committee of deputies would determine the discipline that 
would be meted out, including firing, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
change in the policy as a result of what we’ve learned since 
2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Martensville. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the minister spent yesterday’s 
question period practising up for her time in opposition. I would 
remind her that until the next election she is a minister and she 
has an obligation to answer questions, not only to us, but to the 
people of this province. 
 
So I will re-enter a question that I had asked yesterday. The 
minister told the House that the government checked with the 
women before the settlement was given to Murdoch Carriere. 
The settlement was reached on January 9, 2007. The $275,000 
payoff cheque was dated and delivered on January 26. No one 
talked to any of these women until February 27. Why did the 
NDP keep their settlement with Carriere a secret from his 
victims? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the members 
of the opposition weren’t pleased about how I handled question 
period yesterday. But I do say this, that they’ve had 16 years to 
be in opposition and really, Mr. Speaker, when you’re in 
opposition you should learn how to be opposition members. 
And I didn’t see any evidence of that yesterday. Particularly if 
you want to be the government, you need to be a decent 
opposition in order to be a decent government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the members opposite — 
and I said this before — we tabled in this legislature written 
answers to their questions regarding the cheque that was sent to 
Mr. Carriere’s lawyer. And the member will know that there 
were a number of issues around income tax which we explained 
in the answers to the written questions and, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe I’ve already answered this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the settlement was agreed to on 
January 9. The women were told on February 27, some of them 
by voice mail. The press release that the government issued was 
sent out before some of these women even heard. The minister 
has told us that the government checked with these women 
prior to Murdoch being given this settlement. That is simply not 
true. 
 
Why did the NDP government tell us that they checked with 
Carriere’s victims when they know that that’s not what 
happened? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that an important 
piece of information that the opposition may not be aware of, 
but in, I believe it was April ’06, a couple of officials from the 
Department of Justice did meet with some of the women to talk 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

about the issue around Mr. Carriere and the issues that he had 
raised in terms of his statement of claim and going to the 
commissioner. Mr. Speaker, I understand, I understand that 
there was a discussion around how to proceed, as I understand it 
from the Justice officials. And what I will say to the member 
opposite, a decision was made based on recommendations from 
the Justice department that we were in a position where we 
would very likely lose this case. In fact they told us we were 
going to lose. And we chose to settle with Mr. Carriere and his 
lawyers. We settled around a number of issues which the 
members opposite fail to understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so confident in 
the legal opinion that they received and the decision they made 
based on that, will she table that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it has not been, it 
certainly has not been our practice ever to table legal opinions 
that are provided by the Department of Justice. I don’t recall 
any government ever tabling a Justice opinion because, Mr. 
Speaker, the Justice department wants to be able to deliver its 
legal advice to the government unencumbered by any kind of 
issues that may come up on the floor of the legislature. 
 
But I will say to the members opposite, I can tell the public that 
we were advised to settle with Mr. Carriere because he certainly 
had a statement of claim, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, there’s other information that 
the government is refusing to show us. Time and again this 
NDP government has refused to table the Murdoch Carriere 
settlement. We have asked questions in this House. We have 
asked written questions. We know there is not a non-disclosure 
provision in the settlement. So why is this NDP government 
hiding Murdoch Carriere’s settlement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the members 
of the opposition continue to portray the Murdoch Carriere 
settlement as some form of scandal, Mr. Speaker. I have said 
clearly on numerous occasions that the opposition has spent 
many question periods misleading the public in Saskatchewan. 

And in fact they were running ads on the radio saying that we 
paid him $275,000 to harass women which is totally ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we settled with Mr. Carriere because our legal 
advice indicated to us that we were going to lose that case, Mr. 
Speaker. We have tabled the information through the written 
questions. The members of the opposition know that he 
received $120,000 pay in lieu of notice. As well the rest of the 
money went towards a myriad of issues including releasing 
personal information as well as defamation of character. And I 
will say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order please. Order. 
Order. Order please. Order. Order. Order. Order please. Order. 
Order please. Order please. Order please. Order. Order. Order 
please. 
 
I would ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana to come to order. 
And I would ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana to withdraw 
remarks that have been . . . Members referring to another 
member in this Assembly, on the record or off the record, 
should be only by the member’s title or the member’s seat. And 
we should try to avoid — and this I would like to broaden to all 
members — any reference to name calling. I would ask the 
member to withdraw the names. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I apologize for unparliamentary 
language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Written questions. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 745 to 850 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 745 to 850 have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to join in this debate on the 
budget, and a very good budget it is too. 
 
Before I begin my remarks I want to recognize the contributions 
by the member for Martensville and also the member for 
Weyburn. I did not have an opportunity to reflect on the maiden 
speech by the member for Weyburn, and I would like to do so 
now, as I do for the member for Martensville. 
 
It’s customary that both sides of the House will recognize these 
contributions. We’ve all worked hard and campaigned hard to 
get here. And to make a maiden speech is a daunting task, 
especially when you go up against critics that are very well 
informed, watch the proceedings like a hawk, know what’s 
going on in this Legislative Assembly — and I’m just speaking 
of the people that are watching at home, Madam Speaker, never 
mind the people inside the Legislative Assembly. 
 
We of course don’t criticize and don’t heckle the members in 
their maiden speeches for that reason, but in short, I just want to 
congratulate them on their contributions, and I look forward to 
working with them in the years to come as they perfect their 
roles in opposition. 
 
Madam Speaker, since the early ’90s, the government has been 
working very hard to (1) restore the fiscal foundation for the 
provincial government, and then (2) having repaired that 
foundation, then to work at improving Saskatchewan’s 
economy. I believe we have achieved, are achieving that goal 
and we are seeing that reflected in the budget that was delivered 
last week. 
 
I won’t bore people with the details on our economy. It seems 
like every day someone has a comment about how well 
Saskatchewan’s economy is performing. Whether it’s job 
growth, whether it’s increases in the GDP [gross domestic 
product], housing starts — no matter what the factors are — 
people are speaking very positively. Whether they’re from 
outside the province or they represent an interest inside the 
province, people are speaking very positively about our 
economy. 
 
I know that may not necessarily be widely felt in every quarter 
of the province. Certainly there will be communities in the 
North that are still hoping for a breakthrough in their economic 
growth. I know that there are in the agricultural sector, that it’s 
not been very good years for some people on the farm. But for 
them too we hope that this will be a good year of good crops 
and good prices and that they too will be able to share in the 
economic boom that we are currently experiencing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, the priorities in this budget reflect the 
priorities that the government outlined in its Throne Speech, 
and that would have been last fall when we said, we want to 
make life better for Saskatchewan families. We want to 
strengthen public health care. We want to advance 
environmental protection and the green economy. And I think 
this budget makes significant inroads in achieving these goals. 
 
I might say that in this budget debate we’ve seen more 
discussion than I’ve seen in some budgets on the question of 

fiscal policy. The opposition is now saying that the government 
is spending too much. And for those who are watching these 
proceedings at home, they will know that this is a monumental 
flip-flop based on what they will have seen in the past where 
it’s customary for members to — on almost every occasion — 
to offer up improvements in spending that the government 
should pursue or tax cuts that the government should pursue 
without fail over the course of these last few years. 
 
They will remember comments like “. . . [the] government is 
sitting on a mountain of cash.” And now that the government 
has achieved the position where we’re actually able to invest 
significantly in a priority to Saskatchewan people, well now of 
course they’re saying that the government is spending too 
much. Well I think the people at home will recognize it for the 
flip-flop that it is, Madam Speaker. 
 
It’s like they can’t or won’t criticize or talk about some of the 
specifics in the budget because these are popular initiatives. I 
know that two of the initiatives that have been discussed, 
they’re certainly very popular in my constituency. 
 
In my constituency there are many retired people, many senior 
citizens, and the University of Regina, and many students are 
also located in my constituency. And I can tell you that the 
prescription drug plan which proposes to cap a cost that is 
significant for many senior citizens is very popular with senior 
citizens. And the tax plan to encourage young people to start 
their careers here in Saskatchewan is also very popular among 
young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I still don’t understand why it is that the members are attacking 
the drug plan. They have not yet indicated, and hopefully they 
will during the course of this debate, what their plans are for the 
drug plan in future years. Perhaps they could outline that for us 
and let people know. 
 
So therefore it seems to be a matter of not dealing with the 
specifics in the budget but a matter of just dealing with fiscal 
policy. But my sense is that they really have no credibility when 
it comes to issues of fiscal policy. Credibility is something that 
can be earned because one has over time taken a principled, 
informed direction on a specific issue. And people recognize 
you for the contribution that you’ve made because of that 
consistency, because of your knowledge. Or credibility can be 
earned because you’ve been able to demonstrate through actual 
experience how you would pursue issues, in this case of fiscal 
policy. But clearly the members here have no credibility. 
 
Again this is a group that has monumentally flip-flopped on the 
question of fiscal policy in the course of this budget. This is a 
group that really will not definitively speak about their history 
and their experience with respect to budgets in Saskatchewan. 
Oh for sure, we have the odd member of the opposition that will 
stand up and they will spin how it is that the Grant Devine 
government wasn’t as bad as people make it out to be and that 
the reason that the debt escalated was simply because of interest 
rates and there being no other reason, which defies analysis and 
which defies any serious comment. But from time to time 
they’re driven to doing that. 
 
And then on the other hand you wonder, well are they in fact 
defending a record, because they also try at times to separate 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

themselves from the record of the Devine administration. The 
Devine administration, as you will know, and the people who 
are watching will know in Saskatchewan, is an administration 
that has been characterized as being probably the worst 
government in Canada ever — for any provincial government 
or any national government — because of their ineptitude, 
incompetence in terms of fiscal issues, and also their corruption 
when it came to handling the public purse. 
 
But here’s an interesting quote from a few days ago that again 
deals with this question of whether or not the members 
opposite, the Sask Party, are they defending a record or are they 
not defending a record. And this is a comment by the Leader of 
the Opposition where in question period he said in part, “Well, 
Mr. Speaker . . . it was the Romanow-MacKinnon government 
that brought fiscal probity to this province.” 
 
Now for those who are not aware of the meaning of the word 
probity, probity means integrity and uprightness, honesty. So 
what the Leader of the Opposition is saying that prior to the 
election of Mr. Romanow and the actions taken by Mr. 
Romanow as premier, and his cabinet, prior to that time there 
was no honesty, there was no integrity, and there was no 
uprightness when it came to questions of fiscal administration 
in the province of Saskatchewan. So by inference he’s saying 
that there was no fiscal probity when Mr. Devine was the 
premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And which then calls into question, what is he really saying or 
what is he thinking because this is the same Leader of the 
Opposition who, when Mr. Devine was the premier, felt 
comfortable in working for Mr. Devine and his cabinet 
ministers at a very high level, and in fact went on to seek a 
nomination for the Progressive Conservative Party of Mr. 
Devine in the 1991 election. So he sought to become a member 
of this Assembly under the leadership of Mr. Devine. But now 
he says Mr. Devine did not represent honesty, Mr. Devine did 
not represent integrity. So now he’s trying to distance himself 
from Mr. Devine. 
 
But on the other hand then we get reports of a fundraising 
dinner that the Leader of the Opposition has in Calgary and who 
do we see sitting front-row centre at his $300 per plate seat, 
who do we see sitting there? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dwain Lingenfelter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — No. Mr. Devine was sitting there 
to hear Mr. Wall. So on the one hand they’re trying to distance 
themselves. On the other hand it appears that the Leader of the 
Opposition continues to embrace the support of the former 
premier, Grant Devine. 
 
Madam Speaker, I just want to say a couple of words about the 
question of a balanced budget. The budgets in Saskatchewan 
are balanced pursuant to balanced budget legislation which was 
put forward by the Finance minister of the day, Janice 
MacKinnon, and with the support of the full Romanow cabinet 
and the full Romanow caucus. And so when we talk about 
whether this budget is balanced or not, we have to do that in the 
context of the balanced budget legislation that is still in place, 

was put in place by Mr. Romanow and Ms. MacKinnon. And 
based on the definitions in that balanced budget legislation, we 
indeed have a balanced budget. 
 
And there are of course many people today in the banks and 
financial institutions that would tell you that Saskatchewan’s 
record with respect to dealing with its fiscal challenges is doing 
a very good job in Canada. That is one of the reasons that credit 
rating agencies, those who examine our creditworthiness, have 
over time — well in the early ’90s, because of the legacy of 
debt and deficits — reduced our credit ratings, and one of them 
at one point to what’s called a BBB rating which is just one step 
beyond junk bond status. 
 
That these same credit rating agencies, because of the actions 
by the Government of Saskatchewan . . . And these increases in 
credit ratings they are now providing continues to this day. It’s 
been a huge, huge difference, where they now say that 
Saskatchewan has probably the third best credit rating in all of 
Canada. And that’s a significant accomplishment given the 
depth of, well the depth of incompetence and the depth of 
misspending that we came from in the early ’90s and late ’80s, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
So they can say what they like on their side of the House. The 
preponderance of evidence from history supports the comments 
that I am making that the Saskatchewan NDP has a very good 
reputation when it comes to balancing the budgets. And that’s 
recognized by people in the financial industry. It may not be 
supported by the members opposite, but who really cares? 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to just say a few words about what’s in 
the budget for municipalities, that being part of my 
responsibilities as Minister of Government Relations. I can tell 
you that as a consequence of the debt that faced us in 1990s, the 
federal off-loads that we experienced in the 1990s, that as a 
consequence of that we reduced revenue sharing which had 
peaked at about $120 million a year in provincial budgets — 
revenue sharing for municipalities had peaked at about $120 
million — that we reduced this to about $55 million in the 
1990s. But since we’ve restored the fiscal foundations for our 
province we have begun to reinvest in revenue sharing to the 
extent that with the increase today, the revenue-sharing pool 
now stands at $127.3 million, which is the highest level in the 
history of that program. 
 
In addition thereto, the provincial government has also 
corrected a policy of long standing of not providing the 
equivalent of property taxes where they have buildings to 
municipalities in which those buildings are located. And that’s 
also significant at about $13 million a year. 
 
The percentage increase over the last number of years for 
municipalities . . . Well if you’ve gone from 55 million to 127.3 
million that’s certainly more than doubling the amount. And 
when you compare that to the percentage increase in any other 
aspect of government and, significantly, important public 
priorities such as health, education, social services, when you 
look at the percentage increase for municipalities as compared 
to those other public priorities, one can safely say, one can 
definitively say, that municipalities are an important priority for 
the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan — very clearly a 
priority, and I don’t think anyone can draw any other 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

conclusion but that. 
 
And I might say too that the increase in this budget is an 
historic $30 million. And I say historic because it’s the single 
largest increase to the revenue sharing program in any year of 
the program in its history, Madam Speaker, and that’s 
significant. 
 
Our priorities with regard to this historic increase in revenue 
sharing is to address three specific areas. One, we want to 
ensure that there’s an increase in operational funding across the 
board. We want to address inequities among communities that 
has crept into the program over the course of the years, where 
you have municipalities that have same population, same, 
relatively the same assessment base but getting vastly different 
per capita amounts from this program. We see this as an 
opportunity to correct that and to fix that, but still ensuring that 
all municipalities will see an increase in operational funding. 
 
And we also want to provide funding for infrastructure for and 
transitional issues for rural municipalities. And I might say in 
that vein that I want to congratulate the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities for their budget 
submissions and for focusing on two very clear priorities that 
they identify and which we are supporting through this budget. 
 
One is the roads to resources, which recognizes the need to 
invest in rural municipalities to assist them with the impact the 
heavy oil industry is having in their areas. And secondly, 
through something called the municipal primary weight 
corridors, which arose out of a consultation process by rural 
municipalities, headed by rural municipalities called Clearing 
the Path. 
 
We think this is an excellent initiative by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities and their member 
municipalities. And we as a provincial government look 
forward to working with them constructively to deal with the 
challenges that we have in roads and transportation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, I think my time is nearly at an end. I just 
want to say a few words, a few words about a federal budget 
which was also tabled last week, the Saskatchewan budget not 
being the only budget in Canada last week. And how should we 
characterize the federal budget if nothing but a budget of 
betrayal, of a broken promise of massive proportions for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Prior to that budget, prior to the last federal campaign and in the 
federal campaign before that, the Conservative Party of Canada 
promised the people of Saskatchewan, promised the people of 
Canada that non-renewable resource revenues — oil, natural 
gas, potash revenues — would not be taken into account when 
it comes to disbursements under Canada’s equalization 
program. That was their very clear promise. They knew — we 
knew — it all meant in the neighbourhood of $800 million a 
year for Saskatchewan people. Some members of that party said 
that it would be even more money than that for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well in this budget they had an opportunity to implement that 
promise. They had an opportunity to make good on that 

promise. And they failed, and they failed miserably. They did 
not do it, Madam Speaker. 
 
So our economy is doing well. It’s an economy that could very 
much use an improved equalization scheme so that we can 
further broaden and strengthen our economy to put it on a more 
competitive footing and in the long run to make this a true have 
province in the Dominion of Canada. That’s what an improved 
equalization program would do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s why we’ve been so insistent that federal parties pay 
some regard. And then to have a federal party that does that and 
never, never, never implements that particular promise, it was 
indeed, when they came down with that budget, it was a bitter 
day for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s a puzzler how they could go into that, into that election 
campaign, make that kind of promise, fully aware of what that 
promise means, and then to not deliver for Saskatchewan 
people because they as a party perceive there to be more 
important political priorities in other parts of Canada — 
whether it be in Quebec or whether it be in Ontario — and in 
the process shaft the people of this province. Well, Madam 
Speaker, that’s their decision to make and . . . 
 
But the one thing that comes out of all that that I just don’t 
understand — and I just want to comment on that before sitting 
down — and that is the quietude that seems to exist on the other 
side, the opposition in the Legislative Assembly, on this 
particular question. 
 
This is a group that, for those who watch the Legislative 
Assembly, they will know this is not an opposition that’s at a 
loss for words or at a loss to criticize important events in our 
province. But on this particular question, on this particular 
question of this massive reversal, this massive breaking of a 
promise by a federal government, that they will say very, very 
little if anything at all. And that is a huge puzzler for the people 
of Saskatchewan about why they would, in their quietness, 
indirectly seek to support the federal Conservative Party, and in 
their breaking this promise for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Madam Speaker, I’ve gone on long enough and I think I’ve 
exhausted my 20 minutes. And so I just want to close by saying 
that it’d be my pleasure to support the main motion to support 
this budget because I think it’s a tremendous budget for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to have an opportunity to speak to this budget that this 
government has put forward. Before I get into my comments 
about the budget itself, I welcome the opportunity to thank 
those who were responsible for my being here in this Assembly, 
and for the opportunity and duty to address this House. 
 
To the people of the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency, I thank 
you for the mandate I was given in the fall of 2003 to represent 
our constituency. To the many constituents who have called our 
office or written or emailed and that I have had the opportunity 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

talk to personally, I thank you for comments, your concerns, 
your encouragement, your support, your advice, and your 
opinions. 
 
For those of you who through our constituency office we have 
been able to assist, I can assure you that has been our pleasure. 
That is why I am here and that is why we have a constituency 
office. I would like to thank my constituency office staff, 
Cheryl Hume and Becky Schmitt, for their good work, their 
cheerful demeanour, and their professional manner in assisting 
our constituents. I would also like to thank our constituency 
executive and directors that provide the support at the 
constituency level that is so important to this whole process. 
 
I’d like to thank my family for their continued support. My 
three sons are working and contributing to the provincial coffers 
of our neighbouring provinces to the west. I wish this wasn’t 
the case. But at this point, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is my 
reality and the reality of oh so many Saskatchewan parents and 
grandparents — a reality that this government has not been able 
to address. 
 
[15:00] 
 
A special thank you to my wife, Heather, who continues to 
provide leadership, encouragement, and support that is not only 
appreciated by myself but indeed throughout our entire 
constituency. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the two 
newest members of the legislature: the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and the member from Martensville. Any 
successful team will have a good junior program. 
 
With your indulgence, Madam Deputy Speaker, I have a little 
story to relate which, if you will bear with me, does have 
relevance to what we are debating today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like it could be a long one. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — It’s just a little story. In the fall of 2005 
there was a married couple that utilized the services of a 
financial planner. They chose a firm with a reputable 
background and were hoping to receive advice on their estate 
planning and budgeting, etc. 
 
They were quite pleased with the reports and directions they 
were given for that first year. They attempted to follow the plan, 
but found that during the year they were fortunate in that their 
revenue for the year was considerably higher than they had 
anticipated. Rather than commit this good fortune to 
substantially pay down their debt as they had been advised to 
do, rather they increased their spending quite dramatically. But 
they did manage to pay down a little of their debt, something 
less than 1 per cent. 
 
However, overall they were pleased with the 2006 year and 
looking forward to their meeting with their financial planner for 
their direction for the upcoming year and for the future. As was 
the case the prior year, they dutifully took all of their records to 
the financial planner and awaited the call for their appointment. 
They were disappointed to hear that they would be seeing a 
different adviser this year, but they were dealing with the same 

firm, so they proceeded accordingly. 
 
The adviser that they had used the prior year had excellent 
qualifications. He had had a background in business, and they 
certainly appreciated that. Their new adviser also had 
impressive credentials, but they noted in their introduction to 
him that he didn’t have any background in business. However, 
because they were dealing with the same firm, they were 
relatively comfortable that they would be receiving the same 
high quality and professional advice that had guided them 
through the past year. 
 
In reviewing their last year’s records with the budget that they 
had prepared with their adviser, they noted the following: in 
2006 they had actually budgeted for a deficit of $1,129. But 
they were pleased to see that they actually had a surplus of 
$1,583 for the year just ended. Their savings account remained 
untouched during the year at $8,875. This was good because it 
had been a good year, one of the best in recent history, and after 
all, that savings account was there for a purpose. It was their 
rainy day fund only to be touched in an emergency situation. It 
wasn’t a lot of money but it did represent a reasonable 
contingency fund to be available in the event of a disaster. 
 
Their debt was somewhat troubling, but they had in fact made a 
small dent in that in the past year. And they certainly hoped 
they could make a more concerted effort in this regard in the 
upcoming year. After all, the last thing they wanted to do was 
pass on to their children and grandchildren a debt problem. And 
who was to know how long interest rates would remain at these 
historical low levels? 
 
So they together reviewed the year past and determined that 
although they had not taken full advantage of the good fortune 
of the previous year — they could have curtailed some of that 
extra spending and could have made a more concerted effort to 
reduce their debt — they were indeed on the right track. After 
all, income was up. Expenses were also up, but at least the 
income exceeded the expenses for the year. And their debt 
hadn’t increased and their savings were intact. 
 
So now it was time to say goodbye to last year and what’s 
ahead for the coming year and the future. After all that’s what 
planning is all about and that’s what the budget is all about. It’s 
an integral part of this planning process. 
 
The adviser then presented his plan for the upcoming year. He 
stated at the beginning that he had some good news and some 
bad news. The good news was that the revenue was projected to 
increase by 1.8 per cent over last year’s projected revenue. Last 
year your revenue was projected to be $77,272. This year he 
projected the revenue to be $78,673. This isn’t really that good 
of news because your actual revenue last year was $83,893. 
And some of this year’s revenue isn’t really revenue, but in fact 
a transfer from your savings account. But he would explain that 
later. It was a difficult concept to understand. 
 
The bad news is that your expenses are going to be up by 9 per 
cent from your last year’s projections. Yes indeed, they are 
projected to be $83,497. The couple interjected and made the 
point, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this didn’t make any sense. 
This was how they got into debt in the first place. It wasn’t 
sustainable to be spending more than was coming in. 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

The advisor went on to explain that he didn’t really see this as a 
problem. He agreed that yes, they would be showing a $7,013 
deficit for the year, but they still had a strong credit rating. And 
he added that in the past he had lowballed revenue a bit, just to 
have a bit of a cushion. How could the expenses have escalated 
at 9 per cent when revenues are projected to be less than they 
were the last year? Well, the advisor explained, here’s one 
example. 
 
I see that you have a family of four adult children. I noted that 
last year one of your expenditures was a transfer, a gift to your 
youngest daughter, of $2,000. That was very nice. However to 
be fair, I’ve built into this year’s budget a transfer to your 
daughter and to your other three children of an equivalent 
amount. They should all receive $2,000. So that is part of the 
increase in the expenditure. I believe that this is only fair. 
 
The couple pointed out that their three eldest children were all 
doing very well financially. In fact they were doing better 
financially at this time than were their parents. It was only their 
youngest child that was struggling a bit financially, and that is 
why they had incurred the expenditure in the past year. The 
advisor became quite adamant. He said that his definition of fair 
was equal, and that if his clients wanted to consider themselves 
to be fair, then this was the only way they should proceed. 
 
The couple then brought up the question that if this was going 
to be the plan for the upcoming year, where would the funds 
come from to cover the shortfall? 
 
The advisor had a plan. That was part of the report. Yes, he 
agreed, we have a deficit here of $7,013. Well firstly, I would 
suggest, and it’s built in here in this plan, where you would take 
$5,099 from your savings to make this work. We still have 
$3,776 that we can draw down next year. He added that this 
was a little tricky, but he’d been doing this for his clients way 
back since 2001. See, the trick is to take the money from your 
savings, the amount you need to show that you’ve balanced the 
budget. In this case, this year you should take $5,099 out of 
your savings and — even though it’s a little tricky, you know, 
with the Institute of Chartered Accountants and groups like that 
— we can put that number into your revenue. Now it’s not 
really revenue, but we’ll put it in there, and we’ll include it as if 
it were revenue, and then you can spend that, as I have 
proposed. 
 
The couple didn’t quite understand the concept, but they did 
appreciate that their savings — $8,875 — were going to be 
depleted down to $3,776. Their next question was, okay, under 
your plan our savings are going to go down by $5,099. Where 
does the rest of the projected deficit come from? Well that 
would come from increasing your debt, and I have included in 
your plan that you could do that. And oh yes, your interest 
expense will go up by approximately 4 per cent next year. 
 
So the advisor summed up his report. It was fair, fairer than last 
year’s report. And yes, he did have some minor concerns. Yes, 
the couple was actually going backwards, and yes, their 
financial situation was not healthy for the long term. Increasing 
debt is not a problem, he said. There’s lots of opportunities in 
that area. He noted that he used a lot of credit cards and that the 
ability to increase your debt is readily accessible. Just look at 
how many credit card pre-approvals you receive each year in 

the mail. 
 
Well the couple were feeling pretty uncomfortable after the 
meeting. They were going to go home and review the 
recommendation, but decided right there, right then, to lay it on 
the line. Firstly, this proposed plan did not fit with their goals, 
their dreams, or their priorities. This financial planner was not 
to be trusted. This planner’s services were to be terminated 
immediately. They would find a new planner who would 
produce a plan — a plan that would include that they would live 
within their means whereby you don’t spend more than you 
legitimately take in. They would pay down their debt so that 
you don’t leave a negative legacy to your children and 
grandchildren. And they would interpret fairness as to exclude 
silly. 
 
I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, for listening to this story. 
It may seem odd to have used numbers in the story that weren’t 
neatly rounded off. The reason, of course, was that these 
numbers were multiples of real numbers — the numbers in the 
budget — to show that this is not a budget of vision and not a 
budget of sustainability for this province and not a budget that 
is acceptable. Like the couple in the story, the people in my 
constituency are telling me, it’s time for a new financial 
planner. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government is spending $350,000 
to sell this budget. Let’s look at the features they are trying to 
sell. Firstly, the $15 seniors’ drug plan for those 65 years and 
over. The reality, Ms. Deputy Speaker, is that for many people 
turning 65 does not mean that their ability to pay has decreased. 
For the self-employed and with legislation in the works, even 
more people who turn 65 will not see a reduction in their 
income. In fact their income increases as they begin to receive 
their old-age pension and their tax credits increase as they 
qualify for the additional age exemption. Only an income tested 
plan can deliver to those truly in need in a sustainable manner. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the $10,000 annual tax exemption for 
new graduates will have limited appeal. The reality is that the 
largest number of our graduates are considering seeking 
employment in either Alberta or Saskatchewan. That is the 
reality. In the illustration provided in the advertising campaign, 
one would get the impression that this proposed tax exemption 
would have the graduate who chose to remain in Saskatchewan 
or return to Saskatchewan in a position of being approximately 
$1,100 better off annually for up to five years. 
 
The basic personal exemption in Alberta, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is $15,000 compared to approximately $8,800 in 
Saskatchewan. This alone reduces the perceived benefit from 
$1,100 a year to $380 a year. And oh yes, even though 
Saskatchewan’s PST [provincial sales tax] is the lowest of all 
provinces, yes it is Alberta that does not have the PST. The 
$380 advantage is very quickly long gone when the recent 
graduate buys their first vehicle and furnishes their first 
residence. So maybe, just maybe $350,000, it may not be 
enough to sell this budget. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will reject this budget because it 
lacks vision, and it takes this province in the wrong direction. It 
does not fit with the potential of this province or the values of 
our people. It truly is the time to let the people decide. It’s time 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

to terminate the services of this financial planner. 
 
For these reasons, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting 
the amendment to this motion and not supporting the budget. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the 
Environment, the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
a great pleasure to stand in this House and say some words of 
support for the budget delivered by the Minister of Finance. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to talk a little bit very 
briefly about my riding, Regina Lakeview. Then I’m going to 
talk about the budget. Then I’m going to talk about some 
important issues for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, Regina Lakeview has many 
people who live in that particular area who are going to benefit 
from this budget. There are people who are elders, are seniors. 
There are many families, both big and small, and there are 
many artists, many musicians, many people who provide the 
idea part of our life. There are many teachers. There’s many of 
the civil servants who make sure that our system works in this 
province. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, one thing about a provincial 
budget is that it supports the work of all of those people and 
affirms the kind of work that they do and how they live. And I 
just want to say on behalf of all the residents of Regina 
Lakeview that budgets are very important for them and their 
community, perhaps more so than some other parts of the 
province. And this particular budget is making sure that the 
salaries, the work, the things that they do will continue. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, as many people know, I like to 
make sure that I include Saskatchewan poetry, Saskatchewan 
literature in this House. And so I want to read a poem written 
by our first Poet Laureate, Glen Sorestad. And he wrote it for 
Myrna Kostash, a writer who wrote a book called Reading the 
River which was published last year, and this is a traveller’s 
companion for the North Saskatchewan River. And I 
recommend it to people if they’re interested in the 
Saskatchewan River and how that works. 
 
But this poem is called, “Rivers (for Myrna)”: 
 

The river flows one way 
and in its passing swift, 
or slow, you feel 
the weight of time, 
the lunar pull, the turn 
of seasons. Go with 
the current and it takes 
you where all things 
come at last together. 
 
But there is another way — 
turn against the flow 

and brunt the mystery 
leading you where things 
begin, where a river is 
just a notion wrought 
from sun and ice and stone. 
The river flows one way, 
but in the wonder of its 
passing, we choose. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is about making choices 
and where the flow of Saskatchewan is going to be going in the 
years ahead. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, as it relates to 
water, air, soil — those areas where I have responsibility — we 
are going to be making some very positive choices in this 
budget that will take us back to the source, back to the basic 
things that we need to do to live on this earth. 
 
And I just wanted to affirm the kind of writing that Glen has 
done here, where he emphasizes and acknowledges that choices 
are being made and that people have a choice to not do things 
that they need to do or they have the choice to go back and start 
at the beginning. 
 
Now this budget this year for Environment has $204 million, 
and that covers many, many of the things that are done in that. 
But I want to emphasize the things that we’re going to be doing 
for our green initiatives. This particular budget includes seven 
and a half million dollars for green initiatives, which builds on 
$5 million which we had in the ’06-07 budget. Those items in 
the ’06-07 budget are going to 20 different organizations and 
projects, and those will be in Sask Environment, SaskPower, 
Office of Energy Conservation, and SaskEnergy, and other 
parts of government. And this funding represents concrete 
actions that are coming out of our green strategy. 
 
There are projects that address climate change issues. And some 
of these include contributing to a reduction in the need for 
coal-fired electricity by providing $900,000 to help consumers 
who meet their own power requirements from sources such as 
solar or wind to provide power back to the provincial electricity 
grid offsetting their energy costs. Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
is a project that deals with the net metering issue which we will 
be implementing in this year, 2007, and we’re going to be doing 
it in a way that allows us to have it as a sustainable part of our 
power as we go forward. 
 
Another project will help to increase energy conservation by 
providing $500,000 in rebates to residential, institutional, and 
commercial customers who install solar water heating systems. 
We’ll also have another project we’ll be doing: getting more 
accurate information about air pollution levels by spending 
$445,000 to purchase a mobile air monitoring laboratory. And 
we’ll be collecting air quality data right across the province, but 
we do have a special concern about the northwest of the 
province and what is happening as it relates to development in 
the oil sands. 
 
We’ll also be spending money to help conserve water supplies 
threatened by global warming by giving rebates to customers 
who replace old toilets with new, water-efficient, low-flow 
models. And we’ll also be spending money on water 
conservation programs and public education. This will be cost 
shared and go to different places across the province. 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

We’ll be spending almost $400,000 to support our watershed 
and aquifer protection initiatives and to fund projects to 
implement source water protection plans for First Nations lands 
and small communities with high-risk surface waters. 
 
We’ll be providing money to the University of Saskatchewan to 
assist us in the development of THREATS — the healthy river 
ecosystem assessment system. Other projects that I’m pleased 
to report are being brought forward are $375,000 that goes to 
the Saskatoon forestry farm and zoo to improve their exhibits 
and take a strong part in promoting environmental education. 
 
Our Saskatchewan Science Centre here in Regina will have 
$25,000 to develop a wild Saskatchewan exhibit that explores 
the importance of ecosystems and the implications of 
biodiversity loss. 
 
Another problem that we have in our province relates to the 
invasive alien species that come in our urban and rural 
communities, and we’ll have half a million dollars available to 
address the management of alien species to make sure that our 
local biodiversity and species at risk are protected. 
 
We have 415,000 that will be going to about 200 communities 
to assist with municipal recycling systems. We have money that 
goes to help with dealing with household hazardous waste 
collections days in targeted communities. That’s a program that 
we’ll be developing across the province as well. 
 
I’m also pleased to say that we’re able to support the secretary 
who has been looking at organic farming by giving $210,000 to 
that work which will look at organic agriculture and how we 
make sure that our people have the advantage of having 
Saskatchewan-grown organic food. And we’ll also have 
programs looking at urban pesticides and work with a number 
of other organizations throughout the province. 
 
I’m also pleased that we have $60,000 that goes to the Craik 
sustainable living project to assist them with their work in 
public education. We all know that they have been providing 
good leadership across the province as they work in the whole 
area of changing how we think and how we live in our 
environment here. 
 
It takes the work of all of us together to make sure that we 
tackle these particular problems, and I want to thank all of the 
people who are part of that. This budget this year has another 
seven and a half million dollars which will build on those 
particular projects and will give us a chance to provide support 
as we unveil our full green strategy and also the government’s 
long-term response to climate change. All of these things will 
be happening in the coming weeks. 
 
This budget also provides $12.8 million in capital for the fire 
management and forest protection services. This allows us to 
continue with the renewal of our aerial fleet, construction of 
additional fire towers throughout the forest, upgrading of fire 
access roads, and replacing of heavy equipment. In the coming 
weeks we’ll have two new CV 580A air tankers that’ll arrive in 
the province so that they’ll be ready for service for this year’s 
forest fire season. And we also will be continuing to work to 
make sure that in this year some of the costs around the 
replacement of the plane that went down last May will be 

available for next spring’s firefighting. 
 
We also have noticed that in our overall firefighting system we 
now have 38 new fire towers that have been erected across the 
province, and that this has meant that we haven’t had to spend 
as many hours with aerial detection costs over the last two years 
which has resulted in a saving of $640,000. There have been 
increases in wages throughout the whole area of forestry and 
throughout the department and government, and this budget 
makes sure that these things are fully funded. 
 
Also, working with my colleague, the minister responsible for 
the forest secretariat, we’ll be having dedicated funding for that 
particular secretariat as this budget moves forward so that the 
good work that has been done there will be continued. 
 
Also out of the Industry and Resources budget, the 
Saskatchewan Forest Centre will be receiving $1 million to 
make up for the money that has been reduced by the federal 
government over this past year. We know that the forestry 
centre and the work that they do is important in supporting the 
socially, ecological, and economic sustainable forest economy 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our parks system has received additional funding which will 
help them with upgrading in the parks, and that is well 
appreciated. And we also are fully funding the integrated water 
management framework. This allows the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority to continue with their work to have 
watershed and aquifer protection plans and also to continue 
with their work of protection of sourced water. 
 
The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund amount is being 
increased by 297,000 to recognize the fact that there are 
increased revenues collected from the sale of the habitat 
certificates and the hunting, trapping, and fishing licences. And 
also this year $325,000, which has traditionally been taken from 
the fund, will not be taken by the watershed authority as they 
will be using their own funds to fund some of these areas. So 
this means that there’s over $600,000 more in the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund this year for the good work that 
they do along with their many partners. 
 
So this budget and the work and the . . . [inaudible] . . . supports 
Saskatchewan Environment, Office of Energy Conservation, 
and many others as we move forward and deal with a number of 
initiatives in our province. This budget has as its base the whole 
point of making life better for people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we will continue to do the things that need to be done to 
make sure that we have a strong economy, to make sure that 
people of all ages want to have Saskatchewan as their home, 
and making sure that all the people in our province have access 
to health care for themselves and for their families. Also that 
our highway systems and our infrastructure, our 
telecommunications systems, all of these things are at the best 
level possible to make sure that everybody who lives in this 
province can communicate and participate with each other. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, earlier today I was watching 
question period in the House of Commons and I saw that the 
Member of Parliament for Palliser, Mr. Dave Batters, asked a 
question in question period. And as you know that’s not that 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

common because he’s a member of the governing party. But 
what really surprised me was that he asked the question of the 
minister of Indian and northern affairs, Mr. Jim Prentice, about 
the Kashechewan First Nation in northern Ontario. And it was 
clearly a softball question. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And it was very strange to me that the Member of Parliament 
for Saskatchewan would ask this kind of question from the 
minister about northern Ontario. And I have to ask this 
question: did he ask a question about the promises to the First 
Nations people of Saskatchewan? Did he ask any of the 
questions about the issues of First Nations people in 
Saskatchewan? Did he ask questions about where is the 
Kelowna accord, which was agreed to by the Government of 
Canada, not a particular party? I was extremely surprised that 
that’s the kind of question that would come in that particular 
situation. 
 
And unfortunately I have to ask the same question about a 
number of other members of parliament from Saskatchewan, in 
that we have not heard them ask questions at all about the 
promises that were made to the people of Saskatchewan as it 
related to the national equalization system that we have. 
 
And as we know we are continually trying to raise this 
particular question across the country. Others of our neighbours 
have raised it. But it goes to the heart of what it is that you do 
when you campaign. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I call upon 
all of our members of parliament from Saskatchewan to raise 
the question about what happened with the promises that were 
made to Saskatchewan people as it related to the finances of the 
country. 
 
There are many situations where we know that we have worked 
hard to use the resources that we have, as is shown in the 
budget that I’m speaking about today, to provide services to 
Saskatchewan people. But we also know from our own analysis, 
but also from outside analysis, that Saskatchewan has been 
given a raw deal in Confederation — especially over the last 15 
years — and that there are many things that would have been 
much easier for Saskatchewan people if we had the kind of 
resources that are coming to us. And we elect people to 
represent us in Ottawa and part of their job is to speak for 
Saskatchewan. So I remind all of the members in Saskatchewan 
that we are concerned that they don’t seem to be bringing the 
message to the Prime Minister and to the federal government. 
And we look forward to better work on their part. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is, that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, is good for the people in Saskatchewan. It’s 
another step along the way to building a strong economy so that 
we can provide good social programs for all of our people. And 
I am very happy to say that I am supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into 

the debate on this budget. It’s a budget that this government 
hails as a go-forward budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 
Yet there are many, many shortcomings in this budget as my 
colleagues have pointed out and also members of the public 
have recognized, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of issues, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I 
would like to cover. But perhaps the first thing that I would like 
to do is certainly welcome our newest member of this 
legislature, the member from Martensville. Certainly we are, on 
this side of the House, very pleased to have her as a member of 
the opposition caucus and certainly very proud of the excellent 
work that she has done so far. And also I should also recognize 
once again our young member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. And 
certainly these young people certainly have a long and I am sure 
a very successful future ahead of them in this legislature and 
other careers that they may want to pursue some time later, 
much later on in their young lives. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as the member representing Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, I have said many times before . . . and I 
will just very briefly repeat some of my comments that I have 
made over the years about the makeup of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and the rural nature of the constituency 
of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
In my constituency, Madam Deputy Speaker, we don’t have any 
large urban centres. We don’t even have any medium-sized 
urban centres. Our largest communities are communities that 
are of a population of about 800 people or less. So we are 
certainly a rural constituency, and we have a number of rural 
issues that we are faced with, along with those other issues that 
all citizens across the province whether they are urban or rural 
face. 
 
And I would like to speak about at least a few of the issues and 
particularly the rural issues that the people of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood are faced with. And one of the issues 
that is of great concern, as it is to many rural residents in the 
province of Saskatchewan, is the condition of our highways — 
and particularly some of our secondary highways that service 
communities and provide a valuable service to businesses and 
individuals that live along and near these highways — and the 
lack of attention and the lack of a plan that this government has 
had and the constant deterioration that we are seeing and 
particularly at this time of the year, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would invite members opposite to drive north of Regina and 
drive down that section of Highway 22 that last summer this 
government saw fit to turn back to gravel. I would invite them 
to travel down that portion of highway today when we are 
receiving rain and wet snow. But you know, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the people of the area are forced to travel on that 
highway. 
 
And what’s even more important, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
because this government has seen fit to close a number of rural 
schools and close some of the . . . The high school in Earl Grey 
is an example. We have more and more students travelling 
longer distance in school buses. And particularly on days like 
today that certainly is not an option that the residents feel is a 
viable option, and they have great concern about the safety of 
their children, Madam Deputy Speaker, because along that 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

section of highway we also have a large number of grain trucks 
delivering grain to a high throughput elevator. And the citizens 
of that area have been raising the issue of the deterioration of 
Highway 22 for many years, as long as I’ve been elected, and 
nothing has been done other than turning it back to gravel. 
 
Then also I would invite them to take a drive down Highway 
310 between Balcarres and Ituna and see the deterioration of 
that highway — another busy highway that serves many rural 
residents and residents of the communities, people living in the 
communities along the highway. And what has this government 
said to those area residents? They said, we’re not going to fix 
your highway unless you are prepared to help with the cost of 
repairing and upgrading the highway. They’ve made that same 
sort of statement to the people in the Southey, Earl Grey, 
Bulyea area. Those people on that area along Highway 22 have 
rejected the government’s blackmail. 
 
The people along Highway 310 are so desperate to see 
improvements made to their highway that finally — after much 
thought and much discussion and out of desperation — they’ve 
agreed to the government’s blackmail and said, okay we will 
very, very reluctantly help as best we can with the repair of 
Highway 310, to the point where the municipality that has the 
lowest tax base but yet has the greatest number of kilometres of 
Highway 310 through their municipality has levied an 
additional 1 mill per year for five years which will be dedicated 
to the repair of 310. They already are having difficulty 
maintaining their own municipal roads. But they’ve asked, the 
council of that RM [rural municipality] has asked their citizens 
to pay more taxes on top of all the other taxes that they are 
paying to help fix the highway. It’s a shameful legacy that this 
government is leaving in rural Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And on top of this, to add insult to injury, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, what did we hear from this government and from this 
Premier just very recently in the last number of weeks? They 
have finally admitted something that we have been saying for 
many years: that this government has no plan as far as repair 
and upgrading of our highways. The Premier admitted. He says, 
in the last 15 years we didn’t have a plan but we’ve got one 
now. And they made their announcement of additional funding 
to repair highways. But it’s too little and too late, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve allowed the condition of our highways to deteriorate to 
the point where it reminds me of the old oil filter commercial 
where it goes something like this: where the individual’s 
holding up a new filter and he says, either pay me now a small 
amount or pay me a lot later if you don’t provide proper 
maintenance. And that’s the situation that we’ve got ourselves 
into now, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Did we hear anything about a long-term sustainable plan to 
address the way we fund the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education system in this budget? We heard nothing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. This government, prior to the last election, the 
NDP said, oh we’ve got a plan, and we’ll be able to deal with 
the Boughen report, and we’ll be able to address this matter. 
The Premier went to the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] convention several years in a row and 
firmly said that the status quo was not on, and yet nothing really 

has changed. 
 
Certainly in the last couple of years when they have some 
windfall revenues from oil and gas, they put in place a tax 
credit. But that’s not a fundamental change, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in the way we fund the K to 12 system. It’s a system 
that can be as easily removed as it has been implemented. And 
we’ve seen this in the past. Back in 2002-2003, I believe the 
years were, we had a small tax rebate program for education tax 
on agricultural property of some $25 million per year. We had 
that program in effect for two years. Right after the 2003 
election, that program was abolished. 
 
And until very recently when this government is going into 
election years, and they have as I said these windfall revenues, 
they’ve been able to put a similar program in place which can 
very easily be renewed. What we need to do, and what this 
government said they would do, is meet with the coalition of 
organizations such as SARM and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] and the school boards association 
and the association of resort communities and the Saskatchewan 
association of realtors — and there may be one of two other 
ones who have formed the coalition — and who are willing to 
sit down with this government and find a long-term solution as 
to how we fund the K to 12 system. 
 
We hear nothing from that process, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
There’s no leadership from this government on this issue 
because it’s a tough issue, and they would prefer not to deal 
with it. And there has been, as far as I’m aware, no meetings or 
anything taking place. They’re just hoping that this issue will go 
away. Well it’s not going to go away. Property taxes and the 
education portion of property tax is an issue for all property 
owners across this province, whether they be rural or urban. 
And that is something that we heard on the doorsteps in 
Martensville. And that is something that I’m sure these people 
are hearing, but they are refusing to deal with it, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
What did we hear on agriculture in this budget, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? Well frankly I think what I’d like to do is quote one of 
the leaders in the agricultural community. This government said 
well they’re going to fully fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization]. Well this is nothing new. Other years 
they played the silly little games, and they put a certain amount 
of money into the agriculture budget. And then they would later 
on in the year say, okay yes, we’re fully funding CAIS. 
 
[15:45] 
 
This year, in an election year, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
thought well we’re going to take it one step further. We’re 
going to say right upfront that we’re fully funding CAIS, in a 
year, Madam Deputy Speaker, where I predict that the payouts 
under CAIS will be considerably less than they have been in 
other years due to the increases in commodity prices. So in the 
year when probably CAIS payments will be the lowest they’ve 
been in the last two or three years this government says, well 
okay we’ll finally commit right upfront to funding CAIS. 
 
But what do some of the agricultural leaders in this province 
say, Madam Deputy Speaker? Well I’m quoting now from an 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

news release on the budget. And this is the president of APAS, 
Mr. Ken McBride, and he says: 
 

“I have to admit that we are a little disappointed. This was 
a big-spending budget, but not in agriculture . . .” 

 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I hear the Finance member, the 
minister from Regina South, chirping about some of my 
comments, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I must say that his 
conduct today is certainly much improved over his conduct the 
other night in the Economy Committee, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. But he still hasn’t learned his lesson. 
 
And what I would say to that member is . . . I have two words 
for that member, Madam Deputy Speaker. Now those two 
words are Bill Hutchinson. Bill Hutchinson is the Sask Party 
candidate that will be representing Regina South after this next 
election, Madam Deputy Speaker, and the people of that 
constituency will have a member that was working on their 
behalf, Madam Deputy Speaker. And he will work with people. 
And he will work with other members of this legislature and, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and they will be very well served, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But that member certainly hasn’t learned his lesson and he 
continues to chirp. It must be spring, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
because the crows are back, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another issue that I would like to 
touch upon is daycare in our rural communities. In this budget 
we have a commitment. It’s right in some of the information 
provided with the budget, Madam Deputy Speaker. It says — 
they’re talking about young people — and it says, “. . . 500 
hundred new licensed child care spaces.” Well the question that 
the people in rural Saskatchewan and in particularly one of the 
communities in my constituency, the community of Strasbourg, 
is are any of those new spaces going to be going to 
communities in rural Saskatchewan and in particularly the 
community of Strasbourg? I wonder if the minister can answer 
those questions. 
 
Because there’s a group of community-minded individuals in 
that community who have taken it upon themselves, because 
they’ve seen the need and they were being led by the mayor of 
the community, and they started a daycare on their own. The 
citizens of Strasbourg have done as much as they possibly can. 
There’s been space donated. People are working for little or no 
salary, and they are struggling to try and maintain this service. 
They have asked for a bit of a helping hand from this 
government and to date they have heard nothing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And the question is, will some of that new 
funding go to spaces in rural Saskatchewan? I’ll be very 
interested to hear their answer, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
we’ll certainly be . . . The minister is chirping yes. So will it be 
going to the community of Strasbourg, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
I should relate a conversation that I recently had with a young 
couple that have moved back from Alberta to Strasbourg. 
They’re both professionals. They grew up in Alberta. They said 
we saw some opportunities. And we have a young family and 
we often thought it’d be great to raise a young family in rural 
Saskatchewan. So we had an opportunity and moved to 

Strasbourg. 
 
You know what, one of their major concerns is daycare because 
they are both working. They want to have quality care for their 
children, Madam Deputy Speaker. And in fact they feel so 
strongly that if these services aren’t being provided that they 
may have to reconsider their decision to stay. And they said if 
they’re going to live in the city, they doubt whether it’d be a 
city here in Saskatchewan. They may have to go back. And that 
would be a real shame, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so if we’re going to spend money on advertising to bring 
young people back to our province, we better make sure that we 
have the services that are required. 
 
And this is not, a daycare is not only an issue in Strasbourg. It’s 
an issue in numerous other communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
I’ve heard, you know, working mothers express great concern 
about the lack of proper care for their children in a number of 
communities in my constituency, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
we need to see if this government, the government that touts 
itself as being the people who look after the working families of 
this province, let’s see if they’re going to actually do 
something, or is this another case of all talk and very little 
action, Madam Deputy Speaker? I hope the latter is . . . that 
that’s not the case, but I’m fearful that it is, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I heard the Minister of the 
Environment make a few comments about some of the things 
that his department is going to be doing on green strategy and 
those sorts of things. He’s talking about, I believe it is $7.5 
million on the green initiatives, and it says in the Estimates 
book that this is money that will be used in support of the 
government-wide approach to improve the environmental 
management under the green strategy. 
 
Well the green strategy, Madam Deputy Speaker, is something 
that this government has talked about for, I believe it’s three or 
four years. They started the process and they talked about a 
green and prosperous economy. And to date what have we 
seen? We’ve seen a few small, little announcements here and 
there with promises being made, promises being made to 
develop a multi-material stewardship program which I 
understand is on the rails or perhaps has been derailed or 
perhaps has been discarded. 
 
We’ve seen a couple of other little announcements here and 
there, but we’ve never seen the overall plan, a plan, an overall 
policy or framework that the people of this province can see and 
understand as to where this government is going as far their 
green initiatives. And to date, whenever I would ask the 
minister in estimates as to when are we going to see the overall 
plan, he says soon. Well soon was, I believe, six months ago, 
twelve months ago and eighteen months ago, and then we got 
the same answers. And today he says well we’ll be seeing it 
fairly soon. Well that’s an answer that we’ve seen for quite 
some time. All talk and no action, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so what are some of the environmental groups that are 
watchdogs, as far as governments and their programs, what are 
they saying about this government? Well the Suzuki Foundation 
in their last report said that this government has no plan to 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

address to climate change; that Saskatchewan has the fastest 
increase in greenhouse gas emissions; and on a per capita basis, 
we are at the top of the pack as far as greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
And we have $7.5 million for some small, little handouts that 
this government, this minister wants to use as his little election 
slush fund, and that’s what’s going to address this greenhouse 
problem and climate change problem. This government that 
claims to be the protector of the environment, the protector of 
working men and women, just another example, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, of all talk and very little action. And once 
again, as some of the environmentalists say, this is nothing but 
greenwash, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I believe that. That’s 
all it is. It’s just greenwash, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So in conclusion, I would like to say that I certainly cannot 
support this budget, a budget that presents a false impression of 
the soundness of our financial picture in this province. So I will 
not be supporting the motion but I certainly will be supporting 
the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in support of this 
budget. It’s an outstanding budget, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and it reflects hard work by this government over the last 16 
years to restore our fiscal situation in this province. 
 
Over the last four years, including the measures in this budget, 
we’ve reduced debt in Saskatchewan for the Saskatchewan 
government by another $1 billion. We’ve had 16 consecutive 
credit rating upgrades, Madam Deputy Speaker. And it puts us 
in a strong financial position. 
 
And the Saskatchewan economy is strong — four consecutive 
years of increased employment growth, record employment this 
year, Madam Deputy Speaker, with 491,600 people working on 
average in Saskatchewan; unemployment at its lowest rate since 
1981 at 4.7 per cent. And to give a sense, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, of the strength of the economy, in the last year alone 
the manufacturing sector in Saskatchewan has grown 53 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, that puts us in 
a very strong position to address key social needs in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and this budget does just that. 
 
A lot of my constituents, Madam Deputy Speaker, are young 
people and a lot of them are seniors. And I’m privileged to 
represent a lot of university students in my riding, and they will 
be very pleased with one of the key initiatives in this budget, 
which is an enhancement of the assistance that is available for 
young people who start their careers here in Saskatchewan. 
We’ve introduced a new graduate tax exemption, and when 
coupled with other measures it will allow graduates of our 
universities and technical schools and graduate apprentices to 
earn $20,000 of income each year over a five-year period with 

no provincial income tax levied on that income. And that’s a 
savings, Madam Deputy Speaker, of more than $1,100 a year 
for each of our graduates over five years. So that’s $5,500 of 
benefit altogether for young people who graduate from our 
post-secondary institutes and take up employment in the 
province of Saskatchewan and make their home here. It’s a very 
good initiative, and it will have the support of a lot of my 
constituents. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re also taking steps to enhance 
new training spaces. We’ve increased new training spaces by 24 
per cent over the last four years, keeping our election 
commitment that I and all other members on this side of the 
Assembly made to our constituents in 2003. We said we’d 
deliver 5,000 new training spaces. We bettered that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, by more than 1,000. And in this budget there 
are 2,100 new training spaces being funded, bringing total 
training seats in the province of Saskatchewan to 31,400. 
 
I also have a large number of seniors in my riding, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and this budget addresses their needs. And of 
course the highlight is our new prescription drug program, 
universally available to all seniors in this province. There will 
be a cap placed, effective July 1, of $15 on all prescription 
drugs under the formulary, Madam Deputy Speaker. And that is 
very, very good news for every senior in my riding. It’s a 
well-deserved enhancement to our medicare system in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, Madam Deputy Speaker, our budget addresses the 
needs of seniors by permitting pension income splitting for all 
seniors when they pay their provincial personal income tax, and 
that is also a very positive measure. 
 
And one of the things that all seniors care about, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — and all families, obviously — is their 
grandchildren and their children. And this budget is very good 
news for children in this province and for families in this 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker. We continue to enhance and 
establish new pre-kindergarten programs across this province. 
There is $730,000 of additional money in this budget for 15 
new pre-kindergarten programs across Saskatchewan and 
funding for 500 new licensed child care spaces across 
Saskatchewan, for a total now of over 9,300 child care spaces in 
this province thanks to the initiatives of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — We’re also providing funds in this budget, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, for a dental sealant program for 
children in grades 1 and in grade 7 at our community schools. 
And this is a very important beginning, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to what I hope will ultimately be an enhanced 
children’s dental plan in this province. But it’s the beginning of 
it again, Madam Deputy Speaker. I sat in this Assembly when 
the members opposite, the former conservatives now called 
Sask Party, eliminated the children’s dental program in this 
province. And now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased 
to be sitting on the government side of the House when we in 
the New Democratic Party begin bringing this program back to 
the children and the families of this province. 
 
[16:00] 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s also funds in this budget to 
provide additional supports for children with autism and 
increased training for health professionals to serve as a resource 
for families with autistic children at a cost of $490,000. In 
addition there is $300,000 allocated for a centralized respite 
service available for families with children who have complex 
needs such as those who are ventilator dependent. And this year 
our government will cover 100 per cent of the cost of insulin 
pumps for a targeted population of children with diabetes. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s clear that this government cares 
about children in Saskatchewan, and this budget reflects that 
priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there are a number of 
other important health initiatives in this budget: funding for 
2,000 extra surgeries to be performed this year, $1 million to 
improve patient access to cardiac catheterization lab services in 
Saskatoon. Work gets underway, Madam Deputy Speaker, on a 
fifth MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] to be located at St. 
Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. And we’re significantly, very 
significantly dropping waiting lists, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
for MRI services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in this budget very significantly, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we provide extended health benefits for 30,000 low-income 
workers. This will involve provision of supplementary eye care 
benefits and enhanced drug coverage. And that is another 
outstanding social policy initiative by this government. 
 
There are other important social policy investments in this 
budget that I want to make reference to. There is very 
importantly, in last year’s budget and this year’s budget, $100 
million that is being invested in inner-city development in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and North Battleford — an 
outstanding social initiative, Madam Deputy Speaker. And in 
my home city of Saskatoon, this is going to mean hundreds of 
additional social housing units that are built in the inner city. 
It’s going to mean an investment of $8 million, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in Station 20 West which is very, very welcomed by 
inner-city community associations. 
 
It’s going to mean, Madam Deputy Speaker, a $17 million 
investment at Mount Royal Collegiate where we’re going to 
allow students to not only successfully complete their high 
school, but go on in the same institute, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
to post-secondary training in the trades and a wide array of 
other post-secondary opportunities. And this is just an excellent 
initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of 
other key social policy initiatives that I want to focus on in my 
remarks. One is the enhancements to wages for our employees 
who work for community-based organizations. And I’m very 
pleased to say that with the hard work of my seatmate, the 
former minister of Social Services, that there is a $5.7 million 
increase in wages for employees in community-based service 
organizations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Prebble: — There is also an important investment in 
enhancing policing services to stop child sexual exploitation on 
our streets, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I’m very pleased to 
say in this budget that there’s $1.3 million being invested in 
police resources to bring this practice to a halt in our 
communities. That is a very important initiative. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to turn to environmental issues. 
And the member opposite who spoke just before me was 
criticizing our government for a lack of initiative on the 
environment. Well I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
this budget and the announcements that have taken place in the 
last three months just put to rest any comments he might have 
had about questioning the action and commitment of this 
government to addressing matters of climate change and 
environmental protection in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And I want to specifically put on the record in 
light of his comments, some of the action that has been taken. 
First of all, Madam Deputy Speaker, on the important question 
of protected areas and land set-asides, this government, under 
the leadership of our Premier, has now set aside 9 per cent of 
the lands in this province as protected areas under the 
representative areas network program, and we’re going to 12 
per cent, Madam Deputy Speaker, which is the same target as 
that set by the United Nations. And I noticed the member 
opposite made no reference to that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have also just announced enhanced 
support for promoting organic agriculture in this province with 
another $210,000 for that initiative just announced by the 
Minister of the Environment. 
 
We have $400,000 in this budget to encourage measures in the 
home for water conservation, including rebates for citizens in 
this province who buy low-flush toilets, because it’s the 
flushing of toilets in the home that’s one of the biggest uses of 
water in our homes. 
 
There is, Madam Deputy Speaker, in this budget support for our 
new recycling initiative around used paint cans and our new 
recycling initiative for all electronic equipment, including 
televisions and computers, which can now be recycled at 
SARCAN, Madam Deputy Speaker. He made no reference to 
that in his comments. 
 
It’s easy to criticize when you ignore the specifics, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And of course, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
have announced a number of important new initiatives around 
climate change. And I just want to say that here one of the 
important things we’ve done over the last four years is to 
introduce 172 megawatts of wind power on to our system. 
Thanks to the initiatives of this Premier, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we now have more wind power being generated in this 
province on a per capita basis than any other part of Canada. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to be working in this 
legislature during my time here and beyond, to see our wind 
power initiative enhanced even further in this province. Because 
I believe we can do more but we’ve made an excellent start. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have retrofitted all our seniors 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

housing units in this province in terms of upgrading their 
energy efficiency, and the results have been excellent. We’ve 
invested $1 million a year in this over the last five years starting 
in 2001 and ending in 2006. And I’m pleased to say that the 
energy savings have now more than offset the capital 
investment that we made. We’ve got more than $5 million back 
in energy savings from the $5 million that was spent in retrofit 
work. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have set the best 
energy efficiency standards for public buildings that you’ll find 
anywhere in Canada, and 77 new public buildings have been 
built to this standard. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member opposite ignores the fact 
that we’ve just announced — further to the recommendations 
that I was pleased to provide to the Premier, at his request, on 
further measures we can take in energy conservation and 
renewables — we’ve just announced half a million dollars for 
rebates for homeowners and commercial buildings and 
institutional buildings that install solar hot water in their 
facilities to reduce their use of natural gas. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, just on Monday of this week I 
was pleased to join the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation and the Premier to announce that we are taking the 
EnerGuide for homes program — that the Conservative 
government that members opposite like to support cancelled for 
a year — we have taken that and we have continued it 
throughout the year that the federal government cancelled it. 
And now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ve announced that we 
are enhancing it. Instead of a $2,000 grant for homeowners who 
retrofit their homes, there’ll be a maximum of up to $5,000 
available for homeowners who retrofit their homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And that program is being extended by the 
province to 2011, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And in addition to that, Madam Deputy Speaker, we are 
supporting homeowners with these grants, who install 
geothermal in their homes or who install solar hot water or solar 
space heat in their homes. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister of the Environment 
has just announced $900,000 for homeowners and farmers who 
want to generate renewable electricity on the grid through 
initiatives like solar photovoltaics or small-scale wind, so that 
that kind of distributed generation is being fostered in our 
province. 
 
And the member opposite claims that nothing is being done, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And this is just the start, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, because our Premier has made it clear that 
we’re going to be announcing a comprehensive climate change 
initiative next month, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I’m very 
much looking forward to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to say a 
word about climate change and how crucial it is because, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, climate change is going to be one of 
the fundamental issues that the people of Saskatchewan and this 

legislature and the people of Canada need to address in the 
coming decades. 
 
And the members opposite are clearly on the record, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They are clearly on the record as opposing the 
Kyoto Protocol. And throughout my years in this legislature, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, since I was elected in 1999, I have 
been on the record as supporting the Kyoto Protocol. And 
members on this side of the House, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
have made it clear with their voices that they strongly support 
initiatives that are intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
and climate change in this province, contrary to members 
opposite, Madam Deputy Speaker, who sat here in 2002 and did 
everything they could to prevent a resolution being passed in 
this legislature that expressed support for Kyoto. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a moment 
about why the question of climate change is so critical because 
the international scientific community is clearly saying to the 
world that action must be taken to reduce emissions not just by 
10 or 20 per cent but over the next 40 years reduce emissions by 
60 to 80 per cent, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the scientific community is also warning the world that if 
action is not taken on this front, temperatures, average surface 
temperatures will rise by between 2 and 5 degrees centigrade 
over the next century, Madam Deputy Speaker. That is a 
frightening prospect. 
 
When you think about what a 5-degree change in temperature 
means on the earth, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s equivalent to 
the change in temperature between the last ice age and today in 
terms of average surface temperature on the earth. It’s a 
5-degree difference, 5-degree centigrade difference between the 
temperatures we’ve enjoyed over the last few hundred years and 
the last ice age. 
 
And you also need to bear in mind one other important thing, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and that is that all these greenhouse 
gases are going into an atmosphere that only extends, in terms 
of the breathable portion of it, about 5 kilometres above the 
earth. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the consequences of us 
continuing our greenhouse gas emissions with these 
temperature increases that I’ve just described are as follows, 
and I want to just highlight five key examples of why we need 
this make this a major, major priority. 
 
First is the threat of drought in our province and in many, many 
parts of the world, drought becoming much worse than it is now 
with declining surface water levels, increased forest fires, and 
many important agricultural areas that would become unusable. 
 
Second, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the risk to our beautiful 
coral reefs around the world which will be destroyed if ocean 
temperatures rise by another 2 degrees centigrade. Already 
these are at grave risk, and they are a source of great marine 
biodiversity with a quarter of all marine life spending at least 
part of its time in the coral reefs. If global greenhouse gas 
emissions are not dramatically curbed, the coral reefs of the 
world will be destroyed. 
 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

Third, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the risk that is associated 
with mass extinction of species. Already the temperature 
increases that have occurred are resulting in animal populations 
needing to migrate towards the poles — significant differences, 
several kilometres every decade, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
many animals are not successfully completing their migrations 
because they’re blocked by urban congestion or because their 
food supply does not move with them. And many, many animal 
species are in decline by alarming numbers. Amphibian species, 
for instance, a third of them, Madam Deputy Speaker, already 
on the verge of extinction. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Fourth, Madam Deputy Speaker, we run the risk of Greenland 
and the Antarctic melting as temperatures rise. And we run the 
risk as the result of that, Madam Deputy Speaker, for sea levels 
rising sharply. Already the international scientific community is 
warning that sea levels could rise by nine-tenths of a metre over 
the next 100 years. And there are hundreds of millions of 
people who live in cities that are less than 1 metre above sea 
level, Madam Deputy Speaker, and also large, large numbers of 
animal species who would be threatened by such a sea level 
rise. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, those are just a few examples 
of why this issue is so critical to address. 
 
And there’s just one more that I want to make reference of in 
my brief time here this afternoon, and that is with respect to 
extreme weather events. Saskatchewan has experienced more 
extreme weather events over the last two years, more than 
we’ve ever experienced in the last 40. 
 
And all around the world this is happening, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. More and more people are experiencing severe floods, 
severe hurricanes. And of course we saw last year the billions 
of dollars of damage that was done by Hurricane Katrina, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And it’s just one example of the more 
severe hurricanes that the Gulf of Mexico and many other parts 
of the world are experiencing. In Japan they’re experiencing 
record numbers of typhoons, Madam Deputy Speaker. So this is 
a huge problem for the global community. 
 
And I am so proud of our Premier, that he is coming forward 
and saying clearly to the people of Saskatchewan and to this 
legislature, against the opposition and members opposite, that 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions is going to be a major 
priority for this government in the decade ahead, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And only New Democrats will deliver on this, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know one thing for sure. The Leader of the Opposition 
opposite will never support a serious reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions in this province. He’s on record time and again as 
opposing Kyoto. He has filed petition after petition in this 
legislature opposing Kyoto, and we will fight him to the end, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to make sure he never, never becomes 
the leader of government in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Prebble: — Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to make 
two other comments in closing. First of all, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I want to express appreciation to my constituents for 
electing me for four terms in this Assembly. It’s been a great 
privilege to serve them. This may be my last budget address 
because I announced a year ago that I would not be running in 
the next election and retiring from provincial politics, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to thank my constituents for the chance to serve 
them. It’s been a great honour. I also want to thank my family 
for the huge support that they have given me. My wife Louise, 
my sons Mark, James, and Michael, my stepdaughter Monté, 
my mother Trudy, have been a huge support for me. And I want 
to thank the New Democratic Party in my constituency for the 
privilege of nominating me and for the support they have given 
me. It’s been a great honour to serve. 
 
And finally, my final message, Madam Deputy Speaker, is to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Don’t let the Sask Party take the 
progress that we’ve made over the last 16 years away, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Let’s not turn government, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, over to a party that bankrupt this province when they 
governed it from 1982 to 1991 with $14 billion of debt. Let’s 
not turn over government to a party that destroyed the 
children’s dental program and dozens of other social programs 
during their time in office. Let’s not turn government over to a 
group of people who, when they last governed the province, one 
of their first acts was to blow up the Office of Energy 
Conservation which we have now re-established, and to blow 
up the programs for solar energy in this province that we have 
now re-established. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s not turn back the clock to a group 
of people, Madam Deputy Speaker, that when they were in 
government demonstrated their corrupt practices. Let’s stay, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, with a positive government that’s 
going to work for the betterment of families in this province. 
 
I’m pleased to support this budget, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and I will be opposing the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I hope I 
can get through my speech today. I’ve had a bad cold but we’ll 
give it a try anyhow. 
 
First I’d like to congratulate the member from Martensville on 
her election. It was a resounding victory where she received and 
Saskatchewan Party received over 77 per cent of the vote and 
the NDP only garnered 10 per cent of the vote. The worst 
showing in their history, I understand. So that’s very revealing 
and it also speaks to the record of the NDP and why the people 
in Martensville and the by-election in Weyburn before that, 
why the people of Saskatchewan have turned on the NDP. 
 
I’d like to get into more of the credibility of the NDP or the lack 
of the credibility of the NDP, but first I want to address the 
budget that has come down. 
 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

Madam Deputy Speaker, one only has to look at page 58 of the 
Saskatchewan provincial budget, Budget and Performance Plan 
Summary, 2007-2008. And the NDP say they have a balanced 
budget. But it’s just not true, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 
you look on page 58, the Government of Saskatchewan 
summary statements of changes in net debt, first line, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, surplus (deficit) — well what is it? — it’s a 
deficit of $701.3 million. And at the bottom of the information, 
the net debt, end of the year is $8.7514 billion. That’s an 
increase of net debt of $925.6 million. 
 
So absolutely, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is not a sustainable 
budget. It’s a pre-election budget. And obviously the NDP are 
trying to hoodwink the people of Saskatchewan into believing 
that this is a balanced budget when we know that it is not. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to only look at a number of 
very informative . . . and people from the industry . . . Look at 
what the CBIC has been saying. It says, 
 

. . . looking at the summary accounts [which I just talked 
about] — which includes government departments and 
Crown corporations as well as such thing as . . . [drawback 
downs] from [the] reserves and pension adjustments — 
there is a $701 million deficit planned for [the] fiscal year 
that begins April 1, the bank said. 

 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, Randy Burton, political 
columnist for the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, he says, “. . . when 
you look at it all together, it’s a very expensive campaign 
platform that no government is going to be able to afford in the 
long run.” Unsustainable budget, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to speak a bit about my constituency and really speak to 
what this budget says to my constituents. My constituency is 
called Biggar. It takes in the communities of Langham and 
Borden, Radisson, Denholm, also Wilkie, of course the town of 
Biggar, Perdue, Vanscoy, Delisle, Asquith, and all the rural 
areas in between, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I was very interested to see the statistics about the 
population drop overall in Saskatchewan, but particularly in the 
constituency of Biggar. And I’d just like to point out what has 
been going on since 2001 when this present Premier came into 
power, up to date to 2006. And the numbers show, for the town 
of Biggar, a decrease of 9.4 per cent in the population. Then 
you go on to look at rural Biggar, a decrease of 16 per cent in 
the population; the town of Wilkie, a decrease of nearly 5 per 
cent in population. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, then you look at the RM of 
Rosemount, the rural municipality, minus 20.7 per cent; Reford 
RM, minus 10 per cent. Go on, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
other communities: Kinley, the village of Kinley, minus 12.5 
per cent; Great Bend municipality, minus 13 per cent; 
Langham, which is relatively close to Saskatoon, minus 2.2 per 
cent population; Vanscoy only marginally increased in 
population, point five per cent; village of Ruddell, minus 20 per 
cent, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it just goes on and on. You look at Ruthilda, minus 75 per 
cent in population; Denholm, minus 22.8 per cent; the village of 
Maymont, minus 20.7 per cent; the rural municipality of Eagle 

Creek, minus 4.7 per cent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is what’s been happening in the 
constituency of Biggar since this present Premier has come to 
power. Go on to the village of Landis, minus 26.1 per cent; 
Grandview RM, minus 15.9 per cent; Mayfair, minus 10.5 per 
cent; the village of Perdue, minus 2.2; the Springwater village, 
minus 25 per cent in population; Vanscoy village, minus 1.7 per 
cent; and the town of village, point nine per cent. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is the result of this NDP 
government’s mismanagement since 2001 and even before that. 
But particularly since this government has come to power under 
this Premier, this is the result of what’s happened in the 
constituency of Biggar. People are leaving the constituency in 
droves, and it’s interesting to note who they are. Well many of 
the young people, people that are working. Farmers, young 
farmers, middle-aged farmers, they’ve had to leave their farms, 
their homes, to work elsewhere, and generally they do go to 
Alberta for jobs and elsewhere. And so, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the NDP government’s track record is really dismal 
and certainly speaks to how ineffective their policies have been. 
 
So now we look at this present budget and what do we have? 
Well we have a pre-election budget with a $701 million deficit. 
And really the government has spent everything. The cupboard 
is bare, and what is there for next year and the year after? How 
does this government expect to turn things around in the future? 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they aren’t thinking beyond 
the next election. They’re just going to spend as much money as 
they possibly can and try to buy the next election. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another important thing that the 
government tries to promote is it goes to the Canadian Wheat 
Board and the statistics or the results of the plebiscite that was 
held. And it’s very interesting to note that nearly 55 per cent of 
the voters in the barley plebiscite have voted either for an 
option to market to the wheat board or other buyer of their 
choice, or take the Canadian Wheat Board totally out of the 
process of buying, marketing barley. And overall right across 
Western Canada, it’s 62 per cent that would like an option of 
how they sell their barley. 
 
Now the member from Saskatoon Nutana likes to write letters 
to the editor in the Biggar Independent about the Canadian 
Wheat Board and about my record on the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Well I wish she’d write another letter to the editor and 
state the results of this plebiscite concerning the barley. She’s 
certainly missing the point. And the problem with her position 
is that we have been under the wheat board all through these 
years. And you’d only need to look at the statistics in the Biggar 
constituency and say people are voting with their feet. They’re 
leaving the farms. They’re leaving the towns and villages in the 
constituency of Biggar, and this is the same thing right across 
all of Saskatchewan while we have had the wheat board and 
single marketing. 
 
So Madam Deputy Speaker, it certainly speaks to what people 
think about the Canadian Wheat Board, and obviously changes 
need to be made for marketing choice. And the people of 
Saskatchewan has voted, has shown what they think about the 
Canadian Wheat Board. So I think it should put it to rest. But 
I’m sure the member from Saskatoon Nutana will be writing 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

another letter to the editor stating some, her point of view about 
how important the Canadian Wheat Board is. But it certainly 
will not affect too many people in the constituency of Biggar 
because they know better. They know what the result of having 
the wheat board in place has been in the past. 
 
It’s interesting to note . . . and I had a constituent that came to 
me and was very, very upset. She along with many other people 
have taken the initiative to save energy, everything from, you 
know, using more energy-effective, energy-saving light bulbs 
and so on and so forth. And she says it’s very disturbing to have 
gone to the expense and has done the right thing to try to reduce 
the uses of energy. And so what does the government do? 
Raises the rates, the energy rates, the power rates in 
Saskatchewan. So people in Saskatchewan are being penalized 
for doing the right thing. And only NDP government could 
come up with a plan to penalize people in Saskatchewan for 
doing the right thing. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I’d like to respond to some of the comments made by the 
member from Greystone, and unfortunately he misspoke. I’m 
sure he made a mistake when he took credit and his government 
took credit for the new MRI at St. Paul’s in Saskatoon. Well I 
just want to straighten him out on that. There was no 
government money in acquiring the MRI for St. Paul’s. That 
was raised by the foundation, by the people of Saskatoon, by 
Saskatchewan. And he certainly is wrong in taking any credit 
for the MRI in St. Paul’s in Saskatoon. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note the 
Minister of Highways has got caught saying something he 
shouldn’t have, and the whole situation with the Weyerhaeuser 
plant in Prince Albert, where he jumped on the bandwagon and 
made an announcement about a pending sale of Weyerhaeuser 
to Domtar. Of course as soon as you realize what came out of 
his mouth, he starts denying what he did. 
 
And I just like to relay a story about the Minister of Agriculture 
and what he did to the community of Biggar. There was a 
US-based [United States] packing plant that was considering 
building a packing plant in the community of Biggar. And there 
was a delegation from Biggar went and spoke to this business, 
this packing plant business in Kansas City, and it seemed that 
things were moving along quite nicely. And unfortunately 
everything was going along good until the Minister of 
Agriculture went down to the US and announced that this . . . he 
named the company who was considering coming to Biggar. 
And this company was so outraged by how unprofessional that 
Agriculture minister was that they called off the deal. They said 
they wouldn’t deal with any government that would act so 
unprofessionally. 
 
And then we see the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] doing 
exactly the same thing. Now we hope that his words do not put 
the kiboshes to the agreement. But it’s interesting to see how 
this government operates and how they actually chase business 
out of the province. 
 
I’d like to go back a bit to the budget, Mr. Speaker. The other 
thing that’s happened with this government in power in the last 
few years is that there has been an increase of 1,459 new 

government positions. This has all gone on while the population 
of Saskatchewan has been falling. So again, you know, the 
spending in the Premier’s office is up by 17 per cent, and that is 
not a very good legacy to leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Look at health care. I’m just going to touch on a couple of 
things. You look at health care. In the budget document they 
have, only going to increase the number of nursing education 
positions by 18 in the next year, and that’s outrageous, Mr. 
Speaker, because everyone recognizes that health care is so 
important to Saskatchewan and the future of Saskatchewan and 
the health of Saskatchewan’s people. But this government 
doesn’t seem to want to recognize that they have a major role to 
play in the health care of Saskatchewan citizens. They can 
spend money left and right in pre-election goodies, but they 
certainly don’t dedicate it to some very important areas. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, you look at the announcements 
leading up to this budget. You look at the announcements in 
Highways and Transportation. The minister and the Premier 
make a big announcement of $5 billion over ten years in a 
transportation plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately it was an 
announcement that was very hollow. When you take into 
account inflation, when you take into account the six pillars that 
this money’s going to be spent on, well it leaves very little new 
money for the construction of highways and roads in this 
province. And again we are just left wondering, you know, what 
is the future in infrastructure development in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in the past, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said — you know 
when he was asked about previous spending in the Highways 
and Transportation — and he said how we have been doing 
things in the past has been in many cases ad-hoc without a 
long-term plan. That’s a quote from CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] news, March 6th. The Premier 
admitted that there was no long-term plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have had eight different NDP 
ministers of Highways spending millions and millions of dollars 
without a plan. This is not accountable government. It certainly 
isn’t. It is a sorry state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other thing that has to be said about 
this is that this budget is really hiding the fact of a $701 million 
deficit. And the whole thing about . . . They have the budget 
announcement. They leak a number of items about the budget 
before they announced the budget to do one thing, and that was 
to try hide the whole Carriere scandal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to put on record what the people 
of Saskatchewan . . . and the individual: 
 

One of the nine female government workers who received 
compensation over harassment claims says complaints 
were raised long before the Department of the 
Environment launched an investigation in late 2002. 

 
She goes on to say, “We were ignored.” She says: 
 

“We laid complaints and they said we weren’t going 
through the proper channels . . . which we thought we 
were doing just by going to (our) superior.” 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

The woman said that she believes a union representative 
bringing forward harassment complaints against Murdoch 
Carriere — the former director of fire management and 
forest protection — is what got a government investigation 
started in 2002. 
 
She said some supervisors did try to help prior to that time, 
but it didn’t go anywhere. 
 
“It makes you feel really worthless,” she said in an 
interview. 
 
A statement dated March 25, 2007, that was written by the 
woman — one of nine to split $135,000 from the 
government in 2004 — was read . . . [by my colleague]. 
 
In it, the woman says a meeting was held in July 2002 
between the Department of the Environment’s associate 
deputy minister . . . and five supervisors from the . . . [P.A. 
office upon] “repeated attempts to address the 
harassment.” 
 
“The supervisors were told in so many words by the 
ADM, ‘That’s just Murdoch,’” the woman wrote in the 
statement, which . . . [my colleague] quoted during 
question period. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a government that should stay in office 
very much longer. I’d certainly hope they have the courage to 
be calling an election soon. Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting in 
favour of the budget. I will certainly be voting in favour of the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle, the Minister for Agriculture and Food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much . . . [inaudible] 
. . . thank you. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a 
privilege to be a member in this House, to have opportunity to 
work with tremendous colleagues that surround me, and to have 
a leader who has been so clear in his foresight in outlining what 
we will do under his leadership from very early on in the 
leadership race. 
 
And yet today he continues to make clear that there can be no 
social progress without economic progress. And there must not 
be economic progress without corresponding social progress. 
Mr. Speaker, true to his word he has helped rebuild this 
province, bring us to a place where we can now advance that 
social progress in unprecedented ways, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
what this budget does. And I will speak in favour and vote in 
favour of this budget, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of my time 
I’ll make clear that I will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to serve in this House I need the support 
of a lot of people, as all of us do. And I’m very thankful for the 
support of my family: my wife Gail, my children, Alaina and 
Daniel, my parents, Bruce and Fran, and for my in-laws who 
I’ve noted before would probably never vote for me but they are 

supportive of me personally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the levels of support that there are 
there, but primarily I want to say thank you to the constituents 
of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley who have returned me a second 
time to this legislature with an even greater plurality than I had 
at the first election and who have put their trust in me to work 
for them to help strengthen our community and to help 
strengthen this province, Mr. Speaker. I think in the growth — 
the tremendous growth — that we’re seeing in Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley we are seeing evidence of the kind of 
turnaround that this government, this NDP government has 
made in the economy. And we’ll continue to see the evidence as 
we strengthen the community through the social progress that 
we’re engaging in, Mr. Speaker. So I thank them and I hope the 
support that this NDP government is providing for our 
constituency and in strengthening this province will, Mr. 
Speaker, lead to further opportunities to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to spend a bit of time thanking the 
staff who surround me and enable me to do the many things that 
I’m able to do. To my constituency staff, Donna and Sherry, 
who work so hard during their working hours and who also 
volunteer much time, I am very, very thankful. I don’t think 
anyone could be served better than what I have been by my 
constituency staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My ministerial staff — second to none. These folks work with 
commitment, dedication, and a deep love for the province, and 
have provided tremendous service over the years that I’ve 
worked with them, and I am very thankful to them for their 
work. 
 
And to the Department of Agriculture and Food and now to the 
Department of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development, tremendous staff there who provide great 
information, who provide the sound, solid information that 
enables me to do the work that I’m called upon to do. I am very 
thankful, Mr. Speaker, and I hope I serve them well in my 
capacity as minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise in the House today in 
support of this budget. I think it’s a tremendous budget. It 
clearly illustrates that our vision for Saskatchewan is one that is 
clearly down to earth, well-grounded, and that reaches, Mr. 
Speaker, beyond the limits of the sky. We will build a strong 
and prosperous province. We will build a strong and prosperous 
province. We will build a province where the people prosper 
and the people benefit. Mr. Speaker, this is a province that is 
becoming — because of its economic growth, because of its 
social progress — becoming a destiny for people from across 
this country and around the world, and we intend to enhance 
that over the years ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our focus in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
is on making life better for Saskatchewan families by 
strengthening public health care, by advancing environmental 
protection and a green economy, by building an even stronger 
future here for our young people, by ensuring that families in 
Saskatchewan feel the benefit of our strong and prosperous 
economy. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

To support these cornerstones, the budget for the next fiscal 
year includes new initiatives for health, including prescriptions 
for seniors and measures that are targeted at reducing wait 
times. Mr. Speaker, we have had success in developing these, 
and I know that the people of the province will appreciate them. 
 
Youth will stay in this province because of the opportunity that 
there is here, the jobs that are available, Mr. Speaker. And 
added to that we are providing benefit that will help make this 
place much more affordable for them, the most affordable and 
desirable place to be in this nation, Mr. Speaker, because they 
will have tax exemptions on the first $20,000 that they make for 
five years, Mr. Speaker. Their tuition fees in post-secondary 
education are frozen to help reduce their costs. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is the place to be for our young people to build 
their futures, to raise their families, Mr. Speaker, and to have 
successful careers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made decisions here that will strengthen 
the infrastructure of this province, decisions that are vital to 
continuing to build a strong economy — $5 billion committed 
to transportation infrastructure over 10 years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is going to make a difference to the economy of 
Saskatchewan, and as the priorities are set on those areas, that 
we’ll have the best economic return, Mr. Speaker. We will see 
that return. 
 
We’ll see a strengthened economy that will enable us to do even 
more for the people of Saskatchewan. Our economy is strong. 
It’s growing. It’s strengthening, Mr. Speaker, and today we 
have a budget that really builds on that strength. 
 
I think back, Mr. Speaker, and I think of the time in ’91 and ’92 
as we were facing the challenges left over by the former 
Conservative government in this province. Mr. Speaker, the 
debt/GDP ratio at that time was 65.1 per cent, and, Mr. Speaker, 
we were virtually bankrupt at that period. It was a very, very 
difficult time. And the people of this province pulled together 
with our NDP government to rebuild the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today the combined government and Crown debt is down 
to 23.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. This is a huge change — our 
government debt/GDP ratio at 15.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a province on the move, one of the best in the country with 
great economic growth and the ability to build and strengthen 
because of that debt/GDP ratio being so solid. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, the advancements that 
we have made have allowed us, have allowed us to have the 
second lowest sales tax in the country applied to the least 
number of goods, Mr. Speaker. And it has also allowed us to 
build a strong health care with no health care premiums. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an affordable place to live because of the hard 
work this NDP government has done in rebuilding the province 
after the devastation of the Conservatives. 
 
And all through this debate the members opposite have tried to 
call into question the economics that we have in this budget. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the unbiased judgment of the money markets, 

of the bond raters has been clear, Mr. Speaker. This is our 14th 
balanced budget. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 16 straight 
credit upgrades prove that fact. They prove it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And it’s on that economic base that we 
can build. Mr. Speaker, we can build. We can have a 9 per cent 
overall increase this year. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
sustainable and that is affirmed, that is affirmed by the CAs 
[chartered accountant] who are doing the economic analysis in 
government and outside of government, Mr. Speaker. The 
major banks look at us and they say, yes, yes, these people are 
doing the budget right, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
sustainable budget. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what enables us to build solid economic 
planning, solid, sound budgeting practices, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s what we’re engaged in. And that’s why we have, Mr. 
Speaker, the 14th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because we have that sound economic 
planning, we have been able to reduce income tax by one-third 
over the past eight years. It brings us to a place where we have 
the lowest income tax level since 1999. And I can tell you that 
we plan to continue with our tax reforms in the future. 
 
We’ve achieved the second highest growth in international trade 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker — the second highest growth in 
international trade. We have also achieved the third fastest rate 
of job growth in the country, adding 20,600 new jobs from 
February 2006 to February 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no accident. It’s planned. It’s been clear since 
the Premier took over in this province that we were going to see 
an economic turnaround. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing it, and 
we’re seeing the change, Mr. Speaker, as people are coming 
into this province. And the numbers next year in the census will 
prove, Mr. Speaker, that we have been building and growing 
this province successfully. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the growth 
in Saskatchewan’s GDP is higher than the national average 
because we have planned and yes, Mr. Speaker, because in that 
planning we have seen some good fortune, Mr. Speaker. We 
changed the royalty structures on our oil and gas, on our 
minerals, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time we have seen 
growth in the price. And yes, that has benefited us. And Mr. 
Speaker, it is benefiting the people of this province and it will 
continue to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our sound financial planning has also benefited 
agriculture and food. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s agriculture 
and food industry clearly has a vital role to play in this 
economy. It has a vital role to play in helping us achieve our 
vision for Saskatchewan, our goal of continuing to grow and 
strengthen this vibrant economy. 
 
To help build and strengthen this agriculture industry, Mr. 
Speaker, we have been there on every front, providing support, 
encouraging, enabling, and building this industry. Mr. Speaker, 



March 28, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry remains a priority for this 
province. And that’s why this 2007-08 budget contains $301 
million in spending for agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this is a 13.7 
per cent increase — 36.171 million increase over last year’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite try and obfuscate. They look at the 
year-end spending, Mr. Speaker, where we accounted for fully 
funding for CAIS, where we accounted for a whole number of 
other expenditures that shored up this industry, and they say, 
well it’s not an increase. Mr. Speaker, they’re wrong. Budget 
over budget this is a 13.7 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a $36.7 million increase in budget for the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
And it will be an effective budget, Mr. Speaker. And why will it 
be effective, Mr. Speaker? Because there is, also we are 
experiencing a turnaround in the agriculture economy, Mr. 
Speaker, where we have faced, over the past years we have 
faced negative realized net farm incomes. We have faced 
incomes that are lower than what the average is, Mr. Speaker. 
This year and last, the ’06-07 and the ’07-08 year are far above, 
far above the average realized net farm income. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t spoken to a farmer in this province 
that has said they’d rather get their money from programs than 
from the market, Mr. Speaker. They want the money from the 
market, not from the programs, Mr. Speaker. And that’s where 
it’s going to come this year. Prices are up and they’re going to 
do better in the market, Mr. Speaker, and we’re glad for that. 
And we’ve got program that’s going to help support and 
strengthen those market prices as we move forward. 
 
What are we going to do, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to help 
them? Well we see a growing economy. We see growing prices. 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do in this province, we’re 
going to fully fund CAIS. So where there are losses, Mr. 
Speaker, CAIS is going to help cover those loses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to invest 2 million more in 
improvements to crop insurance and that’s going to make a 
difference to farmers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put in place a 
variable price option so when you’ve got rising prices, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re not going to be locked in at a January price but 
will have the advantage of a July price. Mr. Speaker, this is 
going to make a significant difference and farmers will pick up 
this program. 
 
We’re going to see added coverage for identity-preserved 
canola, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see an increased 
establishment benefit for gopher damage which was very 
significant down in the Southwest last year and we’re going to 
try and help out on that front. 
 
We’re going to see extension of the crop averaging program. 
We’re going to see changes to unseeded acreage administration 
and a pilot program for wild rice, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
solid economic planning enables us to do, to put these 
advantages in there to help farmers if they run into trouble. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the real return is going to come from a better 
market this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re investing also in the areas of research. We 

pushed for three years to get significant funding out of our 
wedge funding into the area of research, Mr. Speaker, $34.6 
million into enhanced research programs to expand facilities. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is going to make a difference. When you 
see the kind of research that’s going on in this province and the 
impact that it can have overall on agriculture, it’s the right kind 
of spend to make to build this industry and to strengthen it for 
the future. 
 
If we get one or two degrees of frost tolerance increase in our 
grains, Mr. Speaker, what a difference that would make in a 
year like 2004. Millions and multi-millions of dollars not lost 
because of these new developments made possible by our 
investment in research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have many challenges in front of us but this 
solid economic planning and the investment that we’re making 
— the increased investment in agriculture — is going to make a 
difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the other 
department that I’m carrying responsibility for right now, and 
that is Regional Economic and Co-operative Development. Mr. 
Speaker, there we are working with the REDAs [regional 
economic development authority], investing in those REDAs to 
try and strengthen our rural communities. 
 
We’re working with ACRE [action committee on the rural 
economy] and we have implemented many of the 
recommendations that the ACRE committee has made to try 
and strengthen our rural economy. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because 
it matters to the whole of our economy. We want to see a strong 
and vital rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are investing in our REDAs, we are working 
with ACRE to make sure that that happens. We’re putting 
small-business loans out to enable small businesses and 
entrepreneurs to develop in rural areas. Mr. Speaker, we want to 
see the whole of this province, urban and rural, prosper, and I 
can tell you that this budget is set up to enable that to happen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to stand here in support of the budget and I 
will be pleased to work on next year’s budget to make sure that 
we strengthen and grow this province even stronger. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I realize we’re getting 
close to the end of the day now and so I would like to move 
adjournment of debate. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2007 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Government House 
Leader, I would like to bring to members’ attention a special 
guest who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. This young man 
comes from real good Saskatchewan stock. His name is Andrew 
Kowalsky — he’s my brother’s son — hailing from Saskatoon. 
And Andrew is here in Regina. He’s currently working towards 
his steam engineering certificate and he’s here doing some work 
and apprenticing or working alongside some of the people that 
keep this building warm and cold. So if the temperature should 
happen to vary a little too much, just let me know and I’ll speak 
to Andrew and we’ll get it repaired really quickly. Welcome to 
Andrew Kowalsky to the Assembly, please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:53.] 
 
 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1053 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1054 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1055 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1055 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1056 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1056 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1056 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1056 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1084 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Plains are Alive with the Sound of Music 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1057 
 Canadian Wheat Board Vote 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1058 
 Constituent to Run Boston Marathon 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1058 
 Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Fundraiser 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1058 
 Saskatoon Open Door Society 25th Anniversary 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1059 
 Minister’s Responses During Question Period 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1059 
 McKercher Cup Mock Trial Competition 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1059 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Lists for Orthopedic Surgery 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1060 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1060 
 Compensation for Forestry Secretariat Executive 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1061 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1061 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1061 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1062 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1062 
  



 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1063 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1064 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1064 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1065 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1067 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1070 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1072 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1075 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1078 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


