


















































Hansard: April 19, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 19, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1329 
 April 19, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s again 
my privilege to present a petition in regards to the need for a 
dialysis unit in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the folks 
from the communities of Grenfell and Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition where the people are asking the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. Mr. 
Speaker, they are concerned that, without an office, submission 
of electrical and gas permits will be more difficult and cause 
delays in customer hookups. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Fiske, Swift Current, and Zealandia. 
And I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Riverhurst and Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
with a petition of citizens concerned about the safety of driving 
on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures are from St-Denis, Saskatoon, Humboldt, 
Muenster, Bruno, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 
18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Radville. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people across 
Saskatchewan who for the past eight years have been lobbying 
this government for a dedicated children’s hospital within a 
hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners come from the provincial constituencies of 
Saskatoon Sutherland, Martensville, and Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring a petition forward from citizens that are deeply concerned 
about the presence of sexual predators that are present or a 
threat to their communities. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to the 
Davidson and Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available as well as lab, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas 
and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
be able to rise in the Assembly today to present a petition 
calling on the government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Radville and Weyburn. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order petitions received at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 54 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 54 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 54. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 54 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority]: when is the projected 
completion date for the review of The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act, and when does SLGA expect to 
make this review public? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day no. 54 ask the government 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SLGA: what are the 
parameters of the review of The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act, and specifically what issues are being 
reviewed? 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very proud 
and pleased to be able to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly some very special guests sitting in 
your gallery. We’re all gathering to present the annual report of 
the Premier’s voluntary sector initiative to the Premier in this, a 
very important, extremely important transition year for the 
initiative. And these members are part of the joint steering 
committee that have been working with not only government 
sector representatives but community representatives to prepare 
the report. 
 
In the order that they are . . . [inaudible] . . . seating, sitting 
within your gallery, Mr. Speaker: Brad Lawrence . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Thursday . . . Brad Lawrence, Government 
House Museum and Heritage Property manager; Tracey Mann, 
director of community impact and investments, United Way of 
Regina, and Tracey has been a stalwart, steadfast supporter and 
Co-Chair of the initiative; Darlene Bessey, board member and 
treasurer of Canadian Crossroads International and Chair of 
Saskatoon citizens’ centennial committee; Carol Smith, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, farm stress unit, 
coordinator of connection services directory; Betty Abrey, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, farm stress unit, 
connection services directory. 
 
And not yet able to join us, there are a number of other steering 
committee members, but they will be with us or join us this 
afternoon. This is an important week, National Volunteer Week, 
so it’s taken quite a few of them away to other events for the 
morning. 
 
But right behind them would be Shianne Krause who is senior 
policy analyst and a superlative support person to this initiative, 
and Rick Fink who’s manager of communications for CYR 
[Culture, Youth and Recreation]. 
 
I’d ask all members to give their warmest welcome to these 
people who’ve been working so hard on behalf of all 
community in Saskatchewan to strengthen the relationship 
between the government sector and the voluntary sector. It’s 
been an extreme pleasure and a great deal of joy to work with 
them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you, members of this Assembly, 
someone who likely needs no introduction at all. She is a 
former member of this Assembly. Seated behind the bar, a 
former member for Humboldt, future member for Saskatoon 
Nutana . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — She is currently involved in operating her own 
business. And I know members will want to welcome her to the 
Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just before that happens, let me also just 
quickly add that recently there’s been a lot of discussion about 
the role of women in politics in the province. And I think we 
will all agree that we need more women involved. 
 
One political leader — I won’t mention his name, but his 
initials are David Karwacki — said something to the effect that 
the women currently involved in politics in this Assembly are 
getting old and ready to retire. I think he said words to that 
effect. Folks might want to send cards and letters his way if 
they’re offended. 
 
For the record, we believe the women of this Assembly are 
young and vibrant and leaders. And we’re looking forward to 
welcoming back Arlene in that capacity here in the near future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of 
the Assembly a group of 14 students seated in the western 
gallery. They are from the Rainbow Youth Centre’s most 
excellent Road to Employment program. Often that road to 
employment leads to the legislature where we have a visit, and 
I’m glad to see them here today. I look forward to meeting with 
them a bit later on. They are accompanied by their teachers, 
Shelly Christian and Raylene Bellegarde. And I look forward to 
meeting with them later on. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
Arlene Julé to the Assembly. As the Leader of the Opposition 
has indicated, Ms. Julé will be running in the constituency that I 
presently represent. Obviously Ms. Julé will be a formidable 
opponent in Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
But I do want to say this, that we have a pretty good political 
organization in our constituency, and our constituency 
association and our election planning committee is looking 
forward to another challenge. 
 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

And while I’m on my feet, I also want to welcome Grant 
Karwacki who was a political opponent on behalf of the Liberal 
Party in the last election campaign. And I think it’s the first 
time that I can remember that both the Liberals and the 
conservatives have their prospective candidates in the 
Assembly, and I can say that I am looking forward, I’m looking 
forward to . . . or pardon me, the Saskatchewan Party, pardon 
me, the Saskatchewan Party. Both the Liberals and the 
Saskatchewan Party have their respective candidates in the 
Assembly, and obviously we’re looking very forward to the 
next election campaign. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce two 
ladies in your gallery — Jeanine Howard-Tripp and Heather 
Chisholm. Jeanine is just recently moved to Regina with her 
husband Michael and their son Timothy. Regina’s gain, Mr. 
Speaker, is certainly both Maidstone and Prairie North Health 
Region’s loss. Michael served our region as a medical 
practitioner for the past number of years. Seated with Jeanine is 
my wife, Heather. 
 
Both Jeanine and Heather have vested interests in the health 
care system in this province and are looking forward to this 
morning’s debate and proceedings. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
that we all welcome our guests to their gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
[10:15] 
 

The Environment 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
coming Sunday, April 22 is Earth Day. The theme of this year’s 
Earth Day in Canada is Take the Next Step. It’s unfortunate that 
here in Saskatchewan this NDP government doesn’t seem to 
have even taken the first step when it comes to the environment. 
 
Last week we saw the NDP government release its so-called 
green strategy which got slammed by environmentalists in the 
province. The Saskatchewan Environmental Society thinks this 
green strategy is flawed because it lacks any targets. An 
editorial last week stated and I quote, “But if the goal is actually 
to build a green economy, the strategy is a non-starter.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is bringing Al Gore to 
Saskatchewan in an attempt to distract people from their own 
dismal record on the environment. It should be noted, Mr. 
Speaker, that both SaskTel and SaskEnergy are sponsors of this 
event, but not SaskPower — the third worst polluter in the 
country. 
 

After 16 years in government, this NDP has allowed 62 per cent 
increase in greenhouse gas emissions to occur in Saskatchewan, 
hardly a record to be proud of. It is clear, Mr. Speaker, that any 
action from the NDP now on the environment is nothing more 
than a deathbed conversion. 
 
In keeping with this year’s Earth Day theme of Take the Next 
Step, I would urge this NDP government to step away from the 
photo op and take a step forward towards a real plan that 
includes targets, goals, and measurability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Earth Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This coming 
Sunday is Earth Day. Every year since 1970, Earth Day has 
served to raise awareness about humanity’s growing ecological 
footprint and help stimulate positive actions aimed at local, 
regional, and global environmental issues. 
 
Earth Day is now the largest, most celebrated environmental 
event in the world involving 500 million people in 180 
countries. More than 6 million Canadians, including almost 
every schoolchild take part. Here in Saskatchewan a wide 
variety of events are planned around Earth Day, Mr. Speaker, 
including a visit from former US [United States] Vice-president 
Al Gore whose film, An Inconvenient Truth, offers a passionate 
look at his crusade to halt global warming by exposing the 
myths and misconceptions that surround it. 
 
This week the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority are observing Earth Day 
with a number of activities, including a performance of Don 
Waite’s play, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the 
Slough, by the grade 4 class of George Lee School here in 
Regina. 
 
As well there will be resource fairs, games, and crafts. Mr. 
Speaker, Earth Day is a time to recognize both our successes 
and our challenges when it comes to environmental issues, and 
there are plenty of both. But our government is committed to 
making life better for Saskatchewan families by conserving, 
protecting, and, when necessary, restoring this great province’s 
environmental integrity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan Business Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year a business in my constituency is 
celebrating its 40th anniversary. Johnson Plumbing & Heating 
in Estevan, a Lennox dealership, has been serving the greater 
Estevan area since 1967. 
 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

John Johnson — affectionately known around town as Johnny 
— is the man that started the business, and he’s now in his early 
70s. He is as spry and energetic as the day he started the 
business. Mr. Johnson’s sons, Rodger and Brad, now own the 
business and it continues to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do the Johnsons run a successful business 
in Estevan; they are also very active in the community. They 
are members of the local Lions Club, and every year they play a 
large part in putting on the club’s annual lobster and steak 
fundraising dinner at the hockey arena. This dinner feeds nearly 
1,000 people fresh lobster that is flown in the same day as the 
event, and the Johnsons help ensure it runs like clockwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating John and Audrey Johnson, their sons 
Rodger and Brad and their families for 40 years of business in 
Estevan and their commitment to the community. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Lakeland Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I had the 
pleasure of attending the Lakeland Citizen of the Year potluck 
in Christopher Lake. This is the 24th year for this community 
event, and as usual there was a huge turnout from the area — 
from Christopher Lake, Emma Lake, and Anglin Lake. There 
was an incredible selection of food as well as performances 
from a local choir and musicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2007 Lakeland Citizen of the Year is Ina 
Toporowski. Ina grew up in the Beatty district nearby and 
operated local businesses for a number of years, but for 24 
years she ran the local post office where she became a valued 
and trusted friend of everyone in the community. Last 
December Ina retired, but she is already looking for other ways 
to give her energy and time to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rural communities all paths lead to the post 
office. It is a meeting place with the postmaster at its centre. 
Even with email and the Internet, the lives of every person in 
the community still pass through the hands of the local post 
office — from birth announcements to condolences, from 
paycheques to pensions, from special days to holidays. As I said 
to Ina on Saturday night, she has held the life of the community 
in her hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Lakeland for recognizing a role 
in the community that we often take for granted and for 
organizing such a successful evening, and special 
congratulations to Ina Toporowski for being chosen Lakeland 
Citizen of the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
 

Nellie Stevenson’s 105th Birthday 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Nellie Myring Southwick was born 
April 8, 1902, at 46 Albert Road, Tamworth, Staffordshire, 
England. And Nellie talks about beginning school in England, 
but in 1907 she arrived in Canada with her family, and they 
began residing at the Hopewell District, north of the community 
of Whitewood. Nellie talks about learning how to ride 
horseback — side saddle — fetching the cows, and learning 
how to milk cows, running errands to a community 10 miles 
away, at the same time delivering butter and eggs. She also 
mentions that in 1909 they moved to a farm four miles northeast 
of Whitewood, and in 1921 she married her husband Frederick 
Eady Stevenson. To this relationship were born two sons, 
Frederick Henry, Robert William, and a daughter, Helen 
Doreen. 
 
Nellie talks about the ’30s as hard years. She talks about the 
difficulties on the farm, the challenges, but how they made 
things work and how they got along very well. Unfortunately in 
November 1953 she lost her husband, but she said farm life was 
good. She moved with her son to town in November 1977. 
Nellie has always been an active person in the community and I 
want to congratulate Nellie Stevenson on her 105th birthday. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Accuracy of Advertisements 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of the spring session last 
year, the member from Thunder Creek was asked about the 
accuracy of the ads that the opposition was running that 
contained inaccurate job numbers. He wasn’t too concerned and 
he said quote, “Maybe technically, mathematically we have to 
might have to review it.” 
 
At around the same time, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
was asked about the ethics of advertising that claimed tuition 
was going up in the province when, thanks to the government 
tuition freeze, it clearly wasn’t. The Sask Party leader wasn’t 
too concerned about that either. And apparently he’s still not 
because the Sask Party is continuing to run factually incorrect 
advertisements this year — one example, the Sask Party ad that 
claims that Saskatchewan’s population is shrinking. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite must be unaware that the fourth 
quarter of 2006 saw Saskatchewan’s largest population increase 
since 1986, not to mention the largest net interprovincial 
migration gain since 1983. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a pattern here of the 
Saskatchewan Party continually and conveniently getting their 
facts wrong, and it serves as another example of how the Sask 
Party’s so-called code of ethics is a total facade. They ran 
unethical advertising last year and got caught, but that hasn’t 
stopped them from doing it again this year. It’s no wonder they 
don’t enforce their own code of ethics, Mr. Speaker. They 
couldn’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Public Response 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
some responses from the public, from Saskatchewan people, to 
our mail-out on the Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from Regina, I quote: 
 

Please be more responsible with my money. Shame on the 
NDP! That was a slap in the face of those women and all 
women in Saskatchewan. 
 

From Estevan, I quote: 
 

This man broke the law, acted in a very disgraceful way. 
He should have been fired with no benefits just like 
anyone else would have been. It is a waste of our money 
and an insult to the ones affected that this man was 
rewarded for his actions. 

 
From Regina, I quote, “What recourse is there for mistreatment 
in the workplace if when you complain the boss gets paid off 
for life!! — after being convicted in the courts.” From Fillmore, 
in my own constituency, I quote, “Rewarding men . . . [for 
harassing] women in the workplace is like telling them to do it 
because women don’t matter.” From the Queen City, I quote: 
 

I agree that paying out that kind of money to Carriere is 
irresponsible government! I have supported the CCF . . . 
NDP for the last 50 years and will not vote for them again. 
I think government should look after taxpayers’ money as 
if it were their own and not waste it like water. I voted for 
. . . [the Premier] but will not be voting for him again . . . 
 

The last quote, Mr. Speaker, from Regina: “You, sir, have lost 
your moral mandate to rule.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Funding for Avastin 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today is 
63-year-old Keith Whyte from Bengough. Mr. Whyte is a 
constituent of mine. He’d been doctoring for almost three years 
to find the cause of his severe stomach pain. Finally last June, 
after he collapsed in a field one day, he was rushed to the 
hospital only to find out that he has cancer. He had a nine-hour 
surgery to remove a tumour the size of a grapefruit. But it didn’t 
end there. He had to aggressively lobby to get into the cancer 
clinic, and when he did get in, his doctor told him that he had 
six months to live and recommended that he take Avastin with 
chemotherapy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister reconsider his decision not to 
fund this cancer drug? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank the member opposite for his question. And I commend 
the constituent for his continuing battle against a horrendous 
disease that affects all too many people across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a position with regards to the drug 
Avastin. We continue to work with other provinces on 
developing a national or a pharmaceutical strategy that would 
include assistance on a national basis. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite are aware 
— as the constituents in the gallery must be aware — Avastin is 
not universally available in any province in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Nothing new has come forward since our decision was 
made and therefore, Mr. Speaker, as of today I’m not in any 
position to announce any changes in our plans. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Keith Whyte took Avastin for 
six months and his condition was improving, but in January of 
this year he had to quit because he ran out of money. The cost 
of treatment was $5,000 per month. 
 
This is the first time in Saskatchewan’s history that a cancer 
drug was recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 
but this government refused to fund it. Other provinces are 
funding it on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cancer patients say they are beyond begging this 
government for help. They are demanding action now. Why 
does this government refuse to help Saskatchewan people like 
Keith Whyte when they need it the most? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
again I reference my comments from just a few moments ago. 
The members opposite and members of the cancer agencies 
across Canada are aware that there is a patchwork quilt of 
cancer drug funding across Canada. The latest review has 
indicated that as far as cancer drug funding is concerned, 
Saskatchewan funds the fourth largest number of cancer drugs 
in Canada. Mr. Speaker, only three other provinces in Canada 
support more of the new cancer drugs or cancer drug treatments 
than Saskatchewan does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to review specific drugs and 
continuing to review a strategy on a national basis that will 
allow us to attend to new drugs like Avastin. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Avastin is considered the 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

standard of care for colorectal cancer but this government 
refuses to give cancer patients the standard of care that health 
professionals say they need. 
 
Had Mr. Whyte been diagnosed earlier, he might not be in his 
current situation, but he didn’t get a CT [computerized 
tomography] scan and his test results were mixed up. And when 
he finally did get in to see an oncologist, he was only allowed 
less than 10 minutes. Staff told him because of the doctor 
shortage, that’s all they had time for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this government refuse to give cancer 
patients in the province of Saskatchewan the help they so 
desperately need? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And again thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The member opposite states what the health critic of 
the party opposite has stated on a number of occasions, that 
Avastin is the standard of care for colorectal cancer. Actually, 
Mr. Speaker, Avastin is not universally available in any 
province in Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the standard of care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It is not the standard of care for colorectal 
cancer, Mr. Speaker. It is not available other than on a self-pay 
option. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan — this 
NDP government — recognized that, to individuals, there may 
be a choice made with regards to taking Avastin. And we made 
available the ability of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and 
our regional health care authorities to provide a self-pay option 
for Avastin. Mr. Speaker, since that decision was made, four 
other provinces, Mr. Speaker, have taken and are doing exactly 
the same thing. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Physician Supply in Canora, Kamsack, and Preeceville 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to media reports last night, the Kamsack, Preeceville, 
and Canora hospitals are all on reduced services at the same 
time. In Preeceville, emergency services shut down Wednesday 
and won’t be back in operation until tomorrow, Friday. There is 
no doctor. In Kamsack, all week long there has been no 
emergency services after 5 o’clock. There is no doctor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have three hospitals all out at the same 
time. This is happening over and over and over again. Why has 
the minister failed to address this long-standing problem that 
now appears to be getting worse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
notice on the order paper today that there’s a motion regarding 

health professionals. Mr. Speaker, I intend to utilize the time 
available to me to make some significant comments that are 
greater than the comments that I can make in this question 
period. But, Mr. Speaker, the essence of my remarks in debate 
later this day will be to show that we have not failed the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our efforts have been 
substantial, substantive, and our commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan also remains substantial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, three hospitals all on bypass at 
the same time, and the Minister of Finance, the member from 
Regina South, refers to this as the fact that I am overreacting. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s deplorable. The people of Canora and 
Kamsack and Preeceville and that entire area need better health 
care that this NDP government has not provided for 16 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what this means with the three 
hospitals on bypass is that all patients, all people in that area 
have to go to Yorkton. That was what was said on the 
television. It was recommended that anyone with an emergency 
must go to Yorkton. Minister knows full well what will happen 
when Yorkton is stretched to the limit. The Yorkton hospital 
has trouble dealing with the number of patients it already has, 
and now there’s this extra load. Mr. Speaker, why has the 
minister failed to effectively deal with this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure that in a day or two the member opposite will also rise to 
congratulate the government for its increase in health 
professionals in the province, and particularly the increase, the 
increase in physicians in this province, Mr. Speaker. Because 
every month, Mr. Speaker, some community is welcoming a 
new doctor into its midst. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we recognize, we recognize that there is a 
continuing challenge to recruit physicians to hard-to-recruit 
areas in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
also knows that the budget brought forward by this government 
contained not only $90 million, Mr. Speaker, of new money for 
contracts negotiated for nurses and doctors and other health 
professionals, but it also contained additional recruitment and 
retention dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

Physician Supply in Spiritwood Area 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A group of 
women in my constituency are fed up waiting on this 
government to fix the doctor shortage in Spiritwood. They have 
gathered 1,700 names on a petition complaining about the lack 
of doctors in the area. These people have been waiting six 
months for emergency services to resume in the Spiritwood 
Hospital. And the problem is spreading, Mr. Speaker. Nearly 
every hospital in my riding now has a shortage of doctors. I 
welcome the comments from the Health minister later on today 
about recruitment and retention of doctors in rural area, 
especially in my area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are these people waiting for answers from 
this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
in the Spiritwood area, like in the Kamsack and Canora area, 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authorities have the day-to-day 
responsibility with regards to recruitment and retention issues, 
working with programs that are initiated at the provincial level. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I commend those who are working on the 
health boards and in administration of these two regional health 
authorities, Mr. Speaker, because they face very significant 
challenges in those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are working very hard with programs that 
they have initiated, with programs that have been put in place 
by this provincial government. And, Mr. Speaker, I urge 
members of the community to continue to work with their 
regional health authorities to ensure that their community can 
attract physicians just as other communities in the province are 
doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are no emergency services in Spiritwood as we speak. And in 
Big River there will be a shutdown of six weeks later on 
without services. Tomorrow afternoon, people looking for 
answers will be gathering at the Shellbrook Hospital to deal 
with this potentially dangerous situation. They wrote the 
minister on February 14 asking why they are so low on the 
government’s priority list. They are still waiting for answers 
from this minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve arranged a meeting in Shellbrook at 2 o’clock 
tomorrow. The minister only lives in North Battleford. These 
people are looking for answers from this minister. Will the 
minister find time tomorrow to drive to Shellbrook and attend 
this meeting with me? Will he give that assurance to the people 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
aware that the member opposite was once the mayor of the 
town of Spiritwood, and he represented the town well as the 
mayor of that community. And he knows that, as the mayor, 
that the communities do play a role, a very significant role in 
the recruitment of physicians to their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows that the regional 
health authority has been working with the communities and 
with the current mayors and others. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
commend the member for organizing a meeting. I fully expect 
that the regional health authority will be in attendance to show 
that once again that the regional health authority is committed, 
has made a priority the recruitment and retention of physicians 
to that particular area of the province. Mr. Speaker, I commend 
the people of the communities for the work that they’re doing, 
and I urge them to continue to work hard to help the regional 
health authority and the government to get physicians into that 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruitment and Retention of Physicians 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the minister was asked the same questions last year, this 
is what he had to say, and I quote in a newspaper article. Health 
minister Len Taylor said, “The suspension of hospital services 
in rural Saskatchewan is a fact of life.” 
 
Is that what he thinks, that these hospital closures are a fact of 
life for rural Saskatchewan? That’s absolutely appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s not only these hospitals that are dealing 
with the problem and know the significance. So does the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. This is what the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association had to say, and I quote: “. . . 
it’s going to become a bigger problem over time.” 
 
Dr. Vino Padayachee, president of the SMA [Saskatchewan 
Medical Association], says, and again I quote: “We’re doing a 
fairly good job in recruiting foreign doctors into Saskatchewan. 
What we’re failing . . . [to do is keep] them here . . .” 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen nothing from this minister on a 
proper recruitment program and especially training programs 
for our own Saskatchewan residents that want to become 
doctors. Is this the minister’s plan to deal with the doctor issue 
in Saskatchewan? Is this foreign recruitment a revolving door? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite’s comments just stretch the realms of 
credibility. On the one hand, he quotes the president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association saying our recruitment 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

efforts are working, and then in his next breath, he says the 
recruitment efforts aren’t — his quote, not the SMA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a good working relationship with the 
SMA. We’ve worked on them in contract negotiations last year 
and received very good response from physicians with regards 
to the contract. We have a recruitment program in place. We 
have some retention initiatives in place. Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to work with Dr. Padayachee and the SMA on 
additional recruitment and retention efforts, Mr. Speaker. The 
dollars are in place. The programs are in place, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore our commitment is in place to ensure that these 
things will happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what rural communities 
understand and what the SMA understands is it doesn’t work 
when you recruit one doctor but lose two. And that is what’s 
happening over and over again. And it leaves rural 
Saskatchewan short of doctors, which causes hospitals to close. 
 
Many rural doctors come to Saskatchewan — and there’s no 
secret; there are some issues around credential issuing — they 
come to Saskatchewan, and they are so overworked that they 
have a hard time studying to pass the CAPE [clinicians’ 
assessment and professional enhancement] exam. And so what 
happens is after two years these doctors leave. And the 
government and communities work hard to bring in new 
doctors. But what that causes is an issue with continuum of care 
for patients, and communities are always left in the lurch to 
recruit more doctors. 
 
What is this minister doing to ensure that when we do finally 
recruit professional doctors from South Africa, that they’ll stay? 
What is he doing to ensure that they’ll stay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I acknowledge that on the order paper today there is a 
motion coming forward. And I will have the opportunity and 
intend to take that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to outline the 
initiatives that have been taken, that are being taken, and that 
will be taken by this government, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
moving forward. 
 
The members opposite will have 25 to 45 minutes on their feet 
in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, to also address this issue. And 
I’m going to be taking very close, I’m going to pay close 
attention. I’m going to be taking notes, Mr. Speaker, on all of 
the alternatives that the members opposite are going to bring 
forward. I’ll make a projection, Mr. Speaker: there will not be 
one alternative raised by the members opposite with regards to 
what this government could be doing differently, Mr. Speaker. 
Not one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health 
Authority is the largest in the province. And yet when we asked 
what type of a human resources strategy it has in place, in fact 
this is what they had to say, and I quote: “The exact number of 
physicians required and the number of vacancies in the region 
are unknown.” Mr. Speaker, unknown. That is very interesting. 
Because a neurosurgeon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask the members to 
show some restraint so we can hear the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because a 
neurosurgeon from South Africa was told by the Saskatoon 
Health Authority that there was no room for her to practise in 
Saskatoon, and she would have to look elsewhere. If you don’t 
know how many physicians that you need and you don’t know 
how many vacancies there are, how are you turning doctors 
away? Why are you telling highly specialized doctors that want 
to come back to Saskatchewan and practise to look elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 
also keep in mind something that the public, the media, and 
most members of this House know but the member opposite 
doesn’t seem to understand — is that the business of 
recruitment and retention for physicians is a very competitive 
business across North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the other day I was reading the Alberta media. 
The shortage in Fort McMurray for physicians, Mr. Speaker — 
47 in one community. Mr. Speaker, shortage of physicians, 47. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vacancies for physicians in the province of 
Saskatchewan today on healthcareers.ca, the government’s 
website, Mr. Speaker — 84 for the entire province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a competitive business, but we are remaining 
competitive, Mr. Speaker. And our programs will keep us 
competitive as we proceed into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Suzanne 
Hattingh is a trained neurosurgeon. She worked in Saskatoon 
from March 1999 to March 2005. Her licence was revoked until 
she completed her family physician exam. So what she did is 
she returned to South Africa, she worked on those exams, and 
since has passed. 
 
Now she’s talked to the Saskatoon Health Authority and was 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

told to not bother coming back. They do not need her any 
longer. She was told that she couldn’t even start her own 
practice in the city. 
 
He’s just finished saying how competitive it is to recruit these 
highly trained physicians. How in the world could we have, 
how in the world could we be turning away a highly trained 
specialist like this that will be needed in this province, 
absolutely needed in this province? How could he let that 
happen under his watch? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
of course I will certainly be checking the facts because I know 
that the facts that the members have presented in the past have 
not always been completely accurate, Mr. Speaker. I will indeed 
be checking the facts on this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has 12 health 
regions, all of which are recruiting actively. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is recruiting actively. Mr. 
Speaker, there are needs in various parts of the province. The 
health regions, Mr. Speaker, have the responsibility for the 
recruitment, the delivery of programming. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do find it interesting that on this day when 
we’re going to have a debate on health human resources, that in 
their questioning today the members opposite haven’t once, 
once raised their one alternative, Mr. Speaker, to hire more 
auditors in the system. Mr. Speaker, that’s an absolute shameful 
circumstance. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout this 
session the Premier has been consistent in his message on the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal. He’s refusing to back away from a 
decision to reward a man who was fired for sexual harassment 
and convicted of assault. Instead of having their complaints 
listened to, Murdoch’s victims were ignored. 
 
The terrible complaints brought forward by these women fell on 
deaf ears. They were told, “That’s just Murdoch.” Instead of 
being stopped in 1994 by a rigorously enforced anti-harassment 
policy, Murdoch Carriere was rewarded with $275,000 and a 
top-up in his pension. And what does the Premier have to say 
about the payment? “Would I do it again? You bet . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so far almost 6,000 people have written the 
Premier with a clear and important message — this was wrong. 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he finally admit that what his 
government did was wrong? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 
that the members of the opposition have indeed raised this case 
since the beginning of this session, which I believe began on 
March 5 or 6. So we’ve had a lot of time to discuss this case in 
the Assembly, and we’ve discussed it in committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I will say to the member is this, that it is very clear that 
Mr. Carriere was punished twice. You cannot engage in what’s 
called double jeopardy. He was suspended without pay and then 
when we came to know about this he was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, according to employment law, the reality is that he 
needed to be paid because he was not properly fired. And we 
received that legal advice. I know that members of the 
opposition don’t want to hear that, but those are in fact the 
facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I want to relay some of the 
comments that we’ve received. Here’s one from Oxbow, and I 
quote: 
 

This shows how rotten our government is. What message 
are you sending to our young people who you are begging 
to stay in Saskatchewan? We are thoroughly disgusted 
with this government. 
 

And here’s one from Saskatoon, and I quote: 
 

I have never been as saddened and disappointed by the 
actions of this government. I used to be a member of the 
NDP Party and am more and more disappointed with the 
way our tax dollars are being handled. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people across this province still have questions 
that the NDP have refused to answer. This NDP government is 
still hiding the truth or hiding from the truth. So, Mr. Speaker, 
will the Premier agree today to refer this matter to a legislative 
committee so we can get to the bottom of the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member of the 
opposition talks about tax dollars. Well we also have heard 
from taxpayers on two fronts; one, that they received a piece of 
information in their mailbox that is inaccurate and, two, ads are 
being run on radio that are simply inaccurate. 
 
And what do I mean by inaccurate? They have referred to Mr. 
Carriere as an NDP insider. He was never a member of the 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

NDP. He has never been a candidate for the NDP. And he was 
never a personal friend of an NDP member, Mr. Speaker. So I 
will say to the members opposite that there is a lot of 
inaccuracies that are being perpetuated by the members of the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, at a total waste of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Members 
will come to order, please. Order. I would . . . Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,123 through 
1,273 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,123 to 1,273 have 
been submitted. 
 
Order. Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Swift Current. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all members of this Assembly, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce another Saskatchewan Party candidate who’s joined 
us in the proceedings. She’s sitting in the east gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, another leader within Saskatchewan, certainly within 
Saskatoon and among the First Nations community. The new 
Saskatchewan Party candidate for Saskatoon Fairview, Eileen 
Gelowitz, has joined us, and I’d ask all members to welcome 
her to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Supply of Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it’s 
certainly a privilege to rise today and speak on the motion that 
we put forward condemning the government for not fulfilling its 
commitment to supply the province with an abundant number of 
doctors, nurses, health care professionals, which has resulted in 
ongoing disruption of service and patient suffering. 

Mr. Speaker, certainly it is a privilege to rise and to debate this 
very, very important motion because it’s a motion that people 
are living through and feeling the results of all throughout the 
province. And it isn’t just in rural Saskatchewan. Today we 
asked a number of questions regarding the impact this is having 
in rural Saskatchewan. But it isn’t just rural Saskatchewan that 
feels this impact. It’s felt just as much in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
I think the difference is, is when a doctor leaves in Regina or 
Saskatoon or even Yorkton or Moose Jaw, when you have one 
or two doctors leave that city, it doesn’t necessarily close a 
hospital. It may close some beds. It may affect a number of 
people that were his patients. But the problem is in rural 
Saskatchewan when you only have two or three doctors in a 
facility and you have one or two doctors leave, or when you are 
relying on nurses that are close to retirement and are looking at 
retiring and they feel the pressure of the community that, if they 
retire, their whole facility may be shut down because they don’t 
have the proper complement of nurses, for example. 
 
So there is a huge impact on the health care professionals in 
rural Saskatchewan just simply due to the numbers. A doctor 
leaves in Spiritwood, and what does that do to the health facility 
there? A doctor leaves in Kamsack or Canora or Preeceville, 
and what does it do the facility there? And it has huge impacts. 
 
We can talk about it as if it was just a facility, here in the 
legislature, but it’s much more than that when you think about 
all the people that rely on that facility. Most people don’t know, 
heading into a weekend, if they’re going to need the services of 
a doctor or a nurse in that facility. And if an emergency comes 
up, they expect that facility to be open. They expect it to be 
there. Do they even know that the facility is closed? They get to 
the doors, and they find out that the emergency services have 
been discontinued. And they may have to go to Yorkton, and 
the impact that has on the regional facilities as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I get into that, what I want to touch on 
first of all, is this an issue that has come up fairly quickly that 
the government is going to have to react to? Has this happened 
just over the last year or two? I’ve been the health care critic for 
two years. Is it just simply because now that I’ve become the 
health care critic all these issues are happening, hospitals are 
closing? I sure hope it isn’t. 
 
So I certainly look at some of the newspaper clippings that have 
been over the number of years regarding this very issue. And 
when you look at what has happened from back as far as 
probably 1990-91 all the way to the year 2007, Mr. Speaker, 
this has been a slow-moving train wreck that has been so 
obvious to see. And unfortunately the government has decided 
to turn its back, to stick its head in the sand, to not address the 
real issue of human resources dating back to probably about 
1991-92. 
 
This government, one of its first acts after it was elected to be 
government in the early ’90s was to close 52 hospitals. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s amazing when I think back now. And I look at 
the state of the health care system in the year 2007, and we’re 
having issues around hospital closures now. 
 
How many health care professionals did we have in our 
province when this NDP party became government? Because at 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

that time we had 52 more hospitals operating. We had the 
complement of nurses. We had the complement of doctors. And 
this government then went and shut the 52 hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan and the Plains — 53 hospitals. 
 
So what happened to all those people that were working in the 
facilities, all those professionals? We had enough human 
resources in the early ’90s to operate 52 more hospitals than 
what we’re operating right now. And we don’t have . . . Under 
this NDP government and 16 years of this NDP government, we 
do not have enough human resources. We do not have enough 
health care professionals to keep these hospitals open. 
 
[11:00] 
 
In the last year, Mr. Speaker, in the last year this is what we 
have seen, having not necessarily closures but discontinuance of 
services. We’ve seen Spiritwood. We’ve seen Big River. We’ve 
seen Shellbrook. We’ve seen Preeceville, Canora, Kamsack, 
Arcola, Bengough, Coronach, Broadview, Central Butte, and 
Vanguard. And I’d hate to say I believe there’s more to come. 
 
When you listen to what the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
has to say, Dr. Vino Padayachee, the president, says it is only 
going to get worse. If this is where we are in the year 2007, 
where are we going to be in two or three years if — if — this 
NDP continues to govern this province? It is going to be an 
issue that will be untenable. 
 
I want to read a couple of newspaper clippings that go back. 
1996, December 7, 1996, the Saskatoon StarPhoenix states, and 
the headline goes, “Plight of rural doctors needs addressing, 
says the College of Physicians and Surgeons.” 
 
What I have been amazed at when I’ve looked over the last 
number of years the newspaper clippings that have come 
forward, often it will be individuals stating the plight of their 
community, whether it’s a member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 
talking about the facility in Spiritwood. Often it’s individuals, 
but also just as often the health care professionals, the 
organizations. Whether it’s the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, whether it’s the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 
whether it’s the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association 
— every one of the health care professionals have been calling 
on this government to address the problem. 
 
And in this article in 1996, it’s the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons saying that the plight of rural doctors needs to be 
addressed. That’s 11 years ago, and what we’re seeing is 
absolutely a failure by this NDP government to address the 
situation. 
 
On December 24, 1998, The StarPhoenix went on to say 
“Health-care workers frustrated with system,” and that is 
something that we can hear on a continual basis. People that 
work in the system . . . You think it’s frustrating, and it is very 
frustrating for people that are trying to access the system. We 
know that. 
 
We had another person in the gallery today around the issue of 
accessing Avastin, and even before he got to the point of 
Avastin, accessing the health care professionals he needed to be 
treated properly. It’s frustrating for patients, but I believe — 

and according to the clippings and the health care professionals 
I’ve talked to — it’s just as frustrating to them. It’s extremely 
frustrating for registered nurses who are trained to not just care 
for the physical needs of patients but the emotional needs of 
patients, and that time has been taken away from them, and we 
hear it on a regular basis. They don’t have enough time to deal 
with not only the physical need, but the emotional needs of 
patients. They just simply don’t have the time. There just 
simply isn’t enough staff. 
 
And that’s certainly what is said in The StarPhoenix in 
December of 1998, “Health-care workers frustrated with 
system”; 1999 the Prince Albert Daily Herald, “Nurse shortage 
forces operating room closure.” Mr. Speaker, this trend can go 
on. I have two or three pages of quotes over the last 11 or 12 
years from newspaper clippings that are just continually 
identifying the problem. 
 
So I come to the conclusion that, should the government know 
that there has been a problem over the last 15 or 16 years? It’s 
been in the papers for the last 15 or 16 years. I’ve used quotes 
back 11 years. I know I could go back more and find more 
issues. So should the government have realized there is a huge 
problem? And you bet they should. 
 
But the bigger question is, have they addressed it? And that is a 
frustrating part for many, many health care professionals . . . is 
they simply haven’t addressed it. You can talk to the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses for example. Here’s what 
Rosalee Longmoore, the president of the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses has to say, “We feel . . . [that] our warnings have 
mostly fallen on deaf ears.” 
 
In other words the health care professionals have told this 
government they have to start addressing the problem because if 
you don’t start addressing the problem, as I said earlier, it’s a 
train wreck ready to happen, and we’re in the midst of it. We’re 
seeing it all over rural Saskatchewan right now. 
 
They’ve called on the government to work together with them 
to find a solution. I find it really quite interesting that the 
minister is touting his recent recruitment and retention agency. 
And they’ve talked about their recruitment and retention 
agency, and he says just wait till next week because we’re 
going to hear a number of announcements on recruiting more 
health care professionals. I’ll be very interested to see that. But 
I find it very interesting that you cannot get the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses to join you at that table because of the sheer 
frustration they felt. 
 
Well the minister puts his hands up and says, well I can’t help 
that. The reason why they’re not at the table is the very 
statement, “We feel . . . [that] our warnings have mostly fallen 
on deaf ears.” In other words, the suggestions that they’ve made 
over the last 11 to 12 years, the minister has ignored. And I’ll 
go back and talk about what a couple other previous ministers 
had to say regarding listening to the health care professionals. 
 
But the minister says, I can’t help it if they don’t want to come 
to the table. It’s what he has done and what the previous 
ministers . . . whether it’s the former Health minister from 
Regina Lakeview or the former Health minister from Saskatoon 
Nutana. The fact’s that they haven’t listened to the concerns of 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

the health care professionals. And that’s why we are where we 
are today. 
 
Every professional organization, whether it’s the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association, whether it’s the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, whether it’s the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, whether it’s a dean of Medicine, whether it’s the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, have called on this government 
— and whether it’s the Saskatchewan Party because we have 
led this charge for 10 years that this party has been formed — 
that you have to start increasing the number of training seats. 
 
And the minister smiles and kind of has a smile on his face as 
if, oh, as if that would solve the problem. Well I haven’t seen 
any solutions from this government that has addressed the 
problem. 
 
I think the minister should be ashamed of himself when you 
look at the number of training seats, when you look at the 
number of training seats for physicians across Canada. There is 
only one university in Canada that has a medical school that has 
fewer training seats than we do in Saskatchewan, and that’s in 
Newfoundland. And they don’t have fewer. They’re at 60 right 
now, and that’s where we are. So of all the medical schools 
across Canada, our medical school in Saskatoon has the fewest 
number of training seats, as well as Newfoundland’s Memorial 
University, at 60 training seats. 
 
 And the minister says I don’t understand why we don’t have 
physicians that are trained in Saskatchewan that want to stay in 
Saskatchewan. He has been quoted as saying that we don’t want 
to increase the number of training seats because we have no 
guarantees we’re going to keep them, and we don’t want to 
increase the number of training seats because that costs more 
money and we have no, no assurance that we’ll keep them. 
 
And that might be true, Mr. Speaker. But when you rely in rural 
Saskatchewan . . . when 75 per cent, 75 per cent of your doctors 
in rural Saskatchewan are foreign-trained doctors, I think we 
have a problem there. Not that there’s a problem with 
foreign-trained doctors, but the problem is we’re not training 
enough of our own Saskatchewan people to practise here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you want to solve the problem in rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan, start training more of our own; increase 
the number of seats. The Saskatchewan Medical Association 
was calling on 20 more seats. The Dean of Medicine is calling 
on far more seats, 20 to 30. There is absolutely no reason except 
this government seems to rely on foreign-trained doctors and 
does not want to rely on training our own. 
 
It’s not any different when you talk about the number of 
training seats for nurses. We were down as low as, we were 
down as low as about 60 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, in 
1991 we graduated 61 registered nurses in Saskatchewan — 61 
nurses. And the government will tout, well you know, in a 
couple years later we increased the number of training seats by 
125 per cent. That’s still half, even by increasing by 125 per 
cent was still half as many as what they had in Manitoba. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the issue is around training seats, and this 
government has fallen far short in that. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s very clear that the government has failed in this area. I’ll be 
very interested to hear what the minister has to say addressing 
this issue but, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for not 
fulfilling its commitment to supplying the province with 
an adequate number of doctors, nurses, and other health 
care professionals which has resulted in ongoing 
disruption of service throughout the province and patient 
suffering. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone and seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for not 
fulfilling its commitment to supply the province with an 
adequate number of doctors, nurses, and other health care 
professionals which has resulted in ongoing disruptions of 
services and patient suffering. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to debate this issue this morning in the 
Legislative Assembly. This is an issue that is extremely, 
extremely important to all people in this province but most 
importantly I think to so many of the people that are located in 
the Canora-Pelly constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important for people to understand that in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency, after numerous closures since this 
NDP government has taken office — closures of hospitals in 
some of the smaller communities — there are now three health 
care hospitals in the Canora-Pelly constituency. They are 
located in Preeceville, Canora, and Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been common over the last number of 
months, in fact years, Mr. Speaker — I have press clippings 
dating back three and four and five years — where the headings 
on the various news releases are that doctor, nurse shortages 
forcing rural hospitals to suspend services. That’s the kind of 
quotation that is contained on many, many press clippings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had numerous press releases — they’re 
referred to as public service announcements — that come from 
the Sunrise Health Region. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I 
went to the Sunrise Health Region website this morning and in 
fact under one of the links that they have there is a link that is 
called service reductions. So it enables people to be able to go a 
website to find out how they are being affected as far as health 
care. And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in question period 
earlier on this morning, in the area that is affected by those 
three hospitals all three are on one form of bypass or another at 
the same time, which is during certain days of this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable. We in the Canora-Pelly 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

constituency deserve better health care than that. I have raised 
the issue with the Minister of Health many times about the fact 
that even his officials will agree that about 11 or 12 practising 
physicians are required for that area but in fact the number of 
people that are actually practising is about half of that. The 
minister’s indicated or his officials have indicated that, you 
know, there are nine registered doctors in the area. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, some of them are retired; they’re not practising. So in 
fact there isn’t the complement of doctors that are needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a public service announcement of Monday, April 
16 indicates that the Kamsack facility is on bypass for the 16th, 
the 17th, the 18th, and the 19th, and part of the 20th. The 
Preeceville Hospital is on bypass from April 18 to Friday, April 
20. The Canora facility will have no emergency services after 5 
o’clock on both Tuesday and Thursday, that day being today. 
So, Mr. Speaker, people have to I guess make a phone call 
when there’s an emergency to determine which facility they’re 
going to go to. As reported last night on the CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] television, the people of 
Canora-Pelly were encouraged to go directly to Yorkton 
because those three facilities are in fact on bypass. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that do for the regional facility that is 
located in Yorkton when you have an entire region that now has 
to travel to Yorkton for bypass? Well it is an overcrowding, let 
me tell you, Mr. Speaker. I have been there on a Sunday 
morning when two of the three facilities were on bypass back 
last summer, and there are dozens and dozens of people in the 
emergency ward wanting to see a doctor when they know that 
there are limited doctors that are dealing with emergency 
services for that day. So it causes a tremendous problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, indicated that we as an official opposition 
have been asking, have been pleading with this government to 
recognize that the shortage of health care professionals . . . And 
I use that term in a broad sense, Mr. Speaker, because I’m not 
just talking about nurses; I’m not talking only about doctors or 
laboratory technicians or X-ray technicians. It is the whole 
spectrum of health care professionals that are required. 
 
And while I understand that the minister says, well this is a 
national problem, and we have to, you know, be aware that 
some of the concerns are outside of our borders . . . We 
understand that. But, Mr. Speaker, what we have asked this 
government over and over again is, what is your plan to address 
this? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a document prepared by the 
Saskatchewan Party. And it’s a long document, and I’m only 
going to quote from section 4, which was entitled “Recruitment 
and Retention of Health Care Professionals,” and it’s part B. 
And part B says this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “Increase the 
number of training seats for doctors, nurses and radiology and 
laboratory technicians to address long-term requirements of the 
province’s health system.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that presentation was made to the Fyke 
Commission, and it is dated February 15, 2001. Six years ago, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party recognized that we would 

have a tremendous shortage of all of these health care 
professionals. And we said to the Fyke Commission, you better 
act now. You better increase the number of training seats 
immediately for all of those different sectors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
also referred to some numbers about what is the current status 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you know, when we look at the 
number of nurses that have been trained over the years . . . And 
the members opposite don’t like Saskatchewan being compared 
to Alberta, so I won’t. I will compare Saskatchewan to 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at one time — and I will use the year 1997 when 
we had a degree and a diploma program — Saskatchewan 
graduated 130 nurses in 1997. In 1998, there were 105. And 
then it started to rise, Mr. Speaker. And if you look at 
Manitoba, Manitoba’s followed the exact same pattern that we 
had. And in fact, they were training; in the same year that we 
graduated 145 nurses, Manitoba graduated 155 nurses. So 
they’re very close. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba recognized or Manitoba 
government must have listened to somebody who said, you 
better increase the number of health care training positions. 
Because in the year 2006, Saskatchewan will graduate 210 
nurses, and Manitoba will graduate 489 nurses. Mr. Speaker, 
they recognized that 155 nurses was not going to meet the 
requirement. So they have increased that number of nurses so 
that now they are in fact graduating a total of 489. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to compare us to Alberta, but I want 
you to listen to what Alberta has also done. And this is a press 
release of March 15, 2007 and the heading on this press release 
is, “Mount Royal launches its first university degree.” 
 

Mount Royal College is making history today. It will be 
offering its first university degree — a Bachelor of 
Nursing. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta has even recognized the fact that not only 
do they have to have additional spots at the University of 
Calgary and the University of Alberta, but they have in fact 
asked Mount Royal College to put in place a degree training 
program for nurses. And they are taking in, as this press release 
indicates, they will be taking in 50 additional nursing students 
per year for four years. So, Mr. Speaker, they will have 200 
nurses being trained only at Mount Royal. 
 
And what has this government done? This year we have a total 
of 18 nurses added to the list of training spots in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, that is deplorable when we look at the concerns. 
 
I recall my colleague from Melfort rising in this Assembly 
probably 10 years ago. We’ve been here a long time, Mr. 
Speaker. And the comment then was, when we were going 
through closures of some of those 52 hospitals, the comment 
made by the member then, who was the Health critic, was that 
the province of Saskatchewan, the government, would not be 
closing hospitals because of a lack of dollars. Hospitals would 
be closed at the local level because of a lack of professionals. 
That’s what was said almost a dozen years ago. 
 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

And we’re starting to see that, Mr. Speaker. I can use the 
example, just a short while ago Foam Lake community, which 
had a hospital, had two nurses who wanted to retire. People 
said, no please don’t retire. And they didn’t for year after year 
and finally both nurses retired. And today, Mr. Speaker, there is 
no acute care services in Foam Lake and there hasn’t been for a 
number of years because there are no nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised a number of concerns that show that 
this government has not had a plan, has not listened to the 
people of Saskatchewan, have not listened to the health care 
professionals as they’ve raised concerns about their practices, 
and whether it’s doctors or nurses, and they need to understand 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to speak in 
this particular debate to set out how we as a government have 
continued to work with the professional organizations and with 
our training institutions across Saskatchewan and with the 
regional health authorities to make sure that we have a supply 
of health professionals for the decades to come. We’re working 
in a North America-wide shortage of quite a number of the 
people that we need and so we have been able to work together 
to make sure that we will have the kind of people we need for 
the long term. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will be making an 
amendment to the motion that’s before the House which will 
make sure that it’s clear that this House supports the 
government’s plan for strengthening Saskatchewan’s leadership 
in public health care by not only improving access to service 
but also through a comprehensive program to attract and retain 
health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget, which the members opposite 
seem intent on voting against, includes almost $29 million for 
the retention and recruitment of physicians for this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to outline how this money is 
going to be spent. This comes as a result of an agreement with 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association and this money is being 
spent in consultation with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and getting the advice from the professionals. 
 
The first fund is a specialist recruitment and retention fund of 
$2 million in this year’s budget. This relates to the specialist 
resident bursary programs, the specialist physician enhancement 
training programs, and the specialist physician establishment 
grants. 
 
Another area are rural and regional incentives. This is a total of 
$3.14 million. The programs that are being funded in this area 
are the family medicine residency bursary program, the rural 
practice establishment grants, the regional practice 
establishment grants, the undergraduate medical student bursary 
program, the rural practice enhancement training program, the 
specialists’ re-entry program, the rural emergency care 
continuing medical education fund, the locum service which 
provides rural relief and weekend relief as a province-wide 

program, the rural travel assistance program, and the rural 
extended leave program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, how are these programs working? Well let 
me give an update as of February-March of this year. The 
locum service program which provides practising physicians 
with coverage while they take vacation, education, or other 
leave — the number of replacement physicians that are part of 
this program are four to six at any given time throughout the 
year. The family medicine residency bursary program which are 
$25,000 bursaries provided in exchange for rural service — as 
of February of this year, 47 residents are receiving funding 
under this program. 
 
Under the rural practice establishment program which are 
$25,000 grants available to Canadian-trained or landed 
immigrant physicians who establish new practices in rural 
Saskatchewan for a minimum of 18 months, 43 physicians have 
taken advantage of the program locating in communities such as 
Meadow Lake, Kindersley, Humboldt, Nipawin, Assiniboia. 
 
The rural practice establishment grant program for 
foreign-trained physicians which is geared toward 
foreign-trained physicians setting up practice in rural 
Saskatchewan — as of February 2007, 34 grants have been 
awarded under this program. 
 
There’s a undergraduate medical student bursary program, and 
this provides an annual grant of $15,000 to medical students 
who sign a return of service commitment to a rural 
Saskatchewan community. 
 
There’s a rural practice enhancement training program which 
provides income replacement to practising rural physicians and 
assistance to residents wishing to take specialized training in an 
area of demand in rural Saskatchewan. A return of service 
commitment is required on this program as well. To date 18 
residents and practising physicians have accessed this program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a long service retention fund which is 
provided to the SMA, and the government puts in $6.6 million 
this year into this fund. This recognizes the long service of 
physicians who have provided 10 or more years of service to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a continuing medical education 
fund of $2.8 million. There’s a fund which is the liability 
insurance protection fund which is of assistance in recruiting 
doctors which pays the Canadian Medical Protective 
Association fees that’s just $7.08 million. 
 
There’s a program for Saskatchewan health re-entry training for 
international medical graduates, and in this year we’re putting 
in $1.9 million. And also there’s a new initiative this year which 
is a program administered by the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association which is for parental leave which is a workplace 
issue, and that has $700,000 allocated this year for new money. 
As well the SMA has a retention and recruitment initiatives that 
are funded to the tune of $3.3 million and also in this area is a 
funding of $2 million for information technology assistance to 
the SMA and to doctors across the province which also assist in 
the establishment of these things across the province. 
 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

As well, Mr. Speaker, there are new bursaries which are in this 
’07-08 budget which the members opposite have had a great 
deal of difficulty with. And the new bursaries this year total 65 
which will be added on top of the 74 that are continuing 
bursaries which means there’s 139 people getting bursaries this 
year. That’s a total of $4.5 million. 
 
Where do these bursaries go, Mr. Speaker? There are 15 that are 
specialist residency bursaries. There’s 10 that are the specialist 
position establishment grant bursaries. There’s four family 
medicine residency bursaries. There’s 10 rural practice 
establishment grant bursaries. There are four rural practice 
enhancement training bursaries. There’s eight for undergraduate 
medical students. There’s another two for Saskatchewan health 
position re-entry bursaries. There’s two that are allocated 
through the committee on rural and regional practice position 
re-entry. And there’s six for specialist position enhancement 
training and four for the international medical graduate for a 
total of 65 of new bursaries in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent upon the members opposite 
to say why they will not vote for a budget which includes these 
very important things for the people of Saskatchewan, that not 
only look at providing services today but look at the next 30 
years of service to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
this is an area where we have to work with the professionals 
like the College of Medicine and other health professional 
training schools, with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
with the regional health authorities, to make sure that we have a 
response which deals with all of the complexities that we have 
in this North American market. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would move an amendment to the motion 
from the members opposite, and this amendment is moved by 
me and seconded by the member from The Battlefords, and the 
amendment is this: 
 

That all words after “that this Assembly” be deleted and 
replaced with: 

 
support the government’s plan for strengthening 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in public health care by not 
only improving access to service but also through a 
comprehensive program to attract and retain health care 
professionals. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Lakeview, and seconded by the member for The Battlefords: 
 

That all the words after “that this Assembly” be deleted 
and replaced with: 

 
support the government’s plan for strengthening 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in public health care by not 
only improving access to service but also through a 
comprehensive program to attract and retain health care 
professionals. 

The debate will continue on the amendment simultaneously on 
the main motion. The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to participate in this debate today and 
in support of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Obviously I think 
the main motion that was presented is a ridiculous motion, Mr. 
Speaker. However I welcome the opportunity to talk about 
health human resources and the plan of the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The opposition has asked me a number of questions over the 
time that I’ve been a member or the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. And there’s just never enough time to put on the 
public record in question period, Mr. Speaker, all of the 
initiatives that we’re raising. As the House will recognize, the 
member from Regina spoke for 10 minutes, only had time, Mr. 
Speaker, to outline initiatives that are being undertaken on the 
physicians’ side, Mr. Speaker. So the opportunity to be able to 
utilize the House time to discuss the good work that’s being 
done by the health professionals in the department and the 
regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker, is very useful. 
 
So I want to take the opportunity while I have my feet, Mr. 
Speaker, to thank those health care professionals and providers 
throughout this province who have all contributed to the work 
that we have undertaken over the last number of years, Mr. 
Speaker. And this includes the representatives of the nurses in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses, whether it’s Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, the Saskatchewan Registered Psychiatric Nurses 
Association, or the Saskatchewan Association of Licensed 
Practical Nurses — Mr. Speaker, they have all contributed to 
this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses are in convention as we speak, Mr. Speaker. 
And to them at their convention, I want them to know that their 
work has indeed influenced the work of this government both in 
terms of policy and spending. I thank them for their 
contributions to date, Mr. Speaker. And I encourage them to 
continue to work on these issues that are so important for their 
members and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during question period I indicated that I was going 
to listen closely to the speeches opposite — 15 minutes from 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone, 10 minutes from the 
member from Canora-Pelly. And I indicated during question 
period, I was going to take copious notes, Mr. Speaker, on 
every alternative, every suggestion they had of something that 
we weren’t doing, Mr. Speaker. And I predicted, I predicted 
that the members opposite wouldn’t have one good idea, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I admit I was wrong, Mr. Speaker. They had one idea, Mr. 
Speaker, both represented by Indian Head-Milestone and 
member from Canora. They say we need to increase the number 
of seats, increase the number of seats. Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Regina had indicated, on the SMA they asked for 
20. We provided 12 plus we added 12 residency seats, and 
we’ve committed to continuing to work with the SMA as 
resources are available to continue to talk about additional 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

physician seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll talk later about nurses and nursing seats but, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken that challenge. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, when asked by the media 
out in the foyer of the Chamber here just a week and a half ago, 
Mr. Speaker, asked by the media, how many seats? Member 
from Indian Head-Milestone, Health critic of the Sask Party, 
you want more seats. How many? Twenty-five minutes today, 
Mr. Speaker, they spoke. Didn’t put on record one single, new 
seat. How many, Mr. Speaker? Is it 10? Is it 15? Is it 20? And 
how do you fund it, Mr. Speaker? Instead the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone is touting these advertisements about 
government wasting people’s money — a big fan, a big pile of 
money, blowing money out the drain — and he stands in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and he says spend more money on health 
care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the only thing he said that is specific, Mr. Speaker, is that 
he would spend more money on auditors. Mr. Speaker, we are 
spending more money on nurses, on doctors, and other health 
care professionals, Mr. Speaker. And while the challenge 
remains significant — and it’s not enough, Mr. Speaker — it is 
increasing year after year after year as resources become 
available to us. 
 
They talk about the history, Mr. Speaker, and let’s just remind 
ourselves of what this history has been. Mr. Speaker, we do find 
ourselves in a situation whereby we do need to increase seats. 
We do need to increase recruitment and retention initiatives 
because, Mr. Speaker, there were challenges in previous years. 
Where did this start, Mr. Speaker? It started during the 1980s 
when those people were in power, Mr. Speaker, and bankrupted 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When this government took over in 1991, Mr. Speaker, we 
inherited the single largest per capita debt of any province in 
this nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, for 
five years in the early 1990s, we were consolidating matters, 
Mr. Speaker. And municipalities know this better than most, 
where revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, was reduced considerably. 
And in the health care field, Mr. Speaker, as we consolidated 
health care facilities because, Mr. Speaker, we did not have the 
fiscal capacity, the resources to move forward because we had 
to deal with that debt. 
 
In the mid-1990s, Mr. Speaker, as we were getting the debts 
dealt with, the federal government threw another fly into this 
ointment, Mr. Speaker, by changing the way in which the 
federal government financed education and health care. And 
again for four years, Mr. Speaker, this government put together 
practical policies in order to deal with substantial reductions in 
funding for education and health care throughout Canada and in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So once again the 
NDP stepped forward and took on the challenge, Mr. Speaker, 
and faced it head-on. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by 2000 when the member from 
Canora-Pelly is saying they were talking about more seats, Mr. 
Speaker, we had put together an action plan for health human 
resources, Mr. Speaker, and it did the same thing. It called for 
increases in seats, and we began to do that, Mr. Speaker, as we 
put the economy of the province back on an even keel and able 

to function for the people of Saskatchewan and not for the 
bankers in New York and in Germany, Mr. Speaker, which is 
where they put us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we began working for the people of 
Saskatchewan. The economy was now functioning, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we began the incremental increase in spending in 
health care on nurses, on doctors, on training seats, Mr. 
Speaker, and for other professionals. And as a result of that 
work and that effort, Mr. Speaker, we have now been 
recognized by the Health Quality Council in Canada as having 
the best human resource plan in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We put that together in the year 2000, we updated it with an 
action plan in 2005, Mr. Speaker, and we have been addressing 
that issue as resources have become available to us, Mr. 
Speaker. And have we been successful in any of this, Mr. 
Speaker? You’re darn right we have, Mr. Speaker. We have 
become extremely successful on that. 
 
I don’t have a lot of time left, Mr. Speaker, but let me just say 
that during the course of the last year, as a result of new dollars 
brought forward in last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, we put the 
recruitment agency in place and we now operate health careers 
in saskatchewan.ca, Mr. Speaker, under saskjobs.ca. And what 
does that do, Mr. Speaker? It provides regional health 
authorities with the opportunity to further expand their 
recruitment efforts. 
 
The recruitment agency and the website, Mr. Speaker, has been 
very active. As of April 18, Mr. Speaker — that’s a date very 
close to today — as of April 18, there were 786 vacancies 
posted in the recruitment agency website, Mr. Speaker, for 
health professions right across Canada. Mr. Speaker, how many 
applications for those jobs are sitting active within the 
department right now, Mr. Speaker, for 786 vacancies? 
Applications submitted and currently under consideration, 
thanks to the work of the recruitment agency, 882 applications 
currently in front of the department and the regional health 
authorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we are very, very proud of 
the work that we are doing and we recognize the challenges that 
we are facing. As everyone will know from my answers in 
question period, we are in a competitive environment in North 
America, Mr. Speaker, for all health care professionals and we 
are doing our best to ensure that we remain competitive in that 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are successful. You read the Leader-Post 
today, Mr. Speaker. A great big colour picture of two happy 
nurses, Mr. Speaker, working in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region. A nurse from Alberta has moved back to Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, to work in the system, direct result of the efforts that 
have been undertaken by this government and the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
And what are the members opposite saying that we have to do, 
Mr. Speaker? Twenty-five minutes of speeches . . . increase the 
seats. That’s the one thing that they’ve been able to offer in 25 
minutes of speeches, Mr. Speaker — increase the number of 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

seats. We’re very pleased to have been able to approach this 
issue on the incremental basis as resources have been available 
to us, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to do that in 
conjunction with the action plan that’s been presented and, Mr. 
Speaker, our commitment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to have the opportunity to stand today and enter 
into this debate regarding the retention and recruitment of 
physicians in the province of Saskatchewan and especially to 
my area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened in question period intentatively 
from the Minister of Health because he was going to tell us in 
the debate today what his plans are from the government as how 
we’re going to deal with the recruitment and retention. And you 
know something, Mr. Speaker? I may have deaf ears but I 
didn’t hear a darn thing from that minister what he was going to 
do. 
 
The only thing, the only thing that he stood up and said, that 
was a great idea, came from this side. It came from the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone and also from the member from 
Canora-Pelly as something that we had put out back in the year, 
I believe it was 2000 or 2001, in regarding seats. That was the 
only thing this minister stood up today in the ten minutes, an 
address, and said that’s a good thing. 
 
My comment is if he has nothing more than that, then why 
doesn’t he move aside and let a party get up and look after this 
province, especially in health care, the proper way? We supply 
all the answers. That minister over there comes up with nothing. 
But yet he talks the talk, but does not do the walk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to be supporting this amendment 
put forth by the members opposite. I am going to be supportive 
in supporting the motion put forth by the member from Indian 
Head and second by the member from Canora-Pelly. The reason 
for that, Mr. Speaker, it is a good motion. It relates specifically 
to the . . . my problem in my area of the Rosthern-Shellbrook 
constituency. 
 
Now in question period today, Mr. Speaker, I talked of the area 
that I am in that is short of doctors. Every or nearly every 
facility in my constituency does not have doctor or doctor 
services or is lacking except possibly Rosthern. 
 
But there was a news clip in the paper that the officials said that 
recruiting in Saskatoon was going well, but recruiting in 
facilities outside of Saskatoon, like Wakaw and Rosthern, were 
having difficulty. But to my knowledge we are still full as far as 
doctors in Rosthern. But that’s not likely the story in my 
constituency with Shellbrook, Big River, and Spiritwood. 
 
[11:45] 
 

To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, there are temporary hospital 
closures in many rural communities. And that seems to be a 
trend and a problem in the province of Saskatchewan where the 
rural hospitals are having difficulty when it comes to 
recruitment and retention of physicians. 
 
Now to my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, the temporary hospital 
closures are: Big River, Spiritwood, Shellbrook, Preeceville, 
Canora, Kamsack, Hafford, Arcola, Bengough, Coronach, 
Broadview, Central Butte, and Vanguard. That’s just to my 
knowledge, Mr. Speaker. How many more out there are facing 
the same situation as we are in Spiritwood, Shellbrook, and Big 
River? There must be more. They’re all rural Saskatchewan 
facilities that are being shut down or have a lack of emergency 
services because of a lack of doctors. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, also in question period today I brought up in 
regards to petitions where there were 1,700 petitions sent to me 
from residents north of Spiritwood regarding the situation at 
Spiritwood. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a potentially dangerous 
situation and that’s why these ladies decided to write this 
petition. Unfortunately it was not prepared properly for me to 
present in the House on a daily basis. 
 
But the question is, Mr. Speaker, that Spiritwood doesn’t have 
any emergency services because there’s only two doctors where 
there should be three. But these ladies, and a lot of the petition 
names on this petition, come from places like Chitek Lake, 
Leoville. And those areas are not in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker; they’re in the member from Meadow Lake. But they 
cannot get across to Meadow Lake because there’s no road 
there so they have to come down to Spiritwood. 
 
Now with the situation we have in Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, 
there is no emergency services so that means they have to go 
further to that for services. That means going to Shellbrook. 
Shellbrook, as we speak, have a full slate of doctors and they 
can provide the services. And thank God they can do that 
because once Shellbrook closes down to emergency services, 
where do the people go? Well they got to go to Prince Albert. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are members here from 
Prince Albert and they know the problem that Prince Albert is 
having with the doctors and the load of services they have to 
provide — not just to the city of Prince Albert but to outlying 
areas, whether it be Birch Hills, whether it be Candle Lake, 
whether it be Spiritwood, Shellbrook, or wherever. 
 
Couple that problem, Mr. Speaker, is the problem we’re having 
in Big River. Big River again is not in my constituency but Big 
River is phoning me continuously about the doctor situation in 
Big River, and that’s in the constituency of Saskatchewan 
Rivers. And I’m wondering if the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers is hearing this and what is that member doing to help 
with the situation. I haven’t heard nothing, Mr. Speaker. So 
now we have a problem with constituents from Big River and 
Spiritwood. With no services or emergency services, they’re 
going to Shellbrook. 
 
This also raises the point, Mr. Speaker, why I asked in question 
period today about the problem with Shellbrook and is the 
minister going to take the time to go to this meeting. It started 
out, Mr. Speaker, talking to some health care workers in 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

Shellbrook, some RN [registered nurse] nurses, and the 
potential for the problems in Shellbrook and how potentially 
dangerous it is going to get if this happens. 
 
And I see the Minister of Health shaking his head. He knows 
this problem, but last week, last week on Thursday when I 
raised this issue the minister said that . . . If I could just find his 
quote here, Mr. Speaker. Here it is, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Health minister says, and I quote: “Health Minister Len Taylor 
said it was the first time he had heard about the Shellbrook 
situation”. This is his quote. It’s not my quote. This is your 
quote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the reason I raise this is because it 
was in the Shellbrook paper on March 30. This here, this here 
was April 12. Twelve, thirteen days later and the Minister 
stands and says he doesn’t know about the situation. So when I 
raised the problem about a serious situation and a dangerous 
situation, it is getting very dangerous when our own Minister of 
Health hasn’t got the time or the facilities to look after this 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this meeting that I’m attending in Shellbrook on 
. . . tomorrow at 2 o’clock, started off with a few nurses talking 
to me. Then the doctors decided if I’m coming to this meeting 
they want to be present. So I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if 
there’s going to be a dozen people there or if there’s going to be 
two dozen people there or if there’s going to be 100 people 
there. But I can guarantee you from the answer the minister 
gave me today, he won’t be there. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from North Battleford . . . The Minster of Health lives 
in North Battleford. It’s only a short drive to Shellbrook. 
 
Surely to goodness the Minister of Health can come to this 
meeting and address the issues. Especially, especially when the 
mayor of Shellbrook, John Young, the mayor of Shellbrook, 
members from the council of both the town of Shellbrook and 
the RM [rural municipality] of Shellbrook have written letters 
to the minister. And to date, Mr. Speaker, there has been no 
response. Absolutely none. Those letters were written way back 
in February 25, Mr. Speaker, and still today there’s no response. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is it going to take? What is it going to 
take for this minister to react to the situation that we have in the 
area west of Prince Albert? We know that this problem’s going 
to escalate. We know that this problem is escalating as it is 
because there’s one doctor that may not be providing services at 
Shellbrook. That brings a problem, Mr. Speaker, that the 
doctors will be down to three. In a facility where there’s five, 
we’re going to have three doctors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know, the minister knows that if that 
happens that hospital there will also be on no emergency 
services. Now we have Big River, we have Spiritwood and 
Shellbrook with no emergency services. What is this minister 
going to do to resolve the problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed my pleasure to enter the debate today and I will be 
speaking in favour of the amended motion. 
 
I enter the debate on a significant challenge facing the province 
as well as all other jurisdictions. I say it is a pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know that the NDP government is working 
hard to address the issues we face when it comes to health 
human resources. We have made attracting and retaining health 
care professionals a top priority and we owe it to the people of 
Saskatchewan to become competitive as possible in light of the 
widespread national and international shortages, Mr. Speaker. 
We owe it as the current government of the medicare province, 
and we owe it as a party that truly has the interests of 
Saskatchewan people at heart. 
 
Our recruitment and our retention initiatives over the past 
several months have been big and, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been 
bold. And most importantly, as the member from The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Health has said, they have been 
successful. 
 
Just yesterday on the six-month anniversary of the recruitment 
grants announcement, the Minister of Health unveiled that 
we’ve received from 120 health care providers. That’s right, 
Mr. Speaker. In six months, 120 health care professionals have 
been approved for return-in-service grants. We’ve recruited 80 
from out-of-province — more than half of them from Alberta 
— 20 from this year’s graduating class, and 20 more who are 
willing to relocate to northern and hard-to-recruit areas of the 
province. 
 
Of these grant recipients, Mr. Speaker, 75 are nurses and 45 are 
from the broader health workforce and include professionals 
such as respiratory therapists, physical therapists, and medical 
laboratory technologists. 
 
The Saskatchewan relocation program and the Saskatchewan 
rural, northern, and hard-to-recruit program flow from the 
government’s 25 million retention and recruitment plan 
announced this past fall. Through these two grant programs, 
Mr. Speaker, we are targeting to recruit 600 new health 
employees to fill vacancies over the next two years — 
approximately 400 nurses and 200 employees from the broader 
health workforce. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the opposition tell us that we are not 
committed to supplying this province with enough health 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, it appears that members opposite 
have either not bothered to read up on our initiatives or perhaps 
they have simply forgotten what we are doing to attract and 
keep health professionals in Saskatchewan. It is understandable, 
considering the lengthy list of good ideas and good results we 
have on the recruitment and retention side of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s start with the plan. We have a plan unveiled 
in December 2005. Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action 
Plan received national recognition for being the most 
comprehensive plan in Canada — that according to the Health 
Council of Canada. Our government was applauded by the 
Canadian Nurses Association for a leading role in nursing and 
demonstrating leadership by delivering this plan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an aggressive recruitment and 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

retention strategy built in consultation with our health partners 
and stakeholders. It is a strategy that is necessary, given today’s 
competitive climate and a strategy that shows that we are 
committed to providing our residents with a strong and 
sustainable health care system, a strategy lauded by national 
medical bodies, and yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, snubbed by the 
opposition. 
 
Within this framework of the workforce action plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have been able to allocate resources and set 
tangible goals for recruitment and retention. In September we 
unveiled our 25 million recruitment and retention fund. We 
clearly laid out our plans for this funding — 15 million was to 
go towards enhancing the nursing workforce and 10 million for 
other health professionals. We established two provincial 
committees to provide further advice, and as a result we 
targeted 6 million for our recruitment grants, 6 million for our 
retention program, and 500,000 for enhanced clinical training. 
 
And still, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition can’t seem to 
grasp what it is we are doing to ensure that this province has an 
adequate amount of health care professionals. Perhaps, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the members opposite can, when they go back 
to their offices today, visit our easily accessible online 
recruitment agency so they can see for themselves what it is that 
is going on. The website for their information is 
www.healthcareersinsask.ca as was announced by Minister 
Taylor on October 18, 2006 to promote Saskatchewan to health 
force employees in the province, across Canada, and around the 
world. It is a one-stop job search service, where the regional 
health authorities and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
advertise vacant career opportunities on this website. The 
applicants can apply online for positions of interest. And as 
mentioned by the Minister of Health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
date the agency has received 882 applications for health 
workforce positions. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are listening to what our 
stakeholders have to say when it comes to recruitment and 
retention. We’re interested in what advice the front-line workers 
themselves have to offer when it comes to making 
Saskatchewan an attractive place to live and work in the health 
field. 
 
We have heard the need to spread the word to those both 
outside and inside our provincial borders on why Saskatchewan 
would be an excellent place to begin or resume a health care 
career. Our billboards, television, and print ads have received 
favourable attention as seen in the response we are getting for 
our recruitment grants. 
 
We also have in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a more direct 
communication with front-line workers when it comes to 
making Saskatchewan health workplaces ones that no one 
wants to leave. In the two months since our Health minister 
announced the health workforce retention program, we have 
received over 30 proposals from front-line workers. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I sure hope the members opposite 
have retained some of the information that each of the speakers 
today have presented on what we are doing to attract health 
professionals to Saskatchewan. 
 

Before I finish today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to speak on 
the training initiatives our government has put in place and 
supported on a sustainable level to increase the number of 
health professionals entering the Saskatchewan health force 
directly from their post-secondary institution. Though we were 
left to clean up the financial mess initially, this NDP 
government recognized the need to increase training seats for 
our health professionals in order to replenish our retiring 
workers. And we did just that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As soon as 
we had the resources available, we targeted nursing, medicine, 
and the college of allied health professionals for increased 
enrolment. 
 
In the last four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen a 55 
per cent increase in nursing seats, a 70 per cent increase in LPN 
[licensed practical nurse] seats. And this year alone, we have 
promised a 20 per cent increase in the College of Medicine. We 
know that individuals are more likely to stay in a province when 
they have trained and will continue to work closely with our 
health partners as we consider future capacity enhancements. 
 
While the graduate will likely stay where he or she has trained, 
cash incentives offer more promise to retaining our health 
professionals. Mr. Deputy Speaker, early this month the 
Minister of Health announced funding for 600 new and 
continuing return-in-service bursaries. This is a 6 million 
investment on behalf of the NDP government in response to 
challenges we are currently facing. The bursaries are awarded to 
students studying in health-related areas where shortages exist 
or are anticipated. In exchange these students agree to work in 
Saskatchewan’s publicly funded health care system upon 
completion of their studies. Combined with the recent budget 
announcement giving tax breaks to keep graduates who settle in 
the province, we believe our bursary program is a powerful 
incentive to keep our young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So there it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have more students 
graduating in related health fields, more graduates wanting to 
stay in the province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party loves to stand in the House and say 
that no matter how many spaces we announce, no matter how 
many bursaries we announce, no matter what programs we 
develop in this field, that we are not doing enough. But they 
have never come up with an idea of their own — nothing in the 
100 Ideas, nothing in the platform, nothing in the Assembly. 
And so my question is to the Sask Party: how would the Sask 
Party deal with this situation? How high is the priority of 
recruitment and retention when all they’ve talked about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is privatization and audits? Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are we on questions? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’m sorry. I had not 
realized that we were on questions. But I think we are on 
questions, and I recognize the Minister of Health . . . [inaudible 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

interjection] . . . Well no, it’s an opposition motion, so we’ll go 
to the government for the first question. And we’ll do the 
opposite every time if it’s a government motion. 
 
So I recognize the Minister of Health for a question. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
try to ask a very clear question in hopes of getting a very clear 
answer. I have indicated frequently, Mr. Speaker, both in words 
and action, that I’m always looking for additional advice — 
constructive criticism and additional advice, Mr. Speaker — in 
order to assure the health system and the people of 
Saskatchewan can actually get the best bang for the dollars that 
are available to us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have heard the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, the health critic for the opposition, on a couple 
of occasions talk about . . . in reaction to some of the things that 
have been announced by this government on recruitment and 
retention, he said, this is a very good first step, Mr. Speaker. 
But yet he’s never gone to say what the next step would be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his leader, in North Battleford, a while ago said, 
we don’t just offer criticism; we provide alternatives. So my 
question to the member from Indian Head-Milestone, this . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — His time has elapsed. I 
recognize the hon. member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the member from Regina Lakeview, who was the minister of 
Health for most of this century and had the opportunity to fix 
some of these problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, foreign-trained doctors are a majority in rural 
Saskatchewan and a significant number in urban Saskatchewan. 
And I’ll give you an example. We lost two doctors in Redvers, 
recruited two foreign-trained doctors, who in turn recruited 
another one, because the first original doctor left as well. Now 
we’re in a situation where we’re down to two doctors in 
Redvers and one of those is rumoured to be leaving — from 
three doctors to one doctor, Mr. Speaker, that’s the recruiting of 
this government. 
 
After 16 years of NDP government, why is this government not 
training more doctors from amongst Saskatchewan residents in 
this province? Manitoba is doing a much better job than we are 
in Saskatchewan. Why did that member, as the minister of 
Health, fail to increase the number of doctor trainings in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have worked 
with the College of Medicine and have increased the number of 
seats at the College of Medicine. It’s four in this year’s budget. 
I urge the members opposite to vote for that budget. Also there 
were five that we introduced a couple years ago. We recognize 
that that four means 16 people in the . . . because it’s four in 
each year. Mr. Speaker, these people are very expensive to 

educate but very crucial for our government. We are using our 
resources to make sure that we train them and make it entirely 
welcoming for them to practise in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — To the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. You see the member has indicated that more 
seats are needed and yet when asked by the media what number, 
he has said nothing. So would the member please answer the 
simple and straightforward question, how many seats? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was interesting 
that the member would be questioning the exact number. What I 
want to do is recite where this government has taken the 
province. At 40 training seats a number of years ago, finally got 
up to 60, which is the least number of training seats in a college 
of medicine across Canada. It’s absolutely pitiful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Medical Association is calling for 20 
more seats. The College of Medicine is calling for a number of 
seats around that area, and we would have to talk with them and 
find out. But what we would do is take action in that direction 
and definitely increase by far more than four which does 
absolutely nothing to address the real issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’m sorry. I recognize 
the hon. member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to address this question to the Minister of Health. Rumours are 
swirling around the city right now that there are a number of 
nurses coming to Saskatchewan from Third World countries 
trying to fill . . . as an effort to fill current vacancies. Yet every 
year in this province we have approximately 1,000 applicants to 
take the RN program of which there are only 400 seats. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, is: how does this 
government’s plan to poach immigrant nurses from Third 
World countries square with this government’s youth retention 
program, especially when we hear on a daily basis of graduates 
from our own schools that can’t get full-time work in this 
province? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government continues to be committed towards increasing the 
number of positions available through the increased number of 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

seats, both RN seats and LPN seats. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
challenges that exist immediately as well, so our recruitment 
efforts are ongoing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget commits this government over the next 
four years to 152 additional nursing seats. Today, Mr. Speaker, 
there are 1,500 people on any given day in the NEPS program, 
nursing education program of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in 
four years time we will have 1,680 individuals every year on 
any given day in a seat — a nursing seat, Mr. Speaker. Seats 
that are supported by this government. This is since 2003 when 
this government got elected — a 55 per cent increase in RN 
seats, a 70 per cent increase in LPN seats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a question for 
the member for Canora-Pelly. On March 16, 2005, just over two 
years ago, he made a motion to amend a motion in this House 
that would ask for a value-for-money audit for the provincial 
health care system. This appears to be the one “brilliant” idea, 
and I put that brilliant in quotes. 
 
And I ask that member to tell us where he’s going to find the 
dollars in the health system so that they can maybe find the 
nebulous suggestion from the member from Indian Head as to 
how many more seats for nurses we’re going to get? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I guess. Mr. Speaker, the article on February 7, 2007, 
quotes . . . It’s the Yorkton paper and it quotes the Minister of 
Health. The Minister of Health says this: 
 

“We are aware that we need to increase the number of 
seats at the College of Medicine.” The Saskatchewan 
Medical Association has said it wants 20 more seats, to 
bring the total to 80. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the opposition has pointed out 
for years that we need to increase the number of people. Mr. 
Speaker, I mentioned, I mentioned the Fyke Commission this 
morning in comments during the 75-minute debate. Mr. 
Speaker, the introduction of the Saskatchewan Party official 
opposition to the Fyke Commission is this, and I’ll read the first 
paragraph. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying more for publicly 
funded health services than ever before, yet people have 
lost confidence in our provincial health care system. The 
challenge of health care reform is therefore twofold . . . 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Member’s time has 
elapsed. I recognize the hon. member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my question is for the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. And when he was up, during his speech, he was 
almost boastful of the government’s commitment and 
successes, and I might add that that was his opinion and no one 
else’s. But I would like to ask him this question: why are new 
nursing graduates still having difficulty obtaining permanent, 
full-time positions in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I truly was proud of the government’s work 
and what we are doing. But what concerns me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Party position on health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all remember the 100 ideas for 
Saskatchewan, and we haven’t heard very much about those 
ideas lately. And I imagine that went seriously flat. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Other members 
are clearly interrupting the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
And I recognize . . . I asked for order. And I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you remember idea 
no. 73, “Complete a value-for-money audit of the provincial 
health care system”? 
 
And how about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone when he had this to say: 
 

If I remember, in the last provincial election we talked an 
awful lot about . . . [the] health care audit . . . we called all 
election to do some sort of a health care audit. 
 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, you know what that got for them, 
Mr. Speaker? It got them sitting in the opposition backbenches. 
That’s where it got them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no plan over there that we have 
heard today, and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will not be fooled. The people of Saskatchewan want 
solutions, and they want substance, which is lacking over there. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The time has elapsed. I 
recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Quickly to the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook who is 
experiencing the challenges of dealing with community efforts, 
has he spoken with his colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford 
where there is indeed some success in recruiting community 
efforts? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. members, the 75-minute debate is concluded and we move 
to private members’ public Bills and orders. 
 
 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Equalization and an Energy Accord 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Trew.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is the resumption of debate on a government 
motion, private member on the government side motion that 
says: 
 

That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
parliament [should] provide an apology to the people of 
this province for breaking their election promise on the 
issue of equalization; and further, that this Legislative 
Assembly call upon the federal government to 
immediately negotiate a Saskatchewan energy accord. 

 
And I’m certainly happy to rise again in this debate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I want to remind the House and anyone listening 
or who may read my remarks that in the 2006 federal election, 
the Conservative Party of Canada, led by the present Prime 
Minister, Stephen Harper, made a promise. And it read as 
follows. They would: 
 

Work to achieve with the provinces permanent changes to 
the equalization formula which would ensure that 
non-renewable natural resource revenue is removed from 
the equalization formula to encourage economic growth. 
We will ensure that no province is adversely affected from 
changes to the equalization formula. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as most people will know, what the 
federal government has been doing is that for every dollar 
earned by the people of Saskatchewan from oil and gas 
development, the federal government has been clawing back $1 
from our transfer payments from Ottawa. And in fact in some 
cases they were clawing back more than $1 for every dollar we 
took in. So we raised this as being an unfairness. 
 
The Conservative Party prior to the last election said that they 
would change this. They went to the people of the province. 
They promised that they would change it. They made similar 
promises to Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia, and 
they broke their promise. They broke their promise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And not only do I believe they broke their promise, 
they have admitted that they broke their promise. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And I want to quote from something that one of their members 
of parliament, Mr. Lukiwski, who in the election promised that 
he would make a change to this clawback, Mr. Speaker, he said, 
quoted in The StarPhoenix on Tuesday, April 3, he said this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Note the words: “If you want to say we 

didn’t fulfill the commitment or keep our promise, fair enough.” 
That’s what he said. I’m going to repeat that. He said: “If you 
want to say we didn’t fulfill the commitment or keep our 
promise, fair enough.” 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s not fair at all. 
It’s not fair at all. And what is particularly galling about that 
statement made by Mr. Lukiwski that they didn’t keep their 
promise was that on the very same day that he made that 
statement in the news media, he ran — with taxpayers’ money 
— along with two other Conservative members of parliament 
from Regina, they ran an ad that I heard on the radio that said, 
among other things, and I’m quoting: “The Conservative Party 
kept their promise.” That’s what they said in their ad. 
 
And at the very same time that Mr. Lukiwski was saying, we 
broke our promise; fair enough — according to him — he was 
paying for an ad on the radio that said to the people of the 
province, we kept our promise. Now I mean, I think in politics, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all engage in hyperbole and 
exaggeration and we all put our own spin on things from time to 
time. I don’t believe I’ve ever seen a situation where a member 
of the Parliament of Canada was saying in the newspaper, we 
broke our promise, and running ads on the radio saying, we kept 
our promise. 
 
And you know, this promise that they made in 2006 wasn’t a 
one-time thing because the same promise was made in the 2004 
federal election — that they would exclude non-renewable 
resource revenues from the equalization formula. In fact the 
present Prime Minister, Stephen Harper, said this to the former 
Prime Minister on November 16, 2005. He said: 
 

The prime minister is also failing Saskatchewan on 
equalization . . . The government now says it will not get 
to that until at least 2006, costing Saskatchewan over $750 
million in lost revenue. 
 

He complained about it. He complained about the former 
Liberal government. He said he was going to do something 
about it. He promised the people of the province he would do 
something about it. The people of this province went out and 
elected 12 Conservative members of parliament to Ottawa and 
then what did they do? They went to Ottawa and they turned 
their backs on the people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That is what they did. They turned their backs on the people of 
this province — our 12 Conservative members of parliament. 
And they should be ashamed. 
 
You know and it wasn’t just Mr. Lukiwski and Mr. Harper that 
in the election said they were going to treat Saskatchewan fairly 
over the issue of our natural resources. David Batters, one of the 
current Regina members of parliament, had this to say in 
November 2005. He said, “Saskatchewan cannot afford to 
wait,” he said, because it’s costing “the people of Saskatchewan 
over $750 million in lost revenue,” he said. 
 
And Carol Skelton, earlier than that, in March 2005, said this. 
She said: 
 

Saskatchewan doesn’t want a free ride. [We want a fair 
ride.] We don’t want a special deal, we want a fair deal. 
We don’t want extra money, we just want our money — 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

our fair share [she said]. 
 
Now she’s our representative in cabinet and what did she do 
along with the other 11 Conservative members of parliament 
from Saskatchewan? She sold us out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she 
sold us out. 
 
In opposition she said this, our Member of Parliament, she said, 
“Saskatchewan is simply not getting its fair share out of 
equalization.” Now in government along with her Conservative 
colleagues, she says this. Carol Skelton says that she “rarely 
hears about it in her conversations with her constituents.” And 
then she goes on to say this, quoted September 13, 2006 in The 
StarPhoenix. She says, “The average person in the street 
doesn’t understand it,” she says. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this is about, this 
attitude that the average person doesn’t understand it, is a view 
in Ottawa and of the Conservative Party that they can rely upon 
the people of this province to faithfully go out, election after 
election, to vote for Conservative members of parliament and 
that the people will not understand what the Conservative 
government is doing to them. And you know, one of the 
members says they may be wrong about that. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think they may be wrong 
about that because I think the people of Saskatchewan are good 
and decent people. And when somebody makes a promise and 
they break the promise and they laugh at the people and say the 
people don’t understand what they’re doing, I think just when 
they’re least expecting it, that may come back to haunt them 
and they may get bit in a place that they really don’t want to get 
bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because when people act like that and 
talk like that and turn their backs on their own constituents, it 
has a way of coming back at them. 
 
Now Ms. Skelton goes on to say on September 9, 2006: “I don’t 
know. I guess I haven’t thought about it that much,” referring to 
equalization. Well I think it’s time to start thinking about it a 
little bit because as Brian Fitzpatrick, Conservative Member of 
Parliament for Prince Albert, said in April 2005, “Saskatchewan 
will continue to lose approximately $800 million per year in 
equalization clawbacks on its non-renewable resource 
revenues,” $800 million a year. 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the last federal 
budget, what did the Conservative Party do? It took 750 million 
or 800 million — depending on which Conservative you want 
to listen to — money away from the people of Saskatchewan by 
not keeping its promise that we would have that money, and it 
gave an increase of $700 million to the people of Quebec so 
that the Premier, who was then in an election, could use it in his 
election to promise that he would cut taxes for the people in 
Quebec. 
 
And you know, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to take note of that, a careful note of it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they are being asked to pay for a tax cut in Quebec 
instead of having the promise that was made to them kept. And 
I don’t think people are going to stand for that in the long term, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know that the Conservatives think they can take all their seats 

for granted. I would be a little bit more careful if I was them. 
One of our Saskatoon Conservatives, Brad Trost, said in the 
spring of 2005, “To the province of Saskatchewan this [their 
promise that they made before they were elected] would mean 
$800 million a year . . . ” He goes on to say: 
 

What could $800 million do for the province of 
Saskatchewan? What could it do for the people? What is it 
in practical, concrete terms? Let me give a couple of 
examples: Saskatchewan could have 260 MRI machines 
[he says] . . . It could have 26 four lane bridges with full 
cloverleaf entrances [he says]. 
 

Then he says, “We could completely abolish all the education 
property tax for everyone, farmers, businesses and 
homeowners, throughout the province of Saskatchewan.” That’s 
what he said, and then they promised to the people of 
Saskatchewan that that’s what they would do. 
 
Now he went a little further than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because when he was asked, well do you think the 
Conservatives will keep this promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan, he said, quoted on CBC News, August 23, 2005, 
he said, “If it isn’t, it better be better.” He said if the promise 
isn’t kept . . . it better be because they’re giving us something 
even more than that. 
 
And then he went on to say in the Leader-Post on October 30 
that either the campaign promise would be met or it would “be 
an even better deal for the province.” That’s what he said. They 
all made similar statements, and certainly the Prime Minister 
made a similar statement when he was trying to get elected 
Prime Minister. 
 
Well as I pointed out last time I entered into this debate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some people say, well if Saskatchewan is 
doing well — which we are doing well because we are a have 
province; we do have a booming economy — why should 
Saskatchewan be asking for this kind of treatment under the 
equalization formula? The answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
that is the kind of treatment that other provinces receive from 
our federal government. And what is a rule for one province, 
should be a rule for another province. 
 
So as I pointed out in the last session where we had this debate, 
when the province of Alberta became a have province from oil 
revenues, there was an arrangement with the federal 
government whereby the province of Alberta would be able to 
keep its oil revenues and not have them counted as revenue for 
the purpose of the equalization formula for a period of about 
eight years. So that’s the arrangement that the province of 
Alberta received. 
 
And so the question has to be asked, why does the Conservative 
government treat Saskatchewan differently than it treats the 
people of Alberta? Why would that be? And how is that fair? 
Well obviously it’s not fair, and it’s not right. 
 
And then we move on to Manitoba, where Manitoba derives 
considerable revenue from hydroelectricity — and 
hydroelectricity of course is a fully renewable resource — and 
the revenue that Manitoba gets from hydroelectricity is not 
calculated when the government takes into account, the federal 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

government, how much money they have. And yet we have a 
non-renewable resource, oil and gas, which someday will be 
gone, and in Saskatchewan it’s counted. And you know, to put 
the matter in perspective, Manitoba next year will receive 
approximately $2 billion in equalization payments from the 
federal government. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the province of 
Saskatchewan will receive from the Conservative government 
in Ottawa? Zero. Zero. Manitoba gets $2 billion. Saskatchewan, 
which is similar in population and size of economy, gets zero. 
Now is there anyone in this House, or indeed in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who would think that that was fair? Is 
there anybody that thinks that’s fair? I certainly don’t think it’s 
fair — Manitoba, $2 billion; Saskatchewan, zero. 
 
And again it raises the question why the Conservative 
government in Ottawa has one rule for Manitoba but a different 
rule for Saskatchewan, and what has the Conservative Party got 
against the people of Saskatchewan? Because it isn’t just me 
saying that this state of affairs is unfair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s what they said was unfair. The Prime Minister said it 
was unfair. Our member of the Conservative cabinet said it was 
unfair. All of the Conservative candidates said it was unfair, 
and they made a promise that they were going to fix it. 
 
And now they’ve broken their promise, and they have turned 
their backs on the people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that is a serious matter. That, in my opinion, is a serious 
matter. It’s a serious matter when we have members of 
parliament who are saying we broke our promise and using 
taxpayers’ money to run ads on the radio to tell the people that 
they kept their promise, while one of their colleagues is saying 
don’t worry about it because the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
really understand the issue anyway.  
 
[12:30] 
 
That’s not a satisfactory state of affairs because it shows a 
disrespect for the people of this province and a disregard for the 
people of this province. And the Conservative Party should not 
have one manner of treating people in the province of Alberta 
and another rule for the people of Saskatchewan. They should 
not have one rule for the people of Manitoba and another rule 
for the people of Saskatchewan while 12 of our members of 
parliament come from the Conservative Party. That’s not a 
satisfactory state of affairs. 
 
Now one of the reasons why the Prime Minister and the 
Conservative Party said that they broke their promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan was this — and this is public 
knowledge on the public record, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they 
said, we can’t keep our promise because the effect would be 
that the people of Saskatchewan would have on average higher 
government revenues than people in Ontario. 
 
Now let’s consider that for a minute. The Conservative Party 
says to the people in Saskatchewan, we will not tolerate a 
situation where Saskatchewan could become more prosperous 
than Ontario. That’s really what they’re saying. And I think we 
have to think about the implications of that because what we see 
again is really a Conservative Party that represents the interests 
of Central Canada. That is what we see. 

They take for granted the fact that Western Canadians elect a lot 
of Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament]. They expect us 
to go out and re-elect the Conservative MPs in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. But when they get into 
office, they turn their backs on the West, and in particular 
Saskatchewan, and they cater to what they consider to be the 
vote-rich Ontario and Quebec. Because let there be no mistake 
about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker — what is going on here — 
everybody knows what is going on here. 
 
Never mind the promise to the people of Saskatchewan because 
we — speaking for the Conservative government in Ottawa — 
we want to get more votes in Toronto and Montreal, and so 
we’re going to cater to Toronto and Montreal. That’s what 
they’re doing because they’re trying to put together a majority 
for themselves. And we shouldn’t be naive about it or pretend 
that that isn’t happening. It is happening. It’s gone on for a long 
time, and it’s continuing to go on. 
 
I think the sad part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the people in 
Saskatchewan is that they have loyally elected these people — 
the Conservatives — thinking that things would be maybe a 
little bit different under a Conservative government, that 
Saskatchewan would have fair treatment. But it’s not to be as of 
yet, and I think that that’s very sad. 
 
And so you have a situation where during the election campaign 
Mr. Lukiwski said this. He said, Calvert, referring . . . I’m 
quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Leader Post, November 
10, 2005: “. . . Calvert [referring to the Premier] should offer 
support to the Conservative party’s proposal to make changes to 
the equalization program . . .” 
 
That’s what he said. But then after the election, the story 
changed. He went on to, according to the Leader Post, 
December 12, 2005, Mr. Lukiwski pointed out “. . . the 
province’s 13 Tory MPs have consistently raised the issue in 
the House of Commons over the last year,” he said. So the 
promise was apparently that they would continue to do so, but 
unfortunately they didn’t do so. 
 
What happened was . . . And now I’m looking at The Globe and 
Mail from April 5, an article by Gloria Galloway and she 
writes: 
 

Last week, in a letter to the National Post, he [referring to 
Mr. Nicholls of the National Citizens Coalition], pointed 
out that the Prime Minister poured about $3-billion into 
Quebec before the provincial election. 
 
“If this was done to help the Jean Charest-led Liberals 
defeat the separatists, it worked. Mr. Charest ended up 
winning a minority government of 48 seats, which works 
out to about $63-million per seat,” wrote Mr. Nicholls. 

 
“Good thing Mr. Harper wasn’t paying for a Liberal 
majority — that might have bankrupted the country [he 
says].” 

 
And the point is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t agree with our 
representative in the federal cabinet, Ms. Skelton, who says that 
the people of Saskatchewan do not understand what is going on. 
I think they actually do understand what is going on, and what 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

is going on of course is what has gone on in this country before. 
We have a federal government — now Conservative, used to be 
Liberal — that cares more about pouring money into Central 
Canada, and especially Quebec, than it does treating the 
province of Saskatchewan fairly. 
 
And when we’re talking about fairness, I want to remind the 
House again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re talking about 
Saskatchewan people being treated in the same way that Alberta 
was treated and the same way that Manitoba is treated and, I 
might add, in the same way that Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland and Labrador are treated because there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when they receive money from natural 
resources it is not clawed back to the same extent as it is in 
Saskatchewan. They get to keep more of it. 
 
Now they’re upset because the Conservatives promised that a 
cap would be removed so that they would even get more. But 
my point is they already receive more than we do because they 
have a special deal with the federal government which again is 
denied to the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s not fair. 
 
I noticed something kind of interesting on some of the websites 
that the Conservatives have and some of their fellow travellers 
in the Saskatchewan Party. For example the website of Ted 
Merriman — I’m sorry I should say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest — used to have on it a little 
article, Saskatchewan Party Proposal for Equalization Reform 
which was dated February 18, 2005, which came from the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus. You know that member took that 
off his website after the promise wasn’t kept. 
 
And I wonder why that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that the 
Saskatchewan Party doesn’t want to talk about the broken 
promise of the federal Conservative Party, and there’s a very 
simple reason for that. That is that the Saskatchewan Party 
worked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through its members, and through 
many of the members sitting here today, to elect the Stephen 
Harper Conservative government in Ottawa. That’s a simple 
fact. Everybody knows it. And they don’t want to be held 
accountable for what their cousins in Ottawa are doing to the 
people of Saskatchewan. They don’t want to be held 
accountable for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think they 
should be. I think they should be. Because I think when you 
support people who make a promise and then break a promise, 
that doesn’t make you look very good either. 
 
You know I have an article from the Carlyle Observer dated 
August 25, ’06, and the headline of that article is “Tory MPs 
should stand up for Saskatchewan.” And I think that’s certainly 
true. The writer says this: 
 

Well, maybe it’s time for our province’s 12 Conservative 
Members of Parliament to stand up for Saskatchewan and 
make good on their party’s election promise for a new 
equalization deal that excludes non-renewable resource 
revenue. 
 
Anything less than the complete exclusion of oil revenue 
from the federal government equalization formula that 
distributes excess tax wealth would be a betrayal of the 
voters of this province . . . 

 

And that’s very true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anything less than 
keeping your promise is a betrayal of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And you know, it’s very sad when you read 
articles in newspapers like The Toronto Star where the headline 
is, “A year later, PM’s promises not worth much.” 
 
And it says toward the end of the article: 
 

A year into this government’s life [referring to the 
Conservatives in Ottawa], Harper can’t credibly claim 
take-it-to-the-bank honesty as a Conservative virtue. 
 
Instead of “promise kept,” it would be more candid to 
laugh off the record as “Just kidding.” 

 
Sort of like Mr. Lukiwski said about the promise, you know — 
oh, if you want to say we broke our promise, fair enough. 
 
I think when Mr. Batters was being questioned about it, he said 
he couldn’t answer the question because he had to go and get a 
doughnut. Well a doughnut is kind of appropriate because it’s 
like a big, fat zero. And that really is what the people of 
Saskatchewan are getting from their Conservative government 
as a reward for electing 12 Conservative members of 
parliament. That’s their reward, along with being insulted by 
our member of the federal cabinet who says we’re too stupid to 
understand the issue. Well maybe we’re not. 
 
And then The Toronto Star says, “Perversely, it’s in the national 
interest to take this Prime Minister with a lump of salt.” And I 
guess that’s true. 
 
But you know it’s really kind of . . . It would almost be funny, 
but it’s just so sad that in the election, in the election campaign, 
the federal election, this is what the current Prime Minister had 
to say. He said, “There’s no greater fraud than a promise not 
kept.” Apparently that’s a Gaelic proverb. But the Prime 
Minister said, “There’s no greater fraud than a promise not 
kept.” And yet he made a promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and the 12 Conservative members of parliament 
made a province to the people of Saskatchewan, and they didn’t 
keep that promise. Well according to the Prime Minister’s own 
words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no greater fraud than that. 
That’s what he said. 
 
Now no wonder one of our local media commentators had this 
to say on the CBC TV. He said, referring to the Conservatives: 
 

. . . the fundamental dishonesty, the fundamental 
justification, the complete untruths that we are hearing 
from the federal Conservatives right now . . . my 
goodness, like, I mean, this is just absolutely horrendous 
. . . 

 
This is a journalist speaking on the television. So that’s what 
it’s come to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this country it’s okay to make a promise 
that you’re going to treat the people of Saskatchewan fairly, and 
after that you just forget about your promise, laugh it off, and 
say that the people aren’t bright enough to understand it. Well I 
think they are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think they are bright 
enough to understand it, and I think that the people eventually 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

are going to tell the Conservative Party that they’ve had 
enough. 
 
Yes here’s . . . I’m reading from the Leader-Post now of April 
11 . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of committees. 
With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is agreed. I 
recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This is 
something that I’ve been wanting to do for several weeks now. 
Joined in the Speaker’s gallery is an employee in my office 
who’s just started working in my office. And I’m quite happy 
. . . I thought now would be a very good time to do that. So I 
would just ask all hon. member to welcome and I’d like to 
introduce to all members through you to the Chamber, to his 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Trevor Morin. He’s been helping out 
in my office and has been doing a very good job, and I’m very 
happy to be able to introduce him today. So I would ask all hon. 
members to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Equalization and an Energy Accord 
(continued) 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Massey Place and the Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I was referring a few minutes ago to one of local 
members of parliament, Mr. Batters, who before the election 
said he was going to keep the promise to exclude natural 
resources revenue from calculation of equalization. This is what 
he had to say recently when he was asked why he didn’t keep 
his promise, and I’m quoting. It says: 
 

“I’m going to get a doughnut and I’m off . . . Thanks 
though.” Palliser Conservative MP Dave Batters when 
confronted by reporters last week on whether or not his 
federal government had kept its election promise to 
Saskatchewan on equalization. 

Well he had to get a doughnut, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then 
Murray Mandryk writes in the Leader-Post: 
 

When the next federal election campaign rolls around, 
may I suggest that you stockpile doughnuts, jelly rolls, 
jambusters, bearpaws, beaver tails, or sticky buns — good, 
old . . . Saskatchewan dainties may be equally effective. 
 
But please keep an ample supply of goodies at the ready to 
detain Conservative MPs long enough to get them to 
explain how not receiving the $800 million a year that 
they promised this province in the last federal election is 
now, as Batters claimed Thursday, “fabulous news.” 

 
They say it’s fabulous news, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you 
know I think I pointed out that Mr. Lukiwski was saying to the 
Leader-Post that the promise was not kept, and at the same time 
running radio ads paid for by the taxpayers which said our 
promise was kept. And this is described in the same article as 
worm-like behaviour. So I don’t know what to make of the 
doughnut analogy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It may simply be that, 
you know, the doughnut, as I said, is so much like the big fat 
zero that the people of the province are getting from the 
Conservative government. 
 
But on a serious note, I think what people want to know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is why is Saskatchewan singled out for this 
kind of treatment from Ottawa? Why did the people of Alberta 
receive access to their natural resource revenue, not counted as 
part of their revenue for eight years, but no such rule for the 
people of Saskatchewan notwithstanding the promise of the 
Prime Minister and the 12 Conservative MPs? Why do the 
people of Manitoba get $2 billion of equalization next year and 
the people of Saskatchewan zero? Why did the Conservatives 
say that they had to do this and break their promise to 
Saskatchewan people because they did not want to see a 
situation where the revenues of Saskatchewan were higher per 
capita than revenues to the people of Ontario. Why is that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Why did the Conservative Party in the last 
budget cut Saskatchewan’s share of payments by $700 million 
but increase Quebec’s share by $700 million in the middle of an 
election? Why did that happen? 
 
I think everybody knows why it is happening, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Everyone knows that the federal Conservative Party 
caters to Central Canada, not to the West, notwithstanding the 
number of members of parliament we send to Ottawa under the 
Conservative banner. Everyone knows that the Conservative 
Party caters to Central Canada, not to the West. And it is 
unfortunate in this particular instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because it costs the people of the province $800 million a year. 
 
And I want to refer again to the federal election platform of the 
Conservative Party of Canada from the 2006 federal election. It 
was called Stand up for Canada, and it says this: 
 

Work to achieve with the provinces permanent changes to 
the equalization formula which would ensure that 
non-renewable natural resource revenue is removed from 
the equalization formula to encourage economic growth. 

 
I’m going to repeat those words, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “that 
non-renewable natural resource revenue [be] removed [note the 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2007 

word removed] from the equalization formula to encourage 
economic growth.” To encourage what? Economic growth. And 
then the platform said, “We will ensure that no province is 
adversely affected from changes to the equalization formula.” 
 
Then you know I want to refer again to some of the promises 
that were made by the Conservative candidates, now members 
of parliament, before the election. Now, Stephen Harper of 
course told the former prime minister that the prime minister 
was failing Saskatchewan and that Saskatchewan was entitled 
to another $750 million a year. Dave Batters made a similar 
statement. I’ve already referred to our federal cabinet minister, 
Carol Skelton, saying before the election, then it was, 
“Saskatchewan is simply not getting its fair share out of 
equalization.” 
 
Now after the election she says, “I don’t know. I guess I haven’t 
thought about it that much” — referring to equalization. Well 
why is the story one way before the election, another way after 
the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think people in 
Saskatchewan are starting to wonder why. And, you know, 
before the election Ms. Skelton said, “We cannot afford to wait 
forever for this federal government to attend to this problem.” 
After the election she said, “the average person on the street 
doesn’t understand it.” 
 
I think actually in fairness to Ms. Skelton and the 
Conservatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say this. I think 
the average person on the street does not understand why the 
Conservatives have not kept their promise. I don’t think people 
do understand that, because before the election we were 
promised that this would be done. 
 
You know, Brad Trost, now an MP, said that we would get 
$800 million a year. He wasn’t content for the 750. He said it 
would be 800 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then he went 
on to say, “What the Conservative Party campaigned on in the 
last election was that all provinces be allowed to keep their 
natural resources and not have them clawed back, like the 
agreements with Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova 
Scotia.” That’s what Brad Trost said before the election. He 
also said, let me give you . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I apologize to 
the hon. member for Saskatoon Massey Place. Other members 
are yelling across the floor and making it very difficult for the 
member for Saskatoon Massey Place to be heard, so I ask for 
order. Order. And I recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, I think the question to be asked, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, among all the other questions, is: if the 
Saskatchewan Party supported the people of Saskatchewan in 
their quest for a fair deal, why would they yell so much any 
time anybody ever complains about the fact that that promise 
was broken? That’s the question. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition is yelling from his seat and 
laughing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this issue at the same time 
that the Prime Minister of Canada has broken his promise to the 
people of this province that we would receive $800 million a 
year. And they think it’s a joke, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And you know, I’ve tried to set this out in a non-partisan and 
logical way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a promise was made. It’s 
documented. The promise was broken; that’s documented. And 
I’ve tried not to engage the opposition in partisan debate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but when I’m trying to raise this on behalf of 
my constituents and the people of this province and they are 
laughing at the people of this province over this broken 
promise, I find that shameful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it may be, it may be, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they can laugh from their seats and they can try to 
shout me down as we’re standing up for the people of the 
province. But I want to make this suggestion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they should be more concerned about standing up for 
the people of this province than standing up for their political 
cousins who just want to maintain power in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And you know, you know, they laugh from 
their seats and say, oh well, you know, just see who wins the 
next federal election and who’s going to get elected in 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve heard that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because they think that they can take it for granted that the 
people of this province are going to go to the polls election after 
election and keep electing Conservative members of parliament 
who then go to Ottawa and turn their backs on the people. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what they think, but at some 
point that is going to come to an end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
when it does, we’re going to be there to see it end. Because this 
charade that’s going on in Ottawa with 12 Conservative MPs 
who are turning their backs on the people of this province — 
with the support of the opposition over there — that is going to 
come to an end at some point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because a 
promise was made to the people of this province. Whether the 
Saskatchewan Party likes it or not and whether they like to hear 
it or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a promise was made. 
 
The promise made was that there would be a fair equalization 
formula for the people of this province. That promise has been 
broken by the Conservatives in Ottawa with the support of our 
members of parliament — and, by their actions and the way 
they’re acting in this House, with the support of the 
Saskatchewan Party that supports them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that’s why they don’t want this debate to take place. That’s 
why they have tried to shut this debate down, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They tried to shut it down last time it was in this 
House. They tried to shout it down today. And it will not work. 
It will not work, because we are not going to be shouted down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I ask members to 
please keep their voices down so that the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place can be heard. Order. I recognize the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 
again, again, we have to ask the question. We have to ask the 
question. They say they support the government and the people 



April 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

of Saskatchewan trying to get a fair equalization deal from the 
federal Conservatives. And yet when you try to mention it in 
the House here, they try to shout it down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Why is that? 
 
And the member from Rosetown is trying to shout it down 
because they don’t want to hear that their Conservative friends 
in Ottawa have broken their promise. And they don’t want to 
hear the people of the province told that our federal cabinet 
minister said that we didn’t understand the issue; the average 
person didn’t understand the issue. I think, watching them, we 
are starting to understand the issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 
we do understand. 
 
What we understand is they are more concerned about the 
Saskatchewan Party and the political fortunes of Stephen 
Harper and the Conservatives in Ottawa than they are about the 
ordinary families of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
do not want to hold their Conservative friends’ feet to the fire to 
keep their promise to the people of the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And when I get up in this House to try to raise the 
issue — and it’s the second time they’ve done it — they try to 
shout me down. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to take more 
than them to keep me quiet on this issue because I’m going to 
keep raising the issue and the issue’s going to come up again. 
And I’m going to speak to it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order, members of the 
Assembly. Order. Members of the Assembly, it now being 1 
o’clock, this House now stands adjourned. And we will come 
together again at 1:30 p.m. on Monday. I wish all members a 
very good weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1329 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1330 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1330 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................1331, 1339 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1331 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1355 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Environment 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
 Earth Day 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
 Estevan Business Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
 Lakeland Citizen of the Year 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
 Nellie Stevenson’s 105th Birthday 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
 Accuracy of Advertisements 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
 Public Response 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1334 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding for Avastin 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1334 
 Physician Supply in Canora, Kamsack, and Preeceville 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
 Physician Supply in Spiritwood Area 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
 Recruitment and Retention of Physicians 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1338 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1338 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1339 
 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Supply of Health Care Professionals 
  McMorris.......................................................................................................................................................................1339, 1349 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1341, 1350 
  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................1343, 1349 
  Taylor.............................................................................................................................................................................1344, 1349 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Iwanchuk .......................................................................................................................................................................1347, 1350 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1349 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1350 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 — Equalization and an Energy Accord 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1351 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


