


















































Hansard: March 27, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 37A  TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1003 
 March 27, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in view of 
the rally outside regarding saving our schools, I read a petition 
and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the 
communities of Regina, Assiniboia, Lafleche, Limerick, and 
Gravelbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
again today. I believe there are six full pages of signatures by 
citizens of Cypress Hills concerned about the impending 
closure of the SaskPower office in Shaunavon, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s numerous pages are signed by individuals 
from the communities of Shaunavon, Frontier, Eastend, Val 
Marie, and other communities in the vicinity. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province that are 
extremely concerned regarding school closures throughout the 
province. This petition, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Imperial 
and Stalwart area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
school closures in rural Saskatchewan. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Willow Bunch 
School remains open. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Willow 
Bunch, Coronach, and Scout Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to keep the Willow Bunch School open. This petition 
states that the closure of the school would cause undo hardship 
to residents particularly young students. The prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Willow Bunch 
School remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Willow Bunch, and I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by individuals concerned with the practice of 
transferring patients from one ambulance to another on the 
highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievably 
today I have a number of petitions again on the citizens who are 
concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And to demonstrate on how well travelled this highway is, Mr. 
Speaker, the signatures are from Humboldt, Bruno, St-Denis, 
Watson, Kamsack, Aberdeen, Colonsay, Canmore, 
Prud’homme, Lake Lenore, Saskatoon, and Calgary, Alberta. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise proudly 
today on behalf of citizens of the community of Melfort to 
present petitions concerning the pending closure of the 
Broadway Community School. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to stop the closure of the Broadway 
Community School in Melfort, Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, number in the 
hundreds, and they are of course from Melfort, but they’re also 
from all of the communities surrounding Melfort who share the 
citizens’ concern. And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of folks from Willow 
Bunch who are concerned about the closure of that school. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Willow Bunch 
School remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks from Willow 
Bunch. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present another petition from people opposed to possible 
reductions of the health care services in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Sonningdale, and Biggar 
and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from people across 
Saskatchewan who want to keep rural schools open. And I’ll 
read from the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners come from the communities of Imperial, 
Liberty, Davidson, and Simpson. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from constituents in my constituency who 
are very, very concerned about the possible closures of school 
services. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Flintoft, 
Stonehenge, Limerick, Wood Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the closure of schools. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take the 
necessary action to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition are from Wood 
Mountain, Limerick, and Assiniboia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to read a petition from 
citizens of this province that are concerned with school 
closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to prevent imposed school closures. 
 
And as duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by people from all over this 
province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about this government abandoning rural 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by the good citizens from the town of Imperial 
and Liberty, Holdfast, Penzance, Watrous, and Simpson. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition to keep rural schools open. I 
will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Imperial and Liberty. I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise today about the closures of rural schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the schools of Imperial, 
Govan, Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Imperial, Saskatchewan. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to present 
petitions calling on the government to keep the school open in 
the historic community of Willow Bunch. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Willow Bunch school 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have 20 pages of petitions signed by people from 
Saskatoon; Pense; Fairview, Alberta; Crane Valley; Cardross; 
Willow Bunch; Coronach; Bengough; Pangman; Lower 
Saxony, Germany, Mr. Speaker; Assiniboia; St. Victor; Moose 
Jaw; and Fife Lake. I so present on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 24, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Learning has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill 
24. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 
1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 24 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 32 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 32 be read in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with leave I would 
ask that we waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on 
this Bill. With leave. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The minister has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
move that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 32 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister for Immigration: what did the department 
spend on immigrant settlement services in the ’06-07 
budget, with a breakdown of funding to each organization? 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also have additional 
questions for the Minister for Immigration. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for Immigration: how much money did the 
department spend on marketing and promotion of the 
Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program in 2006-2007? 

 
And I have the same question for years going back to 
2000-2001. 
 
I also have that I will give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

Also to the Minister for Immigration: in 2000-2001, what 
was the department’s immigrant retention rate? 
 

And I have the same question for the fiscal years from 
2000-2001 through to 2006-2007. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for Immigration: in 2006-2007, how much 
money did the province receive from the federal 
government for the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 
program? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m really pleased today that we’re joined by a group of 21 
students from Grant Road School in the heart of Regina South. 
They are seated up here in your gallery. We are joined today by 
two of their teachers, Miss Reid and Ms. Desjarlais, who have 
brought with them these students. They are also joined by a 
group of chaperones, Dave Reid and Carol Powell and Cyndi 
Lewis. 
 
I’m really happy they’re going to be here today to watch some 
of the proceedings. And later we’ll go get our photos taken, and 
we’ll have a chance to answer some of their questions. So if all 
members would join with me in welcoming this group of grade 
4 students I’d be most appreciative. 
 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to 
welcome guests in both galleries and also in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re members of the Save Our Schools action 
committee that have come to Regina today. You can easily tell 
who they are, Mr. Speaker. They have the rosy cheeks and the 
parkas and mitts on because it was really a little bit fresh out 
there. 
 
I’d like to acknowledge in particular in your gallery their 
spokesman, Mr. David Gleim from Chaplin, Saskatchewan. 
And I know that their day here will be interesting, and I ask all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

The Importance and Future of Schools 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to commend all of the individuals involved 
in the Save Our Schools initiative and to thank them for getting 
involved in their communities. 
 
They have an intimate understanding of the importance of a 
school to its community. After all it is truly the heart of a 
community. Mr. Speaker, I think that many people find it 
frustrating that the 16 years of neglect from this NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government has resulted in thousands of 
people leaving our province for opportunities elsewhere. When 
a family leaves, they take their children with them which in turn 
leads to the depopulation of schools throughout this province. 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that the NDP government will listen 
to some of the Saskatchewan Party’s proposals in this area. 
 
We have suggested the government should provide school 
boards with a few more tools when it comes to making the 
difficult and emotional decisions about the future of a school. 
These tools include the designations of schools of necessity and 
schools of opportunity. Our leader has also proposed that before 
any decision is made on the future of a school status, the school 
board must prepare and release a utilization report to the 
community detailing possible partnerships and alternative 
usages for the school in the community. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this 
Assembly to thank the members of the Save our Schools 
initiative for the work that they are doing for the children of 
today and for the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I too wish to welcome all 
citizens to the gallery and to this Legislative Assembly, but I 
would request that they observe our parliamentary practice 
which is to observe, not participate in any way. 

Next statement. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Junior Achievement’s Business Hall of Fame Awards 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, over the past weekend Junior 
Achievement Saskatchewan held Business Hall of Fame 
Awards dinners in both Saskatoon and Regina to celebrate the 
achievements of students involved in the Junior Achievement 
company program and to acknowledge the contributions of the 
dedicated men and women who volunteer their time and 
expertise as company program advisors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I and many of my legislative 
colleagues had the privilege and the great pleasure to be among 
the capacity crowd in attendance at the event at TCU Place in 
Saskatoon on Friday. I also know some of my colleagues were 
at the Regina event. 
 
Since 1977, Junior Achievement Saskatchewan has been 
educating young people about business and economics, 
inspiring them to develop entrepreneurial, leadership, and 
workforce skills that will guide them into the future. I want to 
take this opportunity to commend the members of the business 
community and organizations who have developed the 
foundation that these young achievers will build on and who so 
generously offer their guidance and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s focus is on making 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and raise a family. 
And those who participate in Junior Achievement are being 
well prepared to serve as community leaders in the days ahead. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the award 
winners from both the Saskatoon and Regina events, to those 
who were inducted into the Business Hall of Fame, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I particularly want to take this opportunity to 
congratulate Junior Achievement Saskatchewan on its 30th 
anniversary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Equality 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about the issue of equality. I fail to see the issue of equality 
when a SaskPower recent basic charge increase is up 50 cents 
compared to somebody living in residential Saskatchewan. 
Does the NDP view this as equality? 
 
Let’s talk about another example: property tax. The NDP 
government tries to convince us that the funding split between 
the government and school divisions is 40/60 which would be 
close to equal. However I have one school district in my 
constituency receives only 27 per cent. Another one only 
receives 12 per cent from this government. 
 
Recently the Premier announced he is going to provide free 
wireless Internet access to a few residents in the city, which is 
fine. But in my constituency, I still have people that are paying 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

for outdated dial-up Internet access. When is he going to make 
that equal? Also I have no cellphone coverage throughout my 
constituency. When is he going to make that equal? 
 
So with the issue of equality, I still feel this government is not 
addressing that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, this past Friday in 
Saskatoon I had the privilege of attending the Saskatchewan 
Protective Services Medal ceremony. Established by this 
government in 2003, the Saskatchewan Protective Services 
Medal, presented by the Lieutenant Governor, recognizes 
exemplary long service for individuals working in a direct 
capacity to protect people and property. These individuals are 
charged with ensuring the safety, security, and protection of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the brave recipients of this medal are 
recommended by a committee of protective services 
professionals called the Saskatchewan Protective Services 
Medal advisory committee. And they receive a circular medal 
surmounted by the St. Edward’s crown. It bears a shield with a 
lion on a stylized western red lily. Recipients also receive a 
miniature of the medal and certificate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people rely on the contributions 
and sacrifices made by safety and security personnel. The 
Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal honours these people 
and focuses attention on the efforts and work of police, fire, and 
emergency professionals along with the countless others 
working in the field of safety and security. This is a high honour 
and a much deserved one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all honourable members of the House 
join me in congratulating all these true Saskatchewan heroes. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Oxbow Physicians Honoured with the Healthcare 
Excellence Award 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure I rise in this Assembly today to congratulate two 
physicians from my constituency who were recently honoured 
with the Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Award. 
 
Dr. David Hyman and Dr. Nicholaas Botha, both originally 
from South Africa and now practicing in Oxbow, were 
honoured with the award in late February at a ceremony here in 
Regina. Nineteen individuals and teams were nominated, and 
Drs. Hyman and Botha were one of the 10 to receive an award. 
 

The following information on the award recipients was 
provided at the ceremony, and I quote: 
 

Always seeing the good in everyone and in all situations 
are the hallmarks of both Dr. Nic Botha and Dr. David 
Hyman’s approach to their work and to their lives. 

 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

They consistently place the patients first and foremost, 
attending patients from pre-hospital situations through . . . 
to regional hospitals . . . Dr. Botha and Dr. Hyman aspire 
to the highest standard of work ethics which carry through 
to the staff at the clinics, this represents a win-win 
environment for both patients and staff. 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, both of these doctors are also actively 
involved in their community. The award literature states, quote: 
 

They both are elders of their faith and [serve] . . . their 
values through the way they live their lives and practice 
medicine in the community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my family used Dr. Botha when the kids were 
attending Oxbow, and they were excellent. So congratulations 
to both Drs. Hyman and Botha on this well-deserved award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Agenda for Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 
member from Saskatoon Silver Springs for being the first 
member of his caucus since the last election to reveal the 
Saskatchewan Party’s real agenda for Crown corporations. 
 
At the end of last year, the SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] Auto Fund rate stabilization reserve was $206 
million — the highest balance in a 61-year history. The Finance 
critic, I’m sure that the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
understands that the SGI Auto Fund is designed to be 
financially self-sustaining and work on a breakeven basis over 
time. It does not receive nor contributes money to the General 
Revenue Fund. In fact it is prohibited by legislation to 
contribute to the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. 
 
Despite knowing this, the member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs says that the $100 million rebate SGI customers will 
receive this year is $100 million that they would not have spent 
if they had been more prudent. The Saskatchewan Party 
opposes the SGI rebate to Saskatchewan people with insured 
vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statement defines the fundamental difference 
between the NDP and the Saskatchewan Party. The NDP 
believes that the Crown corporations are businesses that serve 
the people of Saskatchewan. And the Saskatchewan Party 
believes the Crown corporations are political piggy banks to 
serve the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, what the 
Saskatchewan Party has never understood, as evidenced by the 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

bleeding of the Crowns in the ’80s, is that Crown corporations 
are businesses managed by professionals for the best interest of 
Saskatchewan people — not the Saskatchewan Party. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Public Reaction to the Carriere Scandal 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
of the Public Service Commission may think the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal is old news, but that’s only because she wants 
the opposition to stop asking questions about this scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the minister’s assertion, people across 
Saskatchewan continue to ask questions about the scandal and 
express their outrage and disgust at the way it was handled by 
this NDP government. Just this morning, there was a letter to 
the editor in the Regina Leader-Post that states, and I quote: 
 

How can any government have such a warped sense of 
right and wrong? 
 
I certainly hope Saskatchewan voters, especially women 
voters, remember this disgusting decision at election time 
and develop a “zero-tolerance” policy toward the NDP. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think people are going to be even more outraged 
when they read the front page of the Leader-Post today where 
one of the victims in the scandal speaks out. The victim told the 
Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 

We were ignored . . . We laid complaints and they said we 
weren’t going through the proper channels . . . which we 
thought we were doing just by going to (our) . . . 
supervisor. 
 
It makes you feel really worthless. 

 
The woman also talks about the fact that, and I quote, “Some of 
us were harassed by Murdoch Carriere as early as 1994.” She 
goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that when supervisors raised their 
concerns, they were told, “That’s just Murdoch.” 
 
So much for zero tolerance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Rural School Closures 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, at the legislature 
today are members of the save our schools committee. These 
are men and women trying desperately to maintain the viability 
of their communities and keep their schools open. 

Mr. Speaker, while this latest NDP budget calls for spending 
increases of roughly 9 per cent, there’s not one thin dime 
dedicated to addressing the issues of rural school closures. Mr. 
Speaker, can the minister of Education explain to these people 
why keeping our schools open is such a low priority for this 
NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite is totally inaccurate. There is a 
number of factors that have been put in place and have been in 
place to address the specific issues with rural schools. 
 
We all recognize that there is a number of issues, a number of 
costs in rural Saskatchewan that are higher than what they 
would be in urban areas of the province. There is the small 
school factor. There is the new geographic factor. There is extra 
resources for rural schools. And the member knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the current process for closing 
schools is moving far too quickly. This NDP government 
pushed through the amalgamation process. Now communities 
are not being given the time and resources they need to gather 
information and explore other options. 
 
Local school community councils formed in the wake of 
amalgamation are only now beginning to establish themselves. 
The schools will be closed before the consultation and 
community input can really begin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are these important decisions 
about the future of rural Saskatchewan schools being rushed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, within the legislation there 
is a process for when notification has to be given and the 
process that is followed. When you look at the web pages from 
each of the school divisions they will also have more particulars 
on how they follow through and follow the legislation, and what 
criteria they follow within their divisions. It is clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I do need to say though is we all understand 
that this is a very emotional time and that we are particularly at 
a difficult point in all of this because while notice has been 
given for the reviews, we are not yet at the step where there is 
any definite decisions made. Mr. Speaker, it’s almost as if the 
communities, the families, the teachers, the parents, the 
students, there is a bit of a limbo right now as to what the final 
decisions will be. It is emotional time and we need to let the 
school boards make their decisions. 
 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Role of the School report 
was released in March 2001. That report contained 165 pages 
worth of ideas on how to improve the quality of education. The 
report calls all schools to adopt a, quote, “Community School 
philosophy” that encourages families, neighbours, businesses, 
churches, and other organizations to become involved in school 
events and make use of the facilities in the school building. But 
that takes time, Mr. Speaker, time this NDP government doesn’t 
want to give local school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this tired, old NDP government once again 
ignoring the recommendations of its own report and why are 
they writing off rural schools in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, if the member opposite would take a little bit of time 
and look at the education system across the province of 
Saskatchewan, he will see many innovative projects that have 
been put in place. Mr. Speaker, it has been this government that 
has facilitated this, working with communities, working with 
other partners to provide viable schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite can’t think of any of these 
projects, I have a list of two pages which is by no means a 
comprehensive list of all of the joint-use facilities in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, it’s a direction we’ve taken over the last 
number of years, and it’s a direction we’ll continue to take to 
make sure we have viable schools in every area of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Future of Former Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minster Responsible for the Forestry 
Secretariat. Is there an emergency meeting of the Forestry 
Secretariat called for tomorrow, and what is the purpose of that 
meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell that member 
that the Forestry Secretariat has been meeting since its 
inception. We regularly update the Forestry Secretariat or the 
task force through the secretariat on the work of the government 
and the work with industry. That process continues and there 
will be further meetings in days to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Prince Albert Northcote often has a difficult time keeping his 
story straight. Friday was no exception. In the morning he was 
telling people about the deal to open the Prince Albert pulp and 
paper mill; in the afternoon he was denying it. Mr. Speaker, 
why can’t this minister get his story straight? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased for the 
opportunity to inform that member that I shared information on 
Friday with a young lady who asked me about the future of the 
forestry industry in the province. I shared information with 
respect to process, Mr. Speaker, as it related to the merger of 
the Domtar, Weyerhaeuser assets. I indicated that discussions 
were ongoing and that that process would require any decision 
made by the new company would be made by their board of 
directors. I indicated that that board was established on 
March 7. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated that I had some degree of belief that we 
would be successful in putting together an active operator in the 
Prince Albert pulp mill assets. I believed that on Friday. That’s 
what I said on Friday, and that’s what I repeat again today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker there’s 
an old saying in the navy: loose lips sink ships. Did the minister 
sink this deal? This time the minister’s loose lips are causing 
fear and confusion in Prince Albert. People deserve better than 
confusion and contradiction from the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is it? Is it a deal or no deal on the Prince 
Albert mill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to that 
member, I was at a post-budget meeting last Friday in Prince 
Albert — probably attended by 70, 80 local people — at which 
we discussed a number of issues, one of them being the future 
of the assets. Let me ask this member . . . And he knows so little 
about our community, so let me share with him this. Had 
anyone announced that there was an agreement in principle for 
the sale of the assets and the start of the assets, I can tell him the 
hats would have been flying in the air. I can tell him that there 
would still be applause in the streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I indicated was a process by which a 
decision would be made, if one were to be made. That’s what I 
said Friday. That’s what I said yesterday. That’s what I say 
today. And that’s what I’ll say tomorrow. 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we learned that Murdoch Carriere’s harassment 
victims and some of their supervisors tried to get high-ranking 
officials in the Department of Environment to listen to them for 
years. As early as 1994 some victims went to the supervisors 
for help. Then they went to deputy ministers and associate 
deputy ministers and were repeatedly told, that’s just Murdoch. 
No one would listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why were these women ignored? And more 
importantly, what is this NDP government doing to find out 
why they were ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I spent five years in this Assembly as a 
member of the opposition, and I’m absolutely shocked that we 
have dozens of guests in the gallery and we only had three 
questions on an issue of major importance to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The members of the opposition have asked literally dozens and 
dozens of questions about Murdoch Carriere, and I think I’ve 
answered them all. But they are afraid to ask more questions on 
rural school closure, and that is very surprising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister ignores a lot of the 
people in the gallery . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — A lot of the people that are here today are 
women and they’re very concerned about harassment in the 
workplace. 
 
On behalf of all nine of Murdoch Carriere’s harassment victims, 
one of them wrote directly to the Premier of our province. The 
letter was dated March 10, 2003. It states, and I quote: 
 

A private investigator (Robert Gillies) was hired . . . to 
look into our complaint . . . 
 
In December 2002 the final report was completed. The 
final report also stated that sexual abuse and abuse of 
power had taken place. 
 

It goes on. To quote: 
 

A number of the complaints against Mr. Carriere do fall 
under the criminal code and a complaint has been laid with 
the RCMP. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the letter the Premier said he did not 
understand the seriousness of. How can anyone claim not to 
understand the seriousness of this letter? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I happened to spend some 
time out front of the Assembly at noon and I could tell that 
there are young people that travelled many miles to be here at 
noon to let their position be known to all members of the 
legislature. I note those young people have taken time off 
school and their parents have taken time away from work, yet 
the members of the opposition only asked three questions on 
rural school closures and this is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Would the minister 
complete her response, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And yet the 
members of the opposition — when these people have travelled 
hundreds of miles to be in this Assembly — ask only three 
questions. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more questions the 
opposition could ask about education policy in this province. 
But they don’t want to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t want to 
deal with this issue at all. One of the reasons the victims wrote 
this letter was because everyone high up in the NDP 
government said, that’s just Murdoch, every time a complaint 
was brought forward. Then they decided to promote Carriere 
with the same salary to just another office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter states, and I quote: 
 

This is where we the complainants feel that an injustice 
has been made. A number of female employees who work 
in the Regina office . . . have also experienced incidents 
with Mr. Carriere . . . We feel as employees that the 
females of 3211 Albert Street are being placed into an 
unsafe environment. 

 
The Premier didn’t think that this was serious enough to 
address, Mr. Speaker. Where was the NDP government’s zero 
tolerance policy that this minister boasted about yesterday? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — All of the issues that have been asked 
by the opposition have been spoken to in this Assembly. 
 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

But let me say this about people who are living in rural 
Saskatchewan that have travelled hundreds of miles to speak 
about rural school closures. Mr. Speaker, one of the questions 
that the opposition might have asked is, how long do you think 
a young person should be on a school bus going to and from 
school? Did they ask that question? Not at all. 
 
The other thing that they could have asked . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the other thing that they 
might have asked about if they’d chosen to ask about — but 
which obviously they don’t want to ask about, and they have 
put it on the public record — is which schools would they keep 
open and which schools would they close, Mr. Speaker. They 
might have asked how many schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan are naturally closed every year and have been 
doing so since 1944. But the members of the opposition chose 
not to ask those questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s so glaringly obvious this 
government and this minister does not want to speak about the 
issue that’s affecting women in Saskatchewan. Anything to 
divert the attention from what’s happening that’s not good for 
their politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to reread that quote that was made from 
the women who had the nerve to write to the Premier and try 
and get help from the person who is the highest official in this 
province. I’m going to reread this letter and see if maybe the 
minister will have an answer to the question. Answer the 
question. Any thoughts at all would be welcome. The letter 
states, and I quote: 
 

This is where we the complainants feel that an injustice 
has been made. A number of female employees who work 
in the Regina office . . . have also experienced incidents 
with Mr. Carriere . . . We feel as employees that the 
females of 3211 Albert Street are being placed into an 
unsafe environment. 
 

The Premier didn’t think this was serious enough to address, I 
guess. Yesterday the minister talked about and had boasted 
about zero tolerance policies. Where was the NDP 
government’s zero tolerance policy when it came to Murdoch 
Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly has 
been open in the province since the beginning of March and 
practically every day in the Assembly we’ve had a discussion 
about this issue. The discussion that has not taken place in this 

Assembly is about rural school closures, Mr. Speaker. That 
discussion has not taken place. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
only asked three questions. 
 
Well I would say this — and this really does speak to the 
members of the opposition’s credibility — apparently the 
member from Canora, in December 2, 1992, he says: 
 

The province is too small in terms of population for all of 
the educational facilities it provides. There must be less 
duplication and a greater sharing of services. 
 

That’s what the member from Canora said. And then the 
member from Melfort, he admits that his proposal of having 
schools of opportunity and schools of necessity is unrealistic, 
Mr. Speaker. That speaks to their credibility on rural school 
closures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that minister’s response was just 
as disgusting and embarrassing as the Premier’s response to the 
women when they talked about Murdoch Carriere. What was 
the Premier’s response? The Premier sent the victims a 
three-sentence letter thanking them for writing and telling them 
to keep bringing their concerns forward. Ten years, bring their 
concerns forward. 
 
The victims went to their supervisors. They went to their union. 
They went to the department. They went to the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police]. And then they went to the Premier 
of the province and the Premier wouldn’t even listen to them. It 
seems obvious that this NDP government is more interested in 
protecting Murdoch Carriere than women in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, why did this NDP government 
continue to ignore complaints about Murdoch Carriere and why 
didn’t the Premier act in early March when he received the 
letter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I really do want to speak 
to the members of the opposition’s credibility because they go 
outside and say all kinds of things about rural school closure. 
But here is what their critic, the member from Melfort, had to 
say on March 15, 2007: “We’re not saying any of these schools 
should remain open.” That’s what he said on the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. And then . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order please. 
Order please. Order please. There have been several personal 
remarks thrown across the floor which I believe would be 
unparliamentary being on record. I would ask members to 
refrain and stick to issue debates in the legislature. Would the 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

Minister of the Public Service Commission complete her 
response, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And so, Mr. Speaker, and then what 
does the Education critic say in The Nipawin Journal? He said, 
and I quote, and this is January 31, 2007, “It’s up to the School 
Board to weigh it all out and decide.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s not saying any school shouldn’t be 
closed. He’s saying it’s up to the school board to decide. That’s 
their policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, today we see more evidence 
that Carriere’s victims were nothing more than an afterthought 
to this NDP government in its rush to pay off Murdoch 
Carriere. A few days ago the Saskatchewan Party submitted a 
written question asking the NDP government when it signed the 
settlement agreement with Carriere and the answer was, January 
9. Yet they didn’t tell the public until seven weeks later, and 
even worse they didn’t tell the women victims until seven 
weeks later, the day the settlement was announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the government wait seven weeks before 
it told the public and these women about its $275,000 payoff to 
Murdoch Carriere? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have a 25-minute 
question period each and every day in the province of 
Saskatchewan when this Assembly is sitting. And how many 
minutes did they spend on rural schools and rural school 
closures? Six minutes and three questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have spent more time in this Assembly in this question 
period on an issue that I’ve already answered all of the 
questions when they have not bothered to ask more questions 
about educational policy when it comes to rural Saskatchewan. 
I find that shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on the first day that this 
legislature sat, the minister told the Assembly, and I quote, “. . . 
the complainants were checked with before this was given to 
Mr. Carriere.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just not true. The settlement was reached on 
January 9. The $275,000 cheque was sent to Murdoch Carriere 
on January 26. That’s a full month before anyone spoke to these 
women about this outrageous payoff. Once again these women 
were nothing but an afterthought for this NDP government. Its 
first priority was taking care of the harasser. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why weren’t these women checked with before 
Murdoch Carriere got his big, fat reward from the NDP? And 
why did the minister tell us that they were? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have an 
opposition that has spent most of question period today, when 
rural citizens have travelled hundreds of miles to this Assembly 
to ask their opposition to get the government to account for its 
educational policy in rural Saskatchewan, and how many 
questions do they ask on that? They asked exactly three. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we know their policy. They say that they’re not 
saying any of these schools shouldn’t be closed, and they’re 
saying that it’s up to school boards. Well I think the public in 
Saskatchewan needs to know where this Sask Party opposition 
really stands when it comes to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we have a government that has 
spent the last half an hour refusing to answer questions. Not 
only do they not care about the school closures in this province, 
they don’t care about these nine women who were harassed by 
Murdoch Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — I’ll go through this timeline again so that the 
minister can get her story straight. The minister told the House 
that the government checked with these women before the 
settlement was given to Murdoch Carriere. The settlement was 
reached on January 9. The $275,000 payoff cheque was dated 
and delivered January 26. No one talked to any of these women 
prior to February 27, just minutes before the NDP announced 
this payoff of Murdoch Carriere. 
 
Why did the NDP keep this disgusting settlement a secret from 
the public for over a month? And why did they keep it from 
these women? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already made my point about the 
opposition refusing to ask questions when we have dozens of 
guests in the gallery that have travelled hundreds of miles. But I 
will say this: in 1993 the Government of Saskatchewan, an 
NDP government, introduced amendments to the occupational 
health and safety legislation to make harassment as a grounds 
under the occupational health and safety legislation. And what 
did the member opposite do, from Cannington? He tried to 
eliminate it from the legislation and then he voted against it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every workplace in Saskatchewan’s 
supposed to have a harassment policy. We asked the Sask Party 
caucus to table their harassment policy three years ago or four 
years ago. We haven’t yet seen it. And I would like them once 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

again to table the Sask Party caucus anti-harassment policy — 
if they even have one — because it is the law, Mr. Speaker, to 
have one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling responses to written questions 640 through 744. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 640 through to 744 
have been submitted. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I wish to announce that His Honour 
will shortly be here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:29 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 24 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 
la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 
boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 32 - The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:31.] 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure today on behalf of the Humboldt constituency to enter 
the debate on the deficit budget that the government has 
introduced this year, and there’s no doubt that it was a deficit 
budget. They have opened the purse, quite frankly, and they are 
trying desperately to gain support before an election. They’ve 
been falling quite drastically in the polls. They know it. They 
know it and so therefore they are going to just spend money and 
try to buy the voters. And it’s not going to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was a lot of money spent in this budget. And I went 
through it and just sort of with the idea in mind, how will this 
budget help the constituents of the Humboldt constituency? 
And as everyone in this House knows, a huge concern and a 
priority for Humboldt is the Humboldt hospital. So I was 
pleased to see that there was money allocated towards the 
Humboldt hospital. There was . . . $6.9 million is dedicated 
towards the new Humboldt hospital. I haven’t talked to the 
CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority, but I will be within the next week or so, I hope, to 
know if that amount of money is what they need to go to the 
next stage. It will be important to know whether or not the 6.9 
million is adequate funds for the Humboldt hospital to proceed. 
 
It’s sad and we’ve talked about it a number of times in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, that it has taken so many years for this 
hospital to get to even this stage. There hasn’t been any sod 
turned by any means on the hospital. And the other part that is 
truly devastating to the community of Humboldt and the 
surrounding communities is that, because they’ve had to wait 
well over a decade now for the NDP to come through with their 
promise to build a new hospital in Humboldt, it’s going to cost 
dramatically more than what it should have cost had they built it 
in a more timely fashion. That is not only poor planning on the 
government’s part — which I think everyone just takes for 
granted by now — but it costs the communities a great deal of 
money because they have to come up with 35 per cent of the 
funding.  
 
That wouldn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, if it was a city because in 
the cities it’s 100 per cent funded. But because it’s health care 
in rural Saskatchewan, the rural residents have to come up with 
the money. So if the costs go through the roof and skyrocket 
such as they have for this Humboldt hospital project, it costs 
each and every taxpayer within the Humboldt constituency, that 
are involved in the hospital region, a great deal of more money. 
 
Health care in general is an area that is near and dear to my 
heart. We all know in this Assembly that I used to work at the 
Royal University Hospital as a laboratory technologist at one 
time. And I’ve always had an interest in health care and health 
care workers. I was very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, to see that 
the budget only increases the nursing training seats by 18. I 
think that is a drastic, drastic oversight on the NDP’s part, but 
yet another demonstration that they do not plan ahead. They 
have no clue of a long-term vision for health care in this 
province, or they also have no long-term clue as to what type of 
catastrophe is ahead for health care. 
 
We are experiencing a shortage of nurses; the nurses are telling 
us time and time again. They’re giving us the statistics, the 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

numbers. They’re telling us what other provinces are doing to 
address this issue, and yet this NDP government still doesn’t 
seem to get it. They still don’t have a plan. They’re still not 
understanding what it’s going to take to stop this train wreck 
that is about to happen in health care in Saskatchewan. It isn’t 
just the nurses, Mr. Speaker. It’s also doctors. It’s laboratory 
technologists. It’s radiologists. It is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Regina 
Dewdney on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Dewdney has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted?  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
looking up at the gallery, I noticed three long-time friends of 
mine sitting in the west gallery: Mr. Chuck Ames, Ms. Isabelle 
Musichuck, and Ms. Linda Tate. I think all three were here 
today to watch the proclamation and Royal Assent of the 
superannuation Bill. We’re very pleased that we’re able to do 
that today and give Royal Assent to that Bill just a few minutes 
ago. And it’s always nice to see friends like them in the 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to 
the guests as well. The concern in health care is the shortage of 
professionals, the front-line workers. And it is such a serious 
state right now. Humboldt should have 12 doctors. They have 
had two move on. One moved to Saskatoon. One has recently 
retired. They had the threat of two resignations, but I think that 
will soon be rectified, and that will not be an issue. But there 
are a number of positions that they need to fill in Humboldt. 
 
Lanigan has been struggling with doctors and bringing new 
doctors to Lanigan, and it is crucial that we have these doctors. 
 

You know, the government can introduce a drug plan for the 
seniors, and I think the most vulnerable of people in our society 
that can’t afford drugs should have help and assistance. I’m not 
questioning that we look at programs for the vulnerable people 
within our society, but if we don’t have doctors to prescribe 
those drugs that are needed, then we have a fundamental 
problem that needs to be addressed first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue in the Humboldt constituency, and 
indeed for the province as a whole, is the funding for education. 
And we’ve just gone through a fairly disruptive forced 
amalgamation of school divisions, and the school divisions are 
struggling to make the new, much larger divisions work within 
the restraints of the budgets that they have. And they’re finding 
it increasingly difficult. A number of these school board 
members are telling me that they’re going to be looking at 
increasing the taxes because they will not be able to continue to 
offer the programming that the schools have been able to offer 
in the past with the budgetary restraints that they’re now under. 
 
We’ve heard earlier in question period the concerns of schools 
that are looking at closure to address the lack of funds that the 
school boards are facing, and it’s not entirely the answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again the NDP have no long-term vision, and in this budget 
there is nothing to address this issue at all. There is nothing to 
give relief to these school boards that are now finalizing their 
budgets and trying to offer the best programming possible to the 
students within their divisions. So that is lacking for the 
Humboldt constituents. 
 
Agriculture is also extremely important to the Humboldt 
constituency. It’s largely a farming constituency. And I wasn’t 
surprised because they’ve done it year after year after year. I do 
not understand why, but again the agriculture budget was cut by 
nearly $68 million. So the question will be to the Agriculture 
minister when we are looking at this budget more closely and 
by department, what is he going to cut? What more can he cut 
from agriculture and the different programming that it needs? 
 
We’ve already devastated crop insurance. The premiums have 
gone up each and every year. The coverage has become less and 
less and less. It is not a particularly effective program by any 
means, and far, far weaker program than our neighbouring 
provinces, either Alberta or Manitoba. If you take your existing 
farm — should any of them have a farm, which they don’t — 
but if they did take their existing farm and run the numbers 
through the Saskatchewan crop insurance program, the Alberta 
crop insurance program, and the Manitoba crop insurance 
program, I think that even they would be quite surprised at how 
ours falls seriously short of any support. 
 
I find it whenever I . . . You know, agriculture absolutely is 
very near and dear to my heart, and I understand and have 
followed it very closely. I find it amazing, Mr. Speaker, in an 
industry that is fairly dependent on partnerships with the federal 
government — and agriculture in this province is indeed 
dependent on partnerships with the federal government — that 
even when we may not agree with all of the federal 
government’s decisions that we would continue to egg on and 
irritate the relationship with the federal government, which I’ve 
seen each and every member on the NDP side of the House try 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

to do. They keep irritating it, and so how are we going to work 
with them? And we need to. 
 
If we want to have a good, comprehensive, encompassing 
agriculture program within this province, we best find a way to 
work with our federal government, whoever they may be at the 
time. And we cannot continue down this road of blaming them 
and screaming outside to the media and to the public 
continuously, constantly blaming the federal government, and 
then turn around and say, but give us a good program. It just 
doesn’t work that way. You’ve got to learn to work with people. 
You may not agree with them at all times, but you have to learn 
to work with people and we have to learn to work with the 
federal government. 
 
And the fact that the federal government isn’t giving us the time 
of day for any of the needs that we have in agriculture is largely 
due to the NDP government. The NDP government has treated 
them with an absolute, total, unacceptable lack of respect. So 
therefore it shows in the way that we are treated in negotiations 
at agriculture programs. It’s unacceptable. It is disrespectful to 
the federal government, whoever they may be, and it’s 
disrespectful to the producers of this province who are very 
dependent on agriculture policy. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask that the people 
engaged in the side debates take them outside the doors and 
allow the member for Humboldt to complete her remarks. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other issue or, 
you know, very important concerns of the Humboldt 
constituency of course is highways. It is a rural constituency, 
and economic development is dependent on the highway system 
that goes throughout the Humboldt constituency. Unfortunately 
— and it shouldn’t be this way, but it is — that the highway 
system has also become a safety concern because some of the 
highways are in such poor shape that now they are also a safety 
concern as well. 
 
I’ve read — I can’t even think of how many — petitions in this 
House on Highway No. 5 and the fact that it is the major 
corridor. It is well travelled, and yet it has no shoulders. A large 
stretch has no shoulders, and so therefore there is no mechanism 
to defensive drive which . . . It is a safety concern. And it’s also 
a very hilly region, so not only can you not pull over if you see 
oncoming traffic, but you may not even see them till the last 
split second because of the hill. So that is a concern. 
 
And obviously from all of the petitions that I’ve read and the 
vast number of communities that have signed that petition 
demonstrates how that is a well-travelled highway. 
 
Highway No. 27 is another highway that I have brought up in 
this Assembly. It’s not a particularly long highway, but it is in 
very, very, very bad shape. It is a kind of a spoke highway — if 
we may call it that — that travels into Saskatoon. And the 
majority of traffic would be going to or from Saskatoon. 
 
There are a number of industries along Highway No. 27 that are 
dependent upon that particular corridor to transport goods and 
services and the products that they manufacture, and yet they’re 

finding it increasingly difficult to do so because the highway is 
literally crumbling around them and is no longer safe to drive. It 
is probably only one stage better than the infamous Highway 
No. 368. 
 
Now Highway No. 368 isn’t in the Humboldt constituency, but 
many of the Humboldt constituents work in the industries along 
Highway No. 368 and live in Humboldt. So they are very 
familiar with the cow trail that Highway No. 368 has become. 
 
So does this budget address those highways and the needs of the 
communities for those highways to be brought to better 
standards so that they are safe, so that they can encourage 
economic development instead of being a huge detriment? And 
I would say not. Although the budget is increased slightly, so 
are the costs involved with highway construction increased and 
that’s increased dramatically. So this budget is not going to 
meet the demands of our highway system. And it’s particularly 
not going to meet them because this government has neglected 
those highways for so many years that it’s going to take an 
enormous amount of dollars to even bring major corridors up to 
the standards which they should be brought to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close . . . And my colleagues have all 
spoken to this and I will briefly because so many of them can 
do so better than I. But there can be no doubt that the NDP 
government has absolutely blown the boom. It’s a deficit 
budget. It’s a deficit budget at a time where the province is 
experiencing a boom. It’s experiencing a boom in spite of the 
NDP government quite frankly. The oil and gas revenues have 
been high. Potash has been high. There are a number of factors 
that have been very economically good for our province. We 
have revenues higher than anticipated, quite frankly, four or 
five years ago. And what has the NDP done with that? Well 
they blew it. They absolutely blew it, is what they did. They 
spent $701 million more than what they took in. 
 
And as I went through all of the things that are important to the 
Humboldt constituency, I see that they haven’t addressed any of 
the things that will be important to the Humboldt constituents. 
They absolutely, simply blew the number. They grew 
government; that was not a problem. They grew government. 
They threw out some real great election vote-buying programs 
for . . . and schemes for the election that we have to question 
whether or not they’ll be sustainable. Definitely a 9 per cent 
increase in spending is not sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m wondering how the Humboldt constituents are going to 
receive deficit financing yet again. The NDP talk about the ’80s 
and how the budget was never balanced and it was deficit 
financing and how that was absolutely horrible and it wasn’t 
acceptable. And yet, that’s exactly what they’re doing 
themselves. They can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. They 
can’t go out into the public and try to fearmonger among the 
citizens of Saskatchewan about deficit funding, when they 
themselves are deficit funding and they’re running a deficit 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like just to read into the record a couple of 
articles because I don’t think they can be read enough and I 
don’t think they could be in the record often enough. And one is 
Murray Mandryk’s article and he said, and I quote: 
 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

The numbers that really matter are the $8.35 billion in 
spending, [and] the $7.87 billion in revenue, the $701 
million 2007-08 deficit once all government operations 
including the Crowns are calculated, and the increase in 
Saskatchewan’s debt to $11.4 billion. 
 
These are the numbers that apply to the real world of 
whether we can afford this budget. 
 
Sadly, the numbers in the brave new world of 
Thomsonomics, where you can increase spending by nine 
per cent when revenues are only increasing by 1.8 per cent 
and still claim a surplus, are a bit scary. In fact, it’s hard to 
see anything particularly good emerge from the numbers 
presented by the New Democratic finance minister. 

 
This was the commentary in The StarPhoenix on March 23, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another article that I think tells it like it is and explains it to the 
public is The StarPhoenix editorial on, again March 23, 2007. 
And the editorial states, and I quote: 
 

Any time a government that expects its revenues to rise by 
less than two per cent goes on a pre-election binge that 
hikes spending by nine per cent, then says its actions are 
sustainable for the long term, it’s time to worry. 
 
Saskatchewan was on the verge of bankruptcy 15 years 
ago but today has reason for optimism that the personal 
. . . [services] and hard-nosed public decisions could lead 
to unprecedented economic success. Thursday’s budget by 
the Lorne Calvert government was a giant step in the 
wrong direction. 

 
The last quote I want to use because I find it interesting that the 
NDP members time and time again, as each one joins the 
debate, defends that this is not a deficit budget. And yet the 
Finance Minister himself, in an interview with Don Newman, 
admitted that it’s a deficit budget. So it’s amazing to me that the 
member from Walsh Acres will sit there and say this isn’t a 
deficit budget. You’ll have the member from Coronation Park 
saying it’s not a deficit budget. Well does he listen to his own 
Finance minister? He definitely . . . They don’t listen to their 
past Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, who said it’s a deficit 
budget. But they don’t even listen to their existing Finance 
minister. And I will quote into the record that interview, the 
exchange between Don Newman of CBC Politics and the NDP 
Finance minister on — I’m not even too sure the date of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But Don Newman said, and I quote: “But you’re having an 
operating deficit and you are having a balance sheet balanced 
budget.” The Finance minister replied, and I quote: “There is a 
balance in the General Revenue Fund although we will, we will 
be drawing down on the savings out of the summary financials, 
but that happens. The moment you take money out of your 
savings account, it is just the way the accounting principles 
work.” I find that in itself quite amazing, Mr. Speaker. If we 
spend more than we earn and we have to dip into our savings, 
I’m concerned — I’m concerned. And I certainly wouldn’t say 
that I balanced my cheque book if I have to draw money out of 
my savings to put money into my chequing account because I 

have written too many cheques. That’s a concern. 
 
Mr. Newman went on to say, “I understand that, but you’re 
going to spend more money in the coming fiscal year than you 
are going to collect.” And the minister responded, “yes that’s 
right.” Yes that’s right. I’ll repeat it again. The host said, “I 
understand that, but you’re going to spend more money in the 
coming fiscal year than you’re going to collect.” And the 
Finance minister said, “yes that’s right.” That says it all. 
 
I will be supporting the amendment. I will not be supporting the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure for me to rise today and to enter into this 
the budget debate. 
 
First of all I want to congratulate the member from Martensville 
for her election to this Assembly. I’m sure that she’ll serve this 
Assembly with the same vigour and dedication that her father 
did before her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all members would agree that it is truly an 
honour for any of us to serve in this constituency and to 
represent the fine people of Saskatchewan. In my case, Mr. 
Speaker, my constituency, Regina Northeast, is made up of the 
areas of the city known, commonly known as Uplands, 
Eastview, and everything north of Dewdney Avenue from 
Winnipeg Street to Prince of Wales. And this includes, of 
course, the Ross Industrial Park, Mr. Speaker, so when there’s 
something happening in Regina it’s usually happening in 
Regina Northeast. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say and all of us would agree that when 
we travel across Saskatchewan, wherever we go, we meet fine, 
fine people — friendly, hospitable people that are always there 
to give you a hand if you need one. And the same for the fine 
people in Regina Northeast, Mr. Speaker. As there are fine 
people in Saskatchewan, there are no finer people than those in 
Regina Northeast. And it’s my pleasure and privilege to 
represent them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of any government should be to make life 
better for the people it represents. Mr. Speaker, the goal of this 
government is to make life better for Saskatchewan people. 
There are many ways of improving the lives of Saskatchewan 
people and this budget has certainly taken giant steps in that 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on another way that we are 
moving forward to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people. 
This last summer I was tasked with the responsibility to carry 
out consultations in northern Saskatchewan in regards to the 
issue of the northern overtime exemption. 
 
The labour standards regulation, commonly referred to as the 
northern overtime exemption, exempted some employers 
operating north of township 62 from adhering to a regulated 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

hour work week or the pay of overtime rates. However it does 
not apply to La Ronge, Creighton, and a 10-kilometre area 
around those two communities or Uranium City. The exemption 
was put into place in 1953 and Saskatchewan is the only 
jurisdiction in Canada to have an exemption to labour standards 
based on a geographic location. 
 
In the last 50 years northern Saskatchewan has opened up and 
developed in many ways including communications and 
transportation infrastructure. Today most northern communities 
have cellphone coverage. Today a semi-load of building 
material can move from Prince Albert to Ile-a-la-Crosse with 
the same ease and speed as it could move from Prince Albert to 
Moose Jaw. 
 
The northern overtime exemption which exists north of 
township 62 provides workers with inferior work condition 
protection. Workers north of 62 have no statutory rights to an 
eight-hour day, no statutory rights to a 40-hour work week, no 
rights to one and a half times overtime compensation, no rights 
to refuse an overtime after 44 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last summer in carrying out my task I asked 
anyone who had an opinion on this issue to please share their 
thoughts with us. They were encouraged to attend one of the 15 
public meetings we held across northern Saskatchewan. They 
were encouraged to contact us either through our website or our 
email address or use a toll-free telephone line that we’d set up 
or simply to mail us their thoughts through regular mail. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I also felt it was important to meet people on their own turf to 
get a feel how they were affected by the 53-year-old regulation 
and to do so right in their own communities. Once again 
Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in Canada to distinguish 
between workers based only on a geographic location. 
 
In order to get a real sense of what was the feeling of the people 
on this exemption by the northern workers, I travelled over 
17,000 kilometres in northern Saskatchewan by vehicle and 
another 5 to 6,000 by air. I held 15 public meetings, 2 of which 
were on First Nations reserves, and numerous private 
conversations in coffee shops, community stores, and 
community centres. We met with support workers at the 
uranium mines as well as those who have businesses in the 
North. I met with town councils, economic development 
authorities. I met with workers and representatives of workers. I 
met with those businesses who are in the South but do business 
in the North. I met both publicly and privately with stakeholders 
of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all of our meetings we looked for answers to 
two main questions and they were: how does the exemptions 
affect you? How would its removal affect you? What impact 
would removing of the exemptions have on a broader northern 
economy? And what alternatives or options should the 
government consider, if any? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard from a lot of people who hold strong 
opinions on this issue. And they expressed them either through 
the public forum by attending one of our meetings or through 
the numerous emails that we received. 

They shared with me some of their personal experiences. And 
one lady told me of her experience of leaving her employment. 
She gave her month’s notice to her employer of her plans to 
leave his employment. When the end of the month came her 
employer refused to pay her her last month’s salary. She did not 
know that there was a method through labour standards that she 
could collect the unpaid wages. 
 
Another story was a single mother working at a lodge along 
Hanson Lake Road. A young lady born in Sandy Bay, by her 
own admission left school at a very young age and entered the 
service industry, first working at a resort at Jan Lake where she 
experienced the same experience of the lady I just mentioned of 
having not received her last month’s pay that she was entitled 
to. 
 
Now working at a resort along the Hanson Lake Road, her 
duties included waitress, cook, operating the till in the 
confectionery, pumping gas, and tending bar in the evening. 
Her day of pay, or paid day, was 12 hours long. She worked 13 
though, Mr. Speaker, because she was expected to cash out and 
clean up afterwards. Her work period was 10 days on and four 
days off, but the particular day that I spoke to her she was on 
her 12th consecutive day on duty because her relief help did not 
show up. 
 
When I asked her if she got overtime, she looked at me with a 
puzzled look on her face and said, what’s overtime? When I 
explained to her that if she was doing the same job in southern 
Saskatchewan she would by law be getting a time-and-a-half 
rate for anything after eight hours, she looked at me with a look 
that I will never forget. And she said to me, if they can get time 
and a half in the South, why can’t we get time and a half in the 
North? 
 
Yet another story from one of our public meetings at 
Ile-a-la-Crosse was from a gentleman who worked for most of 
his life in the construction industry. He told me about working 
on a construction site where the general contractor was from the 
southern part of the province. On this particular site the 
contractor had about 60 workers working on a continuous basis. 
They worked 12-hour days, five days a week for 60 hours a 
week. 
 
The contractor had 15 workers on-site from southern 
Saskatchewan while the other 45 workers were from the North. 
The workers from the South were paid time and a half for their 
duties and their work after 40 hours a week, while the northern 
workers were paid — doing the same job, working on the same 
site — were paid straight time for the 60 hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it became apparent to me, and very quickly so, 
that there was a huge lack of understanding of labour standards 
in the North, the right of employees and the duties of 
employers. The northerners who understand this issue were 
quickly to express frustration, impatience, and anger that such 
treatment of people was being allowed to take place in this day 
and age. Mr. Speaker, charges of systemic racism and human 
rights abuse were commonly raised at our public meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was excited to have had the opportunity to travel 
to northern Saskatchewan and to view the many beautiful sights 
up there. Quite frankly it doesn’t matter, when you’re in 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

northern Saskatchewan in the summertime, where you’re at, 
which direction you look; you basically have a picture postcard 
view. But also you meet so many warm and friendly people, 
and I was gratified to be able to capture their opinions and their 
suggestions and to share them through my recommendations 
and my report to the Premier. I now look forward to see what 
the government’s action will be in the future on this file. 
 
Now with what time I have left, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
make a few comments on the other parts of our budget. This 
budget is all about making life better for Saskatchewan people. 
We’re building on our current successes and ensuring that 
Saskatchewan people benefit in our booming economy. 
 
We’re making this the best place in the country for young 
people to live, work, study, and build their futures. We are 
continuing the growth of our strong economy. We are 
increasing access to health care for Saskatchewan seniors and 
families. For families we are beginning with the basis, focusing 
on a strong start for children at home and at school. We are 
continuing to make post-secondary education and skills training 
more affordable and accessible. 
 
Health care remains the largest investment in our budget. This 
year’s initiatives continue to address the waiting lists through 
increased testing by attracting and retaining health care 
professionals and by training more doctors, nurses, and other 
health care workers. Our NDP government is building a better 
future for our communities and rural residents through 
increased revenue sharing, property tax relief, and a large 
capital budget in the history to improve highways, roads, 
schools, hospitals, and other infrastructure. 
 
Some of the other highlights of our budget to make 
Saskatchewan a better place to live is creating a five-year, 
$10,000 graduate tax credit for our young people graduating; 
freezing university tuition fees for the third consecutive year; 
implementing year two of the business tax cuts, enabling 
businesses to expand and create opportunities for young people; 
providing more than $107 million in education property relief 
for Saskatchewan residents; maintaining the PST [provincial 
sales tax] rate at 5 per cent, the lowest it’s been in 20 years, and 
the lowest provincial sales tax in the country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, something that I am very proud of is introducing a 
better, more affordable seniors’ drug plan. For those people 
who have worked, sacrificed, and built this great province, we 
should be able to provide them that little bit of relief in their 
golden years. 
 
Saskatchewan is currently experiencing unprecedented 
economic success. This is no accident. When we took office we 
faced a $14 billion debt. But with hard work, smart investment, 
and solid management, we fixed the fiscal crisis and we have 
since received 16 credit upgrades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just touched on a few of the points that the 
fine people of Regina Northeast have brought to my attention 
and have requested that I will be voting for the budget on their 
behalf. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 

member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege for me to join the debate today on this 2007 . . . well 
we’ll call it a budget. I think that there are other terms that are 
being bandied about as it refers to this particular financial 
document, some of which are less flattering than a budget. But 
it’s a privilege for me to enter the debate today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills for 
whom I have a great affinity. 
 
And I really want to address most of my comments this 
afternoon to the failure of this budget as it relates to the people 
of Cypress Hills. I know there’ll be arguments made on the 
government side that this budget addresses the needs of people 
in various age groups and in various positions regarding 
education, and it might help this person or that person, and it 
might be good for this group or that group. 
 
But in my particular case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m really only 
concerned at this point for how this budget will or will not 
affect the people of Cypress Hills. They’re the individuals who 
expressed enough faith in me to represent them during the last 
election and I need to speak on their behalf. And in doing so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could draw no conclusion after having 
looked at this entire document than to say that this is an 
abysmal failure on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills. 
 
This budget does not address the core needs of the people of 
Cypress Hills in three specific areas. And I’ll address them at 
greater length, but they are in terms of agriculture; in terms of 
education, particularly K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education; and in terms of highways even. Although this budget 
does project a $5 billion expenditure in Highways and 
Transportation over the next 10 years, the needs of the 
southwest area are so specific and extensive that I don’t think 
the amount of spending attributed to highways for this year, in 
this particular document, will come close to addressing the 
needs of the Southwest in any specific way. 
 
So those are three areas which I want to look at this afternoon, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are other, more general and 
broader-based programs that I think I would like to make 
comment on as part of today’s speech with regard to this 
spending document. 
 
When I looked at the agricultural estimates in the minister’s 
budget documents I see that, while they had three different 
columns here, there was an estimate of expenditure for 2006. 
There were the actual 2006 spent items in another column, and 
then an estimate for 2007. 
 
And while I don’t have the page open right now to where it is in 
this particular document, I made a couple of handwritten notes 
here and we’re looking at 2006 estimate figures of 
approximately $265 million. And when the final tally for 2006 
came in, the figure jumped to $369 million. But now we have 
an estimate going forward for the 2007 fiscal year of just over 
$301 million. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, represents a drop or a retrenchment 
of spending in Agriculture of some $68 million. And when that 
was brought to the minister’s attention, he said that that’s not a 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

decline, that that $68 million shortfall from what was actually 
spent last year to what is budgeted for this year in Agriculture is 
not a shortfall, is not a decline in spending. 
 
Now I don’t know anybody in any business or anybody’s 
personal financial affairs who would say that $68 million less 
this year compared to last year isn’t a decline. I think the 
minister was trying to make the point that it wasn’t an actual 
decline from what was budgeted a year ago. But the point of the 
matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what was spent last year is 
the benchmark by which this year’s expenditures will be 
gauged. And this year’s expenditures are down by $68 million. 
 
Now I think the minister also said that we should wait to see 
because his government, his department might spend 
considerably more in terms of agricultural programming in the 
next 12 months. Well if that’s the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
guess the question becomes: what’s the purpose of a budget? Is 
a budget not intended to lay out the spending plans of a 
government over a 12-month period with some predictability, 
with some accuracy? That I think would be the understanding 
of the average person in this province. I think most people have 
an expectation of a budget; that if you create a budget, it’s a 
plan for spending over a certain period of time and people can 
with some predictability and expectation see that money spent. 
 
But the minister is saying that it’s not a shortfall. We’re $68 
million less than we were last year in terms of agricultural 
spending. But it might not be a shortfall because the minister 
and his government might spend more money in Agriculture in 
the days and months to come. 
 
Well if that is the case then this is a wasted exercise. What are 
we debating here? If the minister has that kind of flexibility in 
agriculture with the estimates and the spending opportunities in 
the next 12 months, what’s to prevent the Minister of Health 
from doubling the health budget? What’s preventing any 
government minister from spending considerably more than is 
in the estimates? 
 
[15:15] 
 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if we can’t 
trust with some certainty and reliability the figures that have 
been put forward in this budget document this time around, we 
have nothing to gauge the full intentions and the full spending 
opportunities and priorities of the government. And I thought 
that’s what a budget was supposed to do. 
 
But we have a situation here in agriculture where there’s less 
money going in this year than was spent last year, and there 
may or may not be more money spent going forward. That is 
not very reassuring for the people of the province. And it’s 
certainly not very reassuring for the people of my constituency 
because we don’t know what’s going to happen. But we do 
know as a result of what is in the budget so far that the worst 
affected area for drought — which comprises large parts of my 
constituency and the constituency of Wood River just to the 
east of us — there is no money in this budget to help those 
producers. Not a nickel was set aside to help those producers in 
this time of disaster. 
 
We find it patently unfair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

producers of southwest Saskatchewan can suffer the kinds of 
losses they have because of two years of drought, and not, and 
not get any response from this government, not get any 
assistance from this government. They can hardly get their 
attention on the topic. And producers in the northeast part of the 
province, when they were flooded out last year, were rewarded 
with a support package, a disaster package of $25 an acre cost 
shared on a 60/40 split with the federal government. 
 
And I know the argument about crop insurance being available 
to the producers of the Southwest. But here’s a pragmatic and 
business-based decision for producers in the Southwest as it 
relates to that topic. What producer — when margins are tight, 
when cash flow is minimal — what producer is going to buy 
crop insurance to protect themself against drought when the 
cost of the insurance and the protection offered by the crop 
insurance program won’t even address the very bare minimum 
required by that producer? 
 
I mean, it wouldn’t make good business sense to buy insurance 
that does not provide coverage. And that is what crop insurance, 
that’s the reality for producers in the Southwest when it comes 
to crop insurance right now. So to say that they have the 
privilege of being protected by crop insurance when in fact it 
doesn’t work is really a moot argument. And I don’t think it’s 
an appropriate argument to be made. 
 
Now I understand there’s some improvements being made to 
crop insurance. I’m not sure that they will benefit the producers 
of the Southwest. I don’t know that the impact will be 
significant in terms of drought. But nevertheless to expect the 
producers of the Southwest to carry crop insurance that will not 
meet their basic needs is just foolishness. And the producers are 
smart enough to realize that and have avoided crop insurance 
for that very reason. If you have virtually no money now, 
you’re not going to spend what little you have buying insurance 
coverage that does not assist and protect your operation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m finding that this particular 
financial document put forward by the Minister of Finance and 
the Minister of Agriculture as it relates to Ag expenditures for 
the next year is particularly disappointing to the producers of 
southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the largest 
expenditures in the Department of Agriculture’s budget this 
year is the full funding of CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization]. And while that accounts for a large portion of the 
budgeted expenditures, as you probably are aware if you’ve had 
any contact with rural producers, CAIS is probably the most 
vilified farm program that’s ever been produced. It has been an 
absolute disaster for most producers. They are very 
disappointed in it. There’s been a huge lobby of the provincial 
and federal governments to either get rid of CAIS or modify it 
so significantly that it would be unrecognizable. But at this 
point it is a complete and total failure for the vast majority of 
producers. 
 
And it’s based on declining revenues. That’s the way the 
program has been designed. And if you’re trying to stabilize a 
declining revenue, the only place you can stabilize it is at a 
lower level yet. It’s like a geotechnical engineer that’s trying to 
stabilize a slide on the side of a cliff. The only place you can 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

stabilize that slide is at this point down here where you might 
be able to offset the movement. And CAIS, as a farm support 
program, has been a failure because it hasn’t stabilized incomes 
for farmers. It’s moved them even lower, to a lower level than 
they were experiencing as a result of falling commodity prices. 
 
And so while I think, you know, the government has an 
obligation to participate in this program, I think it has to come 
with the realization that it is a failed program, and that the 
sooner this program can be changed to address the realities of 
farmers and the farm community, the better off we’ll all be. 
 
I want to move rather quickly to education. We had the galleries 
half filled today with individuals, many of whom came from the 
constituency of Cypress Hills. They were here from 
communities right on the Alberta border, the town of 
Richmound. The town of Climax, close to the American border, 
was represented here. Tompkins was represented here. I think 
many other communities just on the edge of Cypress Hills 
whose schools are under threat of closure because of the 
ongoing review were represented here. 
 
And their attendance here on a day that has been particularly 
troublesome for travel, where snow and icy roads and bad 
conditions would have prevented most people from making the 
trip of 4 and 500 kilometres to this legislature — they came. 
That would say to me that the issue for them is very, very 
critical. And they came by bus. They came by car. They teamed 
up together and got in vans. They made the trek here to Regina 
to plead their case. They held a rally on the front steps of the 
legislature over the noon hour today to make the point that this 
government has failed to fund rural education at a standard 
necessary for their schools to be maintained. 
 
The legislation says that school boards ultimately are 
responsible to make the decision as to whether or not a school 
continues to operate. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that those school division boards are only able to make 
that decision in an appropriate manner based on the level of 
funding they get. And the funding for rural schools has been 
eroded by this government. 
 
And I know that as the squeeze happens in these large, 
amalgamated, rural school divisions, the boards are obligated to 
try and balance their budgets. But it’s impossible to do it based 
on the kind of funding they get for their divisions. There are 
some idiosyncrasies in the foundation operating grant that 
impact rural school divisions, especially large ones like the one 
in the extreme Southwest, that just simply do not take the 
realities of geography and distance into consideration. 
 
And I think the other part of this whole thing that’s very unfair 
is the uniqueness of the formula which sees the provincial 
government and the Department of Learning funding almost 
100 per cent of busing costs but not funding fully the school 
program delivery costs in those very schools. 
 
So there’s naturally a bias built into the system, built into the 
foundation operating grant, that would see it preferable on the 
part of school boards to close schools and transport students 
much greater distances than to keep the school open in any 
given community. That has to be addressed. That type of 
inequity and idiosyncrasy has to be addressed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, so that the smaller communities don’t have to feel that 
they are under threat and a threat perpetrated on them by the 
Department of Learning and by this particular minister’s budget 
this year. I think the small of amount of money that’s going into 
offsetting property taxes in rural Saskatchewan is a pittance 
compared to the economic and social impact that school 
closures throughout rural Saskatchewan will have. 
 
And I don’t think that anybody who gets that money would say 
that it is money well spent if it’s going to cost them their 
school. I think the trade-off is more than most communities 
want to bear. And if you ask them I think that they’d be happy 
to tell you exactly what they’re prepared to accept in terms of 
school taxation if they got the assurance their school would 
remain open. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in most of the schools that are being 
considered for closure right now, the sad reality is they’ve been 
dealt a double whammy by this government. First of all they’ve 
had amalgamation forced on them and their taxes have gone up. 
 
For instance in the school division of Chinook, Chinook School 
Division, the average mill rate, the average mill rate — thanks 
to this minister who’s beaking from his chair right now — the 
mill rate went from 18 as an average to 21.3; 21.3 mills in the 
Chinook School Division. I’d like to know what the mill rate is 
in the community that he represents. What is the mill rate in 
Regina? How much does the average taxpayer in Regina 
contribute in terms of mill rate to schools? And in the Chinook 
School Division it’s at least 3 mills higher. 
 
Now while you’ve got taxes going up, the people are insulted, 
adding insult to injury by the fact that their schools are being 
closed, their schools are under threat. And to make matters even 
worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to see as a result of 
this particular scenario schools that are closed and consolidated 
in another community without any assurance that the 
programming will be better. 
 
In fact we’ve got a situation right now where the community of 
Climax, where the community of Climax is being threatened 
with closure. The school division is looking at its programming 
and making a decision as to what needs to happen in that 
community. If the people of that community see their kids go to 
the community of Frontier, which is not that far down the road, 
it won’t be a bad thing from the standpoint of those two 
communities. They get together and do a lot of things between 
them on a variety of occasions for all types of reasons. 
 
But the real disappointment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
they’ve been told by the school division that when the kids go 
to Frontier, their programming will not likely improve. There 
will be no additional teachers hired. There will be a few extra 
kids in each class but their programming will not improve. So 
not only have their taxes gone up, not only will they have lost 
their school, but the new school they go to will not produce 
better programming or better results educationally for those 
students. 
 
Now how much more do you expect the people of rural 
Saskatchewan to take? And if there’s no assurance that things 
will get better by this process, why are we undergoing this 
process? It really requires a much better rationale than we’ve 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

got from this government. 
 
I want to talk about highways a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Here we’ve got a $5 billion budget over 10 years. You know, 
I’m reminded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the last big, grand plan 
for transportation we got from this government. It was under the 
Romanow administration and — I don’t recall — maybe it was 
the member from Meadow Lake who was the minister at that 
time. I believe so. 
 
We had the promise of 2.5 . . . was it $2.5 billion expenditure 
over four years? It was something of that nature. Maybe 5. Well 
you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think we ever got to the 
full funding. We never did see that announcement realized in its 
ultimate expenditure. In fact the very first two years of the 
long-term plan, the expenditures for Highways and 
Transportation were significantly less than the $250 million 
average that had been promised at that time. 
 
And I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re going to see 
that again even though this is a grandiose plan and it has a lot of 
money attached to it — $5 billion over 10 years. They might as 
well have said $10 billion over 20 years or $20 billion over 40 
years. The fact is that it’s almost impossible to plan 
expenditures in a 10-year time frame. And even though it looks 
pretty good on paper right now, we have yet to see, we have yet 
to see whether or not the $500 million will be spent this year 
and, if so, where and on what projects. 
 
And frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, part of the problem with this 
whole plan is that there are so few specifics and there’s no clear 
indication from this minister or this government how that $500 
million is going to be spent. I would postulate this afternoon 
that most of the increase will actually go to inflationary costs — 
increased costs for oil, increased costs for tar, increased costs 
for labour — so that for $500 million expenditures on 
Highways and Transportation this year will be a very little 
difference than $400 million might have been last year or the 
year before. 
 
So while this is a grand scheme and while it sounds great and 
glorious, there’s no evidence, there’s no clear outline of 
whether or not and how this particular budget will benefit rural 
Saskatchewan or the Saskatchewan infrastructure plan as a 
whole. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I think the other thing that I’m troubled by, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the concept of these rural economic corridors where 
we’re going to take a lot of the heavy traffic off of the TMS 
[thin membrane surface] roads and put them on gravel roads. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe you’ve probably ever 
been a truck driver before. I don’t think anybody in the crowd 
on your side has every driven a truck before. But if you take a 
40-tonne Super-B and put it on a gravel road, things might go 
okay until it rains. And when it rains a gravel road, no matter 
how well it’s built, is impassable, especially with a fully loaded 
transport truck — a Super-B, whether it’s a 3-axle trailer, 
whatever the capacity of the unit might be. When it rains, rural 
gravel roads are impassable by big trucks. 
 

So that would suggest to me that these economic corridors will 
come to a complete standstill. Is that what the government 
wants? Is that what the Minister of Transportation wants? Does 
he want to see the rural economy put on hold each and every 
time it rains? I mean if that’s the best plan we can come up 
with, we’re in serious need of better ideas. And I think this is a 
complete and utter hoax being perpetrated on rural 
Saskatchewan. We need good quality roads, and we especially 
need them in the areas that are generating so much wealth for 
this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s view of highways and transportation 
is that roads need to be built on the basis of the best economic 
return and there are roads in the southwest part of the province 
that are returning huge dollars to this government’s coffers. 
 
The Swift Current area of Industry and Resources — they have 
an office out there — they keep tabs on how much money is 
generated by royalties in that southwest district. In 2005 
southwest Saskatchewan produced about $265 million in 
royalties — just the southwest part for royalties alone. That area 
would include up to the South Saskatchewan River, down 
probably Highway No. 4, maybe a little east of Swift Current, 
to the Montana border, out to the Alberta border. Just a little 
area larger than the Cypress Hills constituency — $265 million 
in royalties in one year alone. 
 
That didn’t include the value of lease sales or any of the other 
attendant costs and benefits that accrue to the provincial 
government as a result of the development of the oil and gas 
industry. And so if there’s any area that you could justify the 
expenditure of significant money for infrastructure for 
highways and good quality roads, it’s in southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when the minister was asked about his grand plan by one 
of the local media outlets in the Southwest, he identified 
Highway 13, Highway 21, and Highway 32 as his three 
priorities there. I think, well I hope he’s making that statement 
conscientiously and deliberately. If he is I’ll be the first to 
congratulate him, but I really have, I have some question as to 
whether or not, whether or not that’s going to be a reality 
because Highway 13 is not really the highway of most 
economic importance down there. Highway 13 between the 
community of Cadillac and the community of Shaunavon does 
not serve a significant economic purpose. So if he’s going to 
spend money there, that would be probably a lower-priority 
road. 
 
Highway 21? Well it depends where he’s talking about 
spending it. But they reverted most of Highway 21 to gravel 
just last year. I don’t think he’s going to be rebuilding that 
particular road. Highway 32? There’s a solid case to be made 
for rebuilding that entire length of that road, about 120 
kilometres from Swift Current to Leader. 
 
And if the minister can, as part of his plan, show me where over 
the next four years they will rebuild that entire highway to a 
primary weight stretch, I will be the first to say thank you. And 
we’ll acknowledge that in our legislature reports and so forth. 
But I don’t for a minute think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 
$500 million is going to reach the constituency of Cypress 
Hills. And I don’t think the people of Cypress Hills believe that 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

either. 
 
If you recall a week or so ago, some of the people from Leader 
renamed Highway 32. I don’t think I’ll raise that issue in detail 
here today, but there was a group of people in the community of 
Leader who had a big sign put up. They attached it to a trailer, 
parked it beside the road. In fact a group of four people set a 
card table up in the middle of Highway 32 and started playing 
cards because they felt that if the government thought there was 
gambling potential in Leader, they’d probably get a road faster 
than they’ll get under the circumstances of the economy that 
prevail there right now. 
 
 Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to address just a couple of other 
things. I’m thinking that I’m going to run out of time before I 
get a chance to develop this theme, but I notice that yesterday 
the Minister of Justice was saying there were some things he 
couldn’t understand about the official opposition’s position on 
some of the budget proposals. And of course the one that he 
was most concerned about I guess was the stance we’ve taken 
on the program for graduating students as they leave school and 
as they make their decision as to where they will settle down 
and undertake or take up employment, and undertake a search 
for a career. 
 
And the existing program for the government is basically a 
$10,000 income deferment. And it allows you to put away or 
earn up to $20,000 a year for five years and pay no income tax 
on it. And the Minister of Justice was saying that we had 
panned that. Well I don’t know that we have panned it. I don’t 
think it’s as good an idea as there might have been constructed 
for graduating students. 
 
And he also made the assertion that we were trying to create a 
wedge between university grads and vocational grads and 
people in the apprenticeship program. That’s simply not true. 
You know, if you go to any of those programs, you accrue some 
kind of tuition cost and there are other ways of addressing it. 
 
The reason why we weren’t as convinced as to the success of 
this program as what might have been developed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is we talked to students. We went and talked to 
students one-on-one. We talked to student leadership at a 
couple of the universities and college campuses. And when we 
asked them what was important, they told us that they wanted 
student tuition relief. That was first and foremost: give us some 
relief on the cost of tuition. And so it was only, I think, practical 
and appropriate that we would try and work on a plan that 
would address that issue. This will help to some extent, but it 
only helps to the extent of $1,100 a year. 
 
Now I don’t know too many young people; when they graduate 
from university with a 20, 30, $40,000 debt or greater, that are 
going to make their career decision based on $1,100 net in their 
pocket. You know, they’re looking for the best opportunities, 
the best places to develop careers, the most significant 
opportunities. They are interested in seeing their careers 
develop and having the opportunity to pay off their student loan 
and the most part . . . their student loan, the biggest part of their 
student loan is related to tuition costs. And so if you can tailor a 
program that would address tuition, I think students by and 
large would find that more appropriate than the particular 
program the government has introduced. 

I wouldn’t say this is a complete loss, but it’s just not as 
specific or directed as it might have been. And I think the 
difference between what we’re proposing and what the 
government has in this budget is that they saw this as something 
that they could create and do pretty easily. But we went and 
talked to students and got their first-hand testimony as to what 
they felt was most beneficial. 
 
The other thing I want to talk about is sustainability. We’ve 
made the argument that this budget isn’t sustainable, and I think 
that it’s an argument that’s picking up momentum. The 
anecdotal evidence is that the majority of commentators, both in 
the electronic media and the printed media, have looked at this 
budget and they’ve said it’s not sustainable. I think that . . . Oh 
there’s been a few bankers who thought it might be, but you 
know, bankers have a vested interest in governments running 
debt because that’s how they make their money. If there was no 
debt . . . Oh Janice MacKinnon I forgot about. She was the 
other one who said it was unsustainable. You know I think that 
that’s a pretty telling bit of testimony from somebody who 
really knows what sustainability means when it comes to 
budgeting on behalf of this provincial government. The lack of 
sustainability is pretty clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in the big 
figures, the big picture. 
 
The budget I’m told has increases in spending amounting to 9 
per cent — 9 per cent. What was it last year? What was the 
increase in spending last year, Ron? The increase of 9 per cent 
is huge. The increase in revenues is less than 2 per cent — 1.8, I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if you look at that 7 per cent gap and ask yourself as a 
layman, as somebody who’s balancing their own chequing 
account, their own monthly expense versus income picture, how 
long can you sustain 9 per cent increase in spending when your 
revenues are only going up by less than 2 per cent? 
 
And to make this point more specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that is exacerbated by the fact that the minister will not release 
his predictions and his forecasts for the next several years. If he 
would do that so we could look at that series of projections, it 
might be easier for him to make the argument. But as it stands, 
a 9 per cent increase in expenditures will not be sustained by a 
less than 2 per cent growth in revenue. 
 
And so we haven’t even got to some of the big spending items 
in this budget that will undermine the sustainability of this 
particular document. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I had much more to contribute 
to this debate, others want to take part of the time that’s left this 
afternoon and so I will be supporting the amendment to the 
budget. And I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cumberland and the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Tansi eglanete. Good afternoon. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is a good day in a province that has many 
good days. But before I go to talk about the government motion 
in support of the budget, I want to pay tribute to my father who 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

is celebrating his 83rd birthday today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — It is a good day for sure, and like my 
niece Gina often says, we are not lucky; we are blessed. It was 
through the hard work of so many respected leaders and elders 
like my father who paved the way for us in the North. They 
worked so hard to give a voice to northern people and to ensure 
we have services that so many often take for granted today. 
 
I also want to pay tribute to those elders who are no longer with 
us: Nap Johnson, Jim Carriere, Lawrence Yew, Vital Morin, 
Pierre Carriere, Allan Bird, Louis Morin, just to name a few. 
 
I honour those still with us today like my father, Oscar Beatty, 
Janet Feitz, Frank Mirasty, Mary Ann Morin, Elizabeth Charles, 
John Morin, Angus Merasty, Catherine Charles, Leonard Ray, 
Henry Roberts, and the list goes on. Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
men and women live their lives with respect and integrity, with 
love and kindness and in true humility. As is the ways of our 
ancestors, not once did these men and women ask for 
recognition. They emerged as elders because of the lives they 
led. I thank and honour them today. 
 
I would also like to extend a special greeting to all my 
constituents, especially those in Sandy Bay who have been 
going through some tough times but who are determined to 
work together in moving forward. 
 
I especially want to acknowledge the leadership of Mayor Ina 
Fietz-Ray and her council and PBCN [Peter Ballantyne Cree 
Nation] councillors, Roland Natewayes and David Caribou and 
especially to the Sandy Bay youth council. 
 
[15:45] 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the budget last week was full of good 
news for the North. It responds to what northerners want and 
need. They want to live in safe, healthy communities. They 
want to make a good living to make the North an even better 
place to work and raise a family. They want to have a 
prosperous future. Madam Deputy Speaker, northerners not 
only want a good life now; they want a better life for their 
children and grandchildren, just as our elders planned for us. 
And that was what our budget is about. 
 
This is good news for everyone: drug coverage for seniors; 
consultation dollars for First Nations and Métis communities; 
shorter medical waiting lists; money for recreation and cultural 
facilities; tax cuts; more funding than ever for municipalities; 
funding for community access roads on- and off-reserve; and, 
last but not least, tax breaks to convince young people to stay 
and work in Saskatchewan.  
 
And let me tell you it is so important to work with our young 
people, nowhere more crucial than with First Nations and Métis 
youth. They will not only be our workers; they will be our 
leaders. They deserve to be recognized and we do that. We do it 
with a graduate tax exemption which means a tax break up to 
100,000 of income over five years. We do it with a third 

consecutive freeze on university tuition fees, and we do it by 
funding for 31,000 training spaces in Saskatchewan. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, northern Saskatchewan in particular has a very 
high number of young people. 
 
I would like to note for the Assembly some of the budget 
highlights for the people of the North. Residents of the North 
are often at a disadvantage when it comes to education, jobs, 
and even basic infrastructure and services, so this NDP 
government is working hard to close that gap. We could do so 
much more if the federal government would join us in investing 
in our First Nations youth and committing to infrastructure 
costs, housing, roads, and education. 
 
This year we are putting in $23.1 million for the northern Roads 
to Prosperity program. This is also called the northern economic 
infrastructure strategy. It will improve access to communities 
and reduce the transportation costs of goods and groceries. 
Some fly-in communities pay as much as $4 for a single litre of 
milk. A new road will change that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we will also improve key economic 
corridors for northern businesses, which are essential in a time 
of very high activity in mineral exploration. These roads will 
open up job opportunities for northerners and provide better 
services for northern communities. Some of these opportunities 
will be in construction itself during our five-year plan. With 
new roads to Wollaston, Stony Rapids, and Fond-du-Lac, 
northerners will have a better quality of life. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, while we’re talking about quality 
of life, this budget also devotes $3.7 million to new water and 
sewer projects in the North. Since 2001 this government has 
now allocated approximately $38 million towards such projects 
and we’re going to keep on going. Northern municipalities, like 
those in the South, will benefit from this budget. In the North 
unconditional revenue sharing will increase to $10.2 million, a 
30 per cent increase to allow towns and villages to build 
services according to their own priorities. 
 
What’s more, what’s more, construction will start this year on a 
natural gas pipeline from Montreal Lake up to Weyakwin and 
La Ronge. This is great news for homeowners in those areas, 
and it’s great news for entrepreneurs and industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — It’s the best news for those who work so 
hard to make this possible, and a special thank you goes out to 
the regional natural gas committee and the La Ronge Indian 
Band. Let’s not forget that this project was supported by a 
business plan which demonstrates not only cost savings for 
northern residents but also the potential for new businesses to 
start up. Madam Deputy Speaker, this project and many others 
is about promoting opportunities for jobs and businesses. 
 
This is also the mandate of my department, employment and 
business opportunities for the North, and this budget maintains 
Northern Affairs’ core programs. We support traditional 
activities such as commercial fishing which provides seasonal 
jobs for more than 600 people, something which has sustained 
northern families for many years, including mine. We support 
entrepreneurs with loans, grants, business counselling, and links 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

to other businesses. And we support economic development 
corporations in the North, building an economy that responds to 
local hopes and local needs. Northerners want to take advantage 
of the opportunities in our growing economy and our 
department is there to help. We are partners in the development 
of the North, and by working together towards a common goal, 
we will see northerners realize their dreams. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are many other ways this 
budget supports the North. There are new Justice initiatives and 
staff, funding emergency preparedness training for First 
Nations, establishing a labour standards office in La Ronge, 
directing money for northern recreation facilities, and 
continuing to invest in forest fire protection. And our 
government in this budget has increased base funding for the 
three northern health districts and to northern school divisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — All of this speaks to our desire for all 
Saskatchewan people including those in the North to live in a 
nourishing, secure environment. Saskatchewan is where people 
want to raise their families. It is a place where young people 
want to stay and our budget supports them. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the North has a growing young 
population. More than 40 per cent of northern residents are 
under the age of 20. Many of these are First Nations and Métis 
youth. They face the greatest challenges, but they also present 
the greatest opportunity. We are committed to providing our 
northern youth with training so that they can fulfill our growing 
labour needs in Saskatchewan, whether they live on- or 
off-reserve, so they too can enjoy a good quality of life. 
 
The North does not have a labour shortage, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It has a skills shortage. That is why we continue to 
invest more money in northern training programs. We will fund 
the expansion of the bachelor of northern studies program, 
building on our $4.5 million investment as part of the labour 
market strategy. We will back a northern construction careers 
project to assist up to 40 northerners. We will provide $2.3 
million for training for the northern health access program. And 
we will provide 2.4 million for northern skills training to 
support 600 existing training opportunities. 
 
We are committed to regional training programs that bring 
education closer to the students who need it. And as our labour 
market changes, we will help our young people prepare for their 
futures right here at home. Again we would ask members 
opposite to urge the federal government to invest in First 
Nations youth, especially in post-secondary education. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the North has been a leader in many 
ways. We have long believed in an economy that is not only 
prosperous but green and sustainable. Indeed this is what our 
elders have always said, that we must protect and manage our 
resources and our lands for future generations. We have long 
believed that the path of success is through working and sharing 
with others, partnering to make the most of what we have for 
the benefit of all. This is how we have survived for generations, 
and we believe as do all Saskatchewan people in making things 
better for the next generation. 
 

This NDP government has brought forward a balanced budget 
that delivers for our families and pays down our debt. It delivers 
for our young people and our elders. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
this budget is based on the belief that Saskatchewan is the best 
place to live and raise a family in Canada. I am proud to be 
from Saskatchewan. I am especially proud to be from our 
beautiful North. And I am proud to support this budget, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And I will be opposing the amendment. Thank 
you. Tiniki. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to talk today about the 2007 budget. 
 
Madam Speaker, before you took your position in the Chair this 
afternoon, I noticed the member for Greystone was in the Chair 
which would obviously be very appropriate except I had a 
major déjà vu when he took his place in the Chair as the 
Speaker this afternoon. Because it was just about a year ago 
when I responded to the provincial budget of ’06 that that 
particular member was in the Chair, and it didn’t work out that 
well for me that particular afternoon. Madam Speaker, I can 
assure you that there will be a different result here this 
afternoon. 
 
The member from Sutherland, it happened that he was speaking 
just prior to me on that particular day a year ago, and I noticed 
this year that he’s speaking right after me. So, Madam Speaker, 
I think I’m pretty safe today as far as I know. Perhaps it’ll be 
his turn today. 
 
But I wanted to say a few remarks about the budget, the ’07 
budget. And, Madam Speaker, you know, this will be my fourth 
budget in this particular legislature, the provincial legislature of 
Saskatchewan. It’s most likely going to be my last provincial 
budget in this legislature. And I’ve also seen seven in the 
federal House of Commons. So in all told, I’ve seen 11 budgets 
from governments, either the federal Liberals or this New 
Democrat Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t want this to become so much a partisan debate 
today or what I want to talk about. It’s more a symptom of what 
I see as the weakness in politics, in government in this country 
more so. I think this particular budget, the ’07 budget, is simply 
a product, a by-product of what I see as what is wrong with 
politics in Canada today under the system that we live in. 
 
Far too often, Madam Speaker, from my perspective — and I’m 
speaking, you know, for myself here obviously today — far too 
often many things are done only for the sake of politics and that 
whether it be at this level or the municipal level or the federal 
level. And then every government of any level is attempting 
rather than to do things that are good for the people that they 
represent or good for the jurisdiction that they represent, they 
must be good for themselves first. 
 
And I think that’s where the whole system starts to fumble or 
fall apart, Madam Speaker, is that — and I guess I always say it 
this way — that the business of politics would be a very 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

honourable business if politics didn’t get involved, which 
obviously doesn’t happen very often. Far too often governments 
will bring down budgets for their own use, for their own 
attempts to get back in power or to win an election or to win the 
support of some particular group. And that’s where I see our 
system in general as being weak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look back at examples throughout the years of 
different governments. And I think back to my days in Ottawa, 
and I think back to a federal government who campaigned hard 
on a promise of removing and getting rid of the GST [goods 
and services tax]. Jean Chrétien in his pre-’93 election said that 
we are going to kill, abolish, remove the GST, and he didn’t do 
it. And when in fact when he was called upon to do it by the 
opposition parties of the day, he said he never made that 
promise, Madam Speaker. He wouldn’t admit to have ever 
making that promise. 
 
Save for what I believe to be the credibility of a couple of their 
MPs [Member of Parliament] . . . and I give these couple of 
people a great deal of credit, Madam Speaker, for having the 
willpower, the intestinal fortitude, to stand up, Madam Speaker, 
and to accept the words that they had made and the promises 
they had made. John Nunziata for example refused to sit in 
Liberal caucus because he had felt that his government had 
broken a promise on a federal election campaign. Sheila Copps 
— for what anybody may think of her — had the intestinal 
fortitude to step down and run in a by-election when she could 
not agree with her government saying that they never, ever 
promised to get rid of the GST. 
 
I look at the federal budget here in Canada — and somebody 
from the government side just mentioned it a couple minutes 
ago — certainly there is a perception that the Harper 
government did not fully live up to their election promise on 
equalization.  
 
What could be so easy, Madam Speaker, for this government or 
any other government would be just to have the willpower to 
stand up and say, you know what, we made a mistake. We 
promised this. We couldn’t deliver on it. Here’s why we 
couldn’t promise. Here’s why we couldn’t deliver on it, and go 
on. And I think I believe, I believe the people of Saskatchewan 
and of Canada would appreciate that, and they would actually 
respect and reward any government that would be able to stand 
up and say and do that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And that brings me obviously to this budget. And more 
specifically about this budget, when I look at what’s in it, I find 
it passing strange, Madam Speaker. I cannot get my mind 
wrapped around the fact that the government, the socialist 
government of today in Saskatchewan, could spend so much 
money and yet affect so many people, real people’s lives. And, 
Madam Speaker, that’s the thing that I can’t understand. 
 
We’ve got a plus 9 per cent increase in spending. We’re going 
to run about a $700 million deficit, and yet we have not . . . I 
don’t see any areas where anybody has been truly really 
affected. Yes, I know that two or three of the biggest issues that 
were in the budget were things like the cap on seniors’ 
prescriptions of $15 but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Which 

my colleague says is not sustainable. And many people would 
argue that — you know, smarter economic people than myself 
— would argue that that kind of a plan, that kind of a promise is 
not sustainable for the long term. 
 
The other sort of big spending item was an attempt to attract 
and keep students who have recently graduated from 
post-secondary education home in Saskatchewan by way of a 
tax credit. And that’s all well and good, Madam Speaker. I have 
a son who is 24 and recently graduated from the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan]. I’m not sure he’ll qualify or not. 
But having said that, those are good, reasonable, positive steps. 
 
But I’m not sure that that is going to be enough to turn this 
province around as it relates to keeping our young people home 
or bringing young people back who have moved to other 
jurisdictions in search of jobs or futures or careers where 
they’ve already made that move. And frankly for $1,100 net in 
their tax I don’t see them coming back, Madam Speaker. And 
once we lose them, once they go to another jurisdiction and 
raise a family and settle down and make friends and get 
involved in new communities, it’s very difficult to bring them 
back. 
 
So my point being though, Madam Speaker, is that the two 
major spending items from this year’s budget don’t really seem 
to have had what the impact on the province that I think 
spending that much money should’ve had. I guess in my mind, 
in my mind I’m thinking there are other ways that, you know, 
that things could’ve, this money could’ve been spent, could’ve 
been allocated, that might’ve been far more effective, that 
might’ve reached more people. 
 
Even if you look at . . . If you tear away all the smoke and 
mirrors that’s involved with presenting a budget — all the 
trappings, all the decorations, the wrapping — if you tear all 
that away and leave simply just the raw budget by itself and you 
look at it without any of the PR [public relations] that goes 
along with trying to sell a budget, and you looked at that budget 
and you said it’s purely an election budget — there’s really no 
big secret, Madam Speaker, that most likely there will be an 
election in Saskatchewan sometime in 2007; almost no one 
would argue with that — this truly then does become an 
election budget. 
 
My point being, Madam Speaker, I don’t see this being 
effective even as a purely election budget because I don’t 
believe that there will be any kind of decent value gained in 
return in the numbers of votes from any particular group of 
people. Because if you look again at the two major spending 
items, Madam Speaker, the cap on seniors’ drug cost, there are 
already some safety nets built into the system to protect 
low-income seniors from high costs of drugs . . . It’s not 
perfect. I’m not saying that. Could it be better? Yes it could. 
But there are already some of those safeguards put in place. So 
from a purely political side of it, I don’t think this is going to 
have that much mileage. 
 
If I look at the other big spending item that I talked about, the 
tax credit as it relates to students or to young graduates, young 
people, again if I have a person, — any person, I don’t think 
you can pick — that’s working in Alberta for a decent wage or 
working someplace else, that $1,000 tax credit is not going to 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

bring them home. And I don’t think that it’s going to purely get 
any more political attention in an election campaign. 
 
And if you look at then, at a whole bunch of the other 
announcements, Madam Speaker, I just don’t believe the people 
of the province are going to buy this and make them have an 
idea or have a change of heart and decide to re-elect a tired, old 
government that’s proven that it’s out of ideas. 
 
Madam Speaker, you know, look at things like highways. And 
there was of course the big announcement, and that was prior to 
the budget but . . . And the Premier actually even came out one 
day. He was quoted on CBC news March 6, and he says how 
we have been doing things in the past has been in many cases 
ad hoc and without a long-term plan. And that was a quote from 
the Premier. 
 
Madam Speaker, my point being is if this government has been 
in power now for 15-plus years, why didn’t they come out with 
. . . Why didn’t they have a plan before this? Why all of a 
sudden did they . . . They said well it’s election year; we’d 
better come up with a plan. Because people don’t buy that, 
Madam Speaker, I think that the days of trying to trick the 
electorate with their own money are long past. 
 
And that’s what I’m saying here, is that if you’re going to spend 
700 . . . If you’re going to spend that much money and spend 
$700 million more than you’re going to take in in a blatant 
attempt to get re-elected, then at least I would have thought that 
their political advisors, the strategists from the government side 
of the House, would have sat down and tried to come up with a 
better way to reach a bigger portion of the people of the 
province rather than trying to appeal to so few with so much. 
 
The other thing that always strikes me, Madam Speaker . . . and 
again this government I think is guilty of it, but they’re not the 
only ones. Previous governments have been guilty of the same 
thing, and federal governments have been, and other provincial 
governments have. So again I’m trying not to make this so 
much of a partisan thing here today but rather a problem with 
the system as I see it and that being the idea of deficit or 
balanced budgets. 
 
You know, members from the opposite side in their speeches 
have claimed that this is their 14th straight balanced budget, 
Madam Speaker. That’s the claim they’ve made. And I tell you, 
Madam Speaker, I wish that I could run my business that way. I 
wish that I could go to my banker and say . . . My friend Garth, 
my banker who’s Garth Lewis or Mike Menzies who looks after 
my business, I would like to go to Mike some day, and I’d say, 
Mike, you know what? I’m going to take in $50,000 this year, 
but I’m going to spend $100,000. Could we consider that a 
balanced budget? 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, there’s not a banker in the world that 
would allow me to do that for very long, and nor would they 
believe me when I said that I’m breaking even, even though I’d 
be losing $50,000 a year but . . . So it’s all, again it’s 
wrappings. It’s smoke and mirrors. It’s trying to convince 
people that what they’re saying is actually true. And, Madam 
Speaker, that’s the problem I have. That’s the problem I have 
with the political system that we work in, we live in. Again, 
again, Madam Speaker, this is not a problem with this particular 

government. They are part of the problem, but they are not, not 
the entire problem. 
 
Madam Speaker, it’s good to see that other members in the 
Chamber are waking up finally this afternoon. It’s been a bit of 
a slow afternoon. 
 
But I wanted to just end with a couple of ideas. I know my time 
is getting short, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, at the outset 
of my remarks I mentioned that I had the opportunity to listen 
now to 11 federal or provincial budgets. Madam Speaker, this is 
liable to be my last, will most likely be my last provincial 
budget. And I wanted to say, I wanted to obviously thank the 
people of Carrot River Valley for allowing me to represent 
them certainly over this last four years. And we’re looking 
forward, I’m looking forward to bigger and better things from 
Carrot River Valley in the future. 
 
But I also wanted to sort of express my disappointment, Madam 
Speaker, when it comes to budgets of all political parties that I 
have witnessed. It’s been a disappointment that any of these 
particular governments would not try to do something that has a 
larger, broader impact and positive effect on the people, the 
total people that they represent. Somebody with a vision, 
somebody with an eye for the future, the hope and the dream 
that they could make their jurisdiction — whether it be in this 
province or the country — better after having presented a 
budget, and frankly, Madam Speaker, I just don’t see that in this 
particular budget, and that’s the disappointment. 
 
Will I be voting against this budget? Yes, I will, Madam 
Speaker, for lots of reasons, not the least of which I don’t think 
it’s an honest budget. I don’t think it’s a sustainable budget. 
And I think it’s a budget aimed directly at re-election. And my 
last words to the government would be — on this issue — that 
if they’re strongly in support of this budget and they feel that 
it’s that good, then let’s get at it. Let’s have that election. Call it 
right away. Let’s let the people of the province decide on the 
value of the budget rather than the debate in this House. Thank 
you, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
honoured to stand today in support of this NDP government’s 
next balanced budget in a long string of balanced budgets. 
 
Before I begin speaking specifically about the budget, I want to 
start by thanking some of the people who’ve helped me along 
the way and who’ve been able to be supportive so that I can 
serve the constituents here in Regina. 
 
First of all I want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland for giving me the honour of serving them for these 
past eight years. I’d also like to thank the executive for all of 
the help that they’ve been able to provide in ensuring that I’m 
re-elected in 2003. And of course all the members here, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, know that being an MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] can be a very busy job and requires the 
help of an understanding family, and of course I’m no 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

exception. So I’d just like to thank my wife, Karen, and my 
three kids for helping me to make public service possible here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my constituency’s a microcosm of the 
province. It covers all range of individuals. We’re very 
fortunate to have the University of Saskatchewan. The 
synchrotron, Innovation Place, Muskeg Lake First Nation are 
all within the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. And it’s 
my honour to serve them. 
 
I’d also like to thank the staff here in Regina for all of the work 
that they do. As a new minister, it’s a real learning experience. 
And they’ve been very supportive, and I just want to pass on 
my appreciation to them. 
 
I’d also like to thank the staff in my Saskatoon office — 
constituency assistant, Connie, and her fill-in, Susan —for all of 
the work that they do in serving the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland. And I’d also like to just send my best wishes to 
Connie and get well soon and a speedy recovery. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is committed to making 
life better for Saskatchewan families by keeping the economy 
strong and by improving infrastructure, including 
Saskatchewan’s highways. This budget goes a long way 
towards increasing access to health care for Saskatchewan 
families and for Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
This budget is an example of just how far this province has 
come under the leadership of this NDP government. After nine 
years of fiscal mismanagement perpetrated by the former 
Conservative government, this province was crumbling under 
the weight of an over $14 billion debt. In stark contrast, this 
NDP government has committed to being both fiscally and 
socially responsible. In fact during this term of office, we’ve 
paid down over a billion dollars of debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — And I know that gets the opposition 
upset, and they’re wondering why we’ve got these new 
programs this year and why not sooner. Because this is when 
we can afford them, Madam Deputy Speaker. As the Premier 
said, with social progress comes economic progress; with 
economic progress comes social progress. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government has taken Saskatchewan from bankruptcy to 
boom times. The hard work and sacrifices of the early 1990s is 
starting to pay off for Saskatchewan families. 
 
And I’d just like to single out and thank former Premier Roy 
Romanow. He was an excellent Attorney General in the 1970s 
and early ’80s. He had a long career helping repatriate the 
constitution and, Madam Deputy Speaker, he worked extremely 
hard to bring Saskatchewan back from the brink of bankruptcy. 
And then in his retirement, what does he do? Under the 
direction of Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, he does a 
consultation and issues a report that, in my opinion, has helped 
save medicare for this generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this year Saskatchewan families benefited 

from a reduction of the PST to levels that have not been seen in 
more than 20 years — this on top of reduced income taxes, 
reduced business taxes, and significantly more competitive 
royalty rates from past budgets. Because of this NDP 
government’s commitment, Saskatchewan continues to be the 
best place in Canada to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
As Minister of Healthy Living Services with the responsibility 
to seniors, I’m extremely proud of this budget. With almost 
$170 million invested in programs that fall under the Healthy 
Living Services umbrella, an increase of almost $13 million 
over last year, it’s clear that this NDP government is committed 
to leaving no one behind. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this NDP government is committed to 
improving the lives of our seniors to whom we owe so much. 
Under the leadership of this NDP Premier, the enhanced 
prescription drug plan included in this year’s budget is the most 
significant expansion of health services for seniors in a 
generation. Effective July 1, Madam Deputy Speaker, seniors 
will pay no more than $15 for a prescription, an average savings 
of $400 for the more than 115,000 seniors. 
 
We’re investing $2.25 million this year to improve access to 
children’s mental health services and children’s therapies. This 
will reduce waiting lists and provide additional specialists while 
increasing capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud to say that this budget is the 
first in provincial history to have dedicated funding in support 
of autistic children. The $3 million committed will go towards 
developing and expanding services for autistic children and 
their parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues the commitment of Project 
Hope. This year’s budget provides almost $15 million to the 
Premier’s Project Hope, an increase of $1.3 million over last 
year. This money will go towards, among other things, a detox 
facility in Regina, a 24-youth stabilization unit in Saskatoon, a 
youth treatment facility in partnership with Prince Albert Grand 
Council, and a family treatment centre in Saskatoon — this 
along with continued programming for high-risk, 
hard-to-engage young people who are severely affected by 
substance abuse. 
 
This government is spending $3.5 billion on our health care 
budget to ensure Saskatchewan people continue to have the best 
possible care. Mr. Speaker, this budget recognizes the health 
care needs of this province. This budget commits to recognizing 
the diverse needs, the diverse health care needs of 
Saskatchewan people, including the unique health needs of 
Aboriginal people. This health budget will also improve access 
and wait times along with recruiting and supporting health care 
workers throughout this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has also made a 
commitment to our students by freezing tuition for the third 
consecutive year. This will ensure that post-secondary 
education students . . . and the education for these students will 
remain affordable and accessible. 
 
To ensure that our young people choose Saskatchewan after 
graduation, this government introduced in this budget a special 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

$10,000 annual graduate tax exemption that, coupled with other 
credits, will permit recent post-secondary graduates to earn 
$20,000 tax-free each year for five years after graduation. And 
this can be carried over, Mr. Speaker, for up to 10 years. So if 
young people upon graduation want to travel for a year or two, 
see the world, they can bring back those experiences and help 
make Saskatchewan even better. 
 
All this helps make Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, 
and raise a family in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — But, Mr. Speaker, the opposition refuses 
to support this government and this budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that brings me back to a flyer and a pamphlet that was recently 
distributed in Saskatoon by the Leader of the Opposition. It 
included a text in the line that says the Saskatchewan Party is 
committed to, and I quote, “A strong social safety net which 
protects those who truly need support . . .” 
 
Well I wonder, Mr. Speaker, who does not truly need support in 
the eyes of the opposition. Is it seniors in this budget? Is it 
parents of children with autism? Is it recent graduates who are 
trying to get their lives started? Or is it parents of children who 
suffer from mental illness? Who is it, Mr. Speaker, that the 
opposition says does not truly need this support? 
 
This tired and old opposition Sask Party, when they were asked 
what they would cut, Mr. Speaker, the opposition Finance critic 
said there’s too many civil servants and there’s too much 
money spent on health care. Those members opposite continue 
to try to cover their spots but they cannot, Mr. Speaker. They 
continue to attack civil servants and to attack health care 
professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the earlier speakers indicated that this 
government should just get along with the Prime Minister and 
the federal Conservatives. We should just stop aggravating 
them. We should just work with them and maybe they’ll give us 
some money. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the blame-the-victim 
mentality. The Conservative government made a promise; they 
said they would provide $800 million each and every year. And 
they’ve reneged on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — But I have a question for them, Mr. 
Speaker. Do we honestly believe that if prime minister 
Stéphane Dion was the prime minister, would they be saying 
the same thing? Would they be saying oh Mr. Goodale, it’s 
okay? We’ll just work with you. I know you promised us $800 
million but that’s okay. We’ll only raise one question in the 
House and then we won’t bother any more. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was $800 million for Saskatchewan 
people and for Saskatchewan families. What did they do with 
that money? They sent it directly to Quebec to try to buy an 
election, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, a number of years 
ago during the crisis in Quebec, there was a line that went 
around Canada that said, my Canada includes Quebec. And I 
agree with that, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, my Canada also 
includes Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, we have a Prime Minister 
of Canada, Mr. Harper, who’s starting on a daily basis to sound 
and look and act more like a former prime minister, Mulroney. 
We’ve seen that story where money goes down to eastern 
Canada — it goes to Quebec, it goes to Ontario, and that’s 
where the money goes. What does the opposition say? We 
should just get along with them. We shouldn’t aggravate them. 
Mr. Speaker, that tired, old opposition Sask Party has got it 
wrong. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s a debate. The federal 
Conservatives broke their promise to Saskatchewan people, and 
they should be held accountable, and they will be held 
accountable. In fact, the Sask Party shamefully wouldn’t even 
allow this Assembly to debate and discuss that issue. When we 
asked for leave, they listened to their masters in Ottawa instead 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reading a novel the other day written in the 
early 1940s by a German writer, Hesse. And there was a line in 
there that I think is applicable. The Saskatchewan Party, their 
ultimate goal is to rule Saskatchewan. They want to rule 
Saskatchewan. Well the NDP, Mr. Speaker, they want to serve 
Saskatchewan and serve Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, 
our pamphlet here, instead of talking about truly needs support 
and the ideas that they were talking about, let me just review 
some of the things that we’re doing to make life better for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re, number one, introducing a new drug plan for seniors. 
We’re creating new five-year $10,000 annual tax credit for new 
graduates. We’re freezing university tuition at 2004 levels into 
2008. We’re funding our largest budgeted capital program for 
improvements to roads, highways, schools, hospitals, and other 
community . . . [inaudible] . . . And finally, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
cutting taxes. In fact we have provided the lowest PST rate in 
20 years at 5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious to me who this budget represents. It 
represents Saskatchewan’s families. And that’s why I’m proud 
to say I will support this budget and not this opposition. 
Saskatchewan has a choice: they can be ruled by the 
Saskatchewan Party or they can be served by the NDP. Mr. 
Speaker, that choice is clear, and I will be supporting with this 
government and I will not be supporting the opposition’s 
motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
enter into the deficit debate today. This is a time where 
members usually make comments about other things that take 
place in their constituency and in their personal life. There was 
enough things going on in this budget, I was actually sometime 
compelled not to even talk about those things. But I would be 
somewhat remiss if I didn’t mention my constituency assistant, 
Rita Flaman Jarret, who does a superb job of looking after my 
constituents and my scheduling. And as some of the other 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

members here said, does a very admirable job of making me 
look good, and I thank her for that. 
 
And Shannon Hardy and Lynne Agnew, Gene and Pat 
Humenny, Gary Machishnic, Albert Johnson, Abe Kroeger, 
Rene Stock, Patrick Bundrock, Kay Robertson, and Stew 
Foster, who are volunteers and members of my executive who 
are actually out this week, Madam Deputy Speaker, doing a 
turkey sale and turkey promotion. And I think part of the 
program is they sell the turkeys with the idea that they will 
bring home turkeys from Regina. And I think it’s referring to 
some of the NDP MLAs. So actually we call it a turkey sale and 
a turkey demotion. So we’re looking forward to having highly 
successful results from that. 
 
I would, Madam Deputy Speaker, like to use this opportunity as 
well to make some reference to the two by-elections that took 
place earlier this year — in particular what we call our junior 
achievement project. The member for Saskatoon Eastview made 
reference to having attended the Junior Achievement banquet in 
Saskatoon. I attended, and I want to thank her for her remarks. I 
agree with them. It was a wonderful event. 
 
But on this side of the House we have a junior achievement 
program within our caucus, and we have two members that are 
sitting here today that are the successful recipients of our junior 
achievement award. We call them new MLAs, and we’re 
pleased to have them as part of our caucus. 
 
I did a lot of door knocking in Weyburn, and I think most 
members, as they’ve spoken in the House, have made reference 
to the fact that it is the hometown of Tommy Douglas. And I 
actually found virtually no Tommy Douglas roots left there. I 
found a lot of people that knew our candidate, knew our 
candidate’s spouse, spoke well of the candidate, and made 
reference to our candidate as being the local candidate, 
notwithstanding the fact that the NDP literature made reference 
to their candidate as being the local candidate. 
 
As a matter of fact I never saw their candidate. I saw some 
Liberals out working occasionally, but I never did see any NDP 
folks out working. And maybe that was reflective of how the 
results came out. 
 
I also spent some time — and it was a considerably colder 
by-election — working in the Martensville one. And I think 
maybe it says something about the commitment of the people in 
that area when they’re able to get out 77 per cent of the vote. 
What an overwhelming endorsement of this candidate and what 
an overwhelming statement about where the NDP exists in the 
polls. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s worth noting that not only 
did they not get their deposit back for filing their nomination 
papers, they also don’t get the sharing money back for the 
expenses. So those members over there will probably have to 
write some personal cheques or go back to their regular donors 
and saying, we lost another one and this time it was worse than 
the Weyburn one. So anyway I guess I leave them with that. 
 
And we’ve done some door knocking in some other 

constituencies, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I have the same 
sense of excitement when I go and knock doors there than I 
have in Weyburn and in Martensville, in particular some of the 
Regina constituencies. Regina South with a dynamic, strong 
candidate, Bill Hutchinson, superb candidate, works very hard. 
And when you knock doors in that constituency, there’s a real 
sense that the people want to make a change. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, Regina Wascana Plains with Christine Tell is 
another constituency that we’re getting a very warm, favourable 
response, Madam Deputy Speaker. That’s one that if I was a 
member of the NDP, I would be certainly concerned about. It’s 
the same sense of enthusiasm, the same sense of excitement that 
exists there that does in Weyburn and does in Martensville. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to make another comment 
or two about my own constituency. It’s in a rapid growth mode 
right now. I have a new neighbourhood of Stonebridge that is 
growing south of the city, with Saskatchewan’s newest 
Wal-Mart. There is the Willows subdivision which backs on to 
a golf course and I’ve been out door knocking in that area, both 
of those areas and getting a very favourable response. And 
people in that area saying, let’s have an election, let’s get on 
with the process. 
 
I listened with some interest last week when the Finance 
minister presented his deficit plan for the province and I had 
some thoughts about it. It’s easy when you have no money, you 
just say no to everything. It’s a little bit more difficult when 
you’ve got a little bit of money, because you’ve got to pick and 
choose. You’ve got to pick and make choices which things you 
do and which things you don’t do. And it reflects on a 
government with the choices that they make, particularly the 
things that they don’t do. 
 
But in this particular situation, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
had an enormous amount of money as a result of the revenue 
boom in this province from the resource windfall, which was 
certainly nothing to do with the NDP government. They had a 
lot of money. They had $1 billion surplus, not to mention the 
amount of money they withdrew from the fiscal stabilization 
fictional fund that they talked about. They had an enormous 
amount of money. And in spite of the fact that they were able to 
run the province $700 million further into the hole than it was 
when they started, they were not able to achieve anything of 
any significance whatsoever. They didn’t even make their own 
core supporters happy. 
 
The previous Finance minister at least tried and made an effort. 
This minister just sprayed money around with no plan, with no 
vision, and we know that the only one person that had any 
benefit from this budget whatsoever will be Murdoch Carriere 
because he received over a quarter of a million dollars of money 
that’s going to come out of this budget. 
 
They had once-in-a-lifetime of literally $1 billion in unplanned 
revenue, probably the largest amount of cash that the 
Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan Department 
of Finance has ever had to handle and never had to manage. 
And they had wonderful opportunities. They could have done 
something for the health sciences building. They could have 
done one-shot things for infrastructure. They could have 
repaired and updated correctional centres. They could have built 
drug treatment facilities. They could have made some real 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

commitments. They could have done south bridges. They could 
have done highways. 
 
What they’ve done is they’ve talked about a 10- or 15-year 
plan. And if nothing else, if they didn’t have the imagination, 
the plan, or the vision to do anything, what that Finance 
minister could have done was he could have taken the entire 
amount of money and dumped it against the provincial debt and 
at least helped our children and our grandchildren. 
 
But no, he took the spray approach and sprayed it all over the 
province and managed to achieve absolutely nothing that was of 
any long-term and permanent benefit for this — nothing that is 
sustainable, nothing that is realistic and nothing more than is a 
bunch of desperate promises. What we have right now is a 
transparent, desperate, pathetic, and surely unsuccessful bid to 
stay in power by this NDP government. 
 
I’d like to quote Winston Churchill, Madam Deputy Speaker 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not going to quote the 
member from Carrot River Valley. But they run the very grave 
risk of falling into senility before being overtaken by old age, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And that’s the situation that they’re 
finding themselves in now. 
 
What they need right now, Madam Deputy Speaker, is a plan 
that will attract and retain young people in this province. What 
we need to do is find jobs that are in the fields that those young 
people want to work in. What we want to do is give employers 
an incentive to hire the people that will work in their fields. 
 
We’ve done consultation with young people. And university 
students say, while it may be nice to have some incentives after 
they graduate and after they start working, what the young 
people that are in universities right now, what they want is jobs. 
They want to have a job that they can go to that’s in their field. 
They want to know that there’s a pool of employment 
opportunities that they can work in. They know that there need 
to be a focus on technologies. There need to be a focus on entry 
programs to get right into the workplace. 
 
What we expect to have this government do is work with 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology], work with the University of Regina, work with 
the institute of Indian technology, work with the U of S, work 
with some of the private vocational schools in this province to 
try and match the resources and match the programs to where 
the employment needs are and the employment opportunities 
are. 
 
In some situations with SIAST, they’ve got 15- and 20-year 
waiting lists to get into some of the programs. They’ve 
demonstrated that they have absolutely no plan, no vision, and 
right now are running around playing catch-up. They’re playing 
Band-Aids and prop ups and doing nothing that’s going to 
benefit the province in the long run. 
 
And one of the things that this budget absolutely missed that 
should be the biggest embarrassment to this government is the 
issue of property tax. It’s the biggest disincentive to improve or 
to purchase a new home. The education component is the 
problem with property tax in this province. It pits school boards 
against ratepayers. It pits school administrators against parents. 

Right now we should have a shift away from property tax as the 
primary source of funding for education. Had they chosen to 
listen to the Boughen report or the statements that were made 
around the time of amalgamation . . . they had opportunities and 
options to do that. 
 
The Boughen report’s in place right now; the amalgamation is 
done right now. They could do something that would be of 
some benefit to homeowners. And they’ve done nothing for 
homeowners. They’ve done nothing for businesses that want to 
purchase or expend in regard to their property tax. And they’re 
being crippled, and they are being hobbled by excessive 
property taxes. 
 
And you want to know who some of the people that are going to 
be the most victimized by the property tax in this province will 
be the senior citizens. Senior citizens have fixed income. They 
pay thousands of dollars a year in property tax. These are 
people that might want to improve their homes. They might 
want to add on and build a deck or a garage or something like 
that, but they know when they do that they will in perpetuity 
have to pay more money in their property taxes because that 
Finance minister from Regina South — who will likely lose his 
seat in the next election — did not have the courage or the will 
to try and do something that was going to help them, because he 
was too busy spraying money around on bizarre other things. So 
he did nothing for those people. 
 
What about some business entrepreneur that wants to come in 
and buy a hotel, build a restaurant, or do something else with a 
mine or some other business project in the province? They can’t 
or they won’t because they’ll be crippled by the oppressive 
property tax in this province. It’s a tax on ownership. It’s not a 
tax on income. It’s not a tax on your earnings. It’s a tax on 
owning and it’s a direct disincentive. 
 
What they did instead, Madam Deputy Speaker, is they gave 
money to municipalities. Municipalities need the money. They 
want the money, and they will probably put it to good use, far 
better use than the NDP would. But they did absolutely nothing 
to address the problem of the education component of property 
tax. 
 
Another thing that this NDP government chose not to do, to 
absolutely ignore it, and it is one thing they should be ashamed 
of, is they did not address the issue of children not in school. By 
their own estimates, there is approximately 5,000 school-age 
children in our province that are not enrolled in any kind of a 
school program or school curriculum. They will not set out to 
try and develop a database or develop the data that will identify 
those children so that those children can be brought back in 
school. 
 
Those children who are not in school are the ones that are prone 
to be victims of sexual exploitation, become involved in drugs, 
become involved in gangs and youth criminal violence. They 
have no plan to try and identify those kids, and the reason they 
don’t have a plan is because they don’t have the willingness to 
try and develop a plan that will reintegrate those children back 
into school, to deal with substance abuse, to deal with career 
training, to deal with life skills, family issues, and the various 
issues that those families have got to deal with around those 
young people. And we can’t afford not to do that. Those young 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

people deserve a chance to participate fully in this province as 
does anyone else. 
 
They had an opportunity to partner with FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations], with tribal councils, and with 
local organizations to develop plans that would reintegrate 
those students back into school if they had the courage to try 
and identify who those kids are, and to try and do something 
with them. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our children are the greatest resource 
that we have. And they may ask, can we afford to do those 
things? I challenge back to them, can we afford not to do that? 
 
It is an embarrassment for any government that wants to call 
itself compassionate or even human. They have not addressed 
nor considered any of this in the mad dash to try and stay in 
power. What people will look at when they go forward, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is a strong desire not to vote for the NDP 
government in the next provincial election. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we had a promise in 1999 dealing with 
crime. We had a promise from the Finance minister at that time 
to increase the number of police officers in this province by 
200. In 1999 we had 1,930 police officers by Statistics Canada 
figures; 2006, we had 2,030. We had increased by 100 — a 
promise that, after seven years, has only been half fulfilled. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if we want to address the issues of 
crime in this province, one of the things that we need to do is 
we need to have more front-line police officers. It’s been 
demonstrated to be effective in cities like New York, Chicago, 
Los Angeles, and a variety of other American cities and large 
Canadian citizens as well. What we have right now is the tragic 
situation where Saskatoon and Regina compete to be the murder 
capital of Canada. Something that is absolutely not acceptable 
to the citizens of this province to be vying for the title of murder 
capital in the world. 
 
And one of the places that’s most tragic is the Premier’s own 
riding of Saskatoon Riversdale. We have a fine candidate there 
by the name of Fred Ozirney who will work hard and may well 
become the next MLA from that constituency. And I can tell 
you this, Madam Deputy Speaker, Fred Ozirney will work hard 
to deal with crime in the area of Riversdale in Saskatoon. He’s a 
fine gentleman, will work hard, and the people of Riversdale 
are listening to what he’s got to say. If I was the Premier, I 
would start spending some time in Riversdale and start listening 
to people that are there. 
 
There’s no money for the additional police officers, little or no 
money for addictions treatment. We understand there’s some 
contemplation that they may be able to create a treatment 
centre, and they’re out shopping for land trying to find a place 
for it. No sense that they might want to look for an existing 
facility that could be converted or upgraded. Nothing that’s 
taking place on that. 
 
Nothing that’s being done in this budget for inner-city schools. 
SchoolPlus has now become school minus because the program 
has been gutted because of lack of funding. 
 
The one thing that they did do, and I will give them credit for it, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, is they did give some money with 
regard to inner-city housing. And I commend them and I thank 
them for that small step. Unfortunately you need to have the 
rest of the supports to go with it. You have to have the social 
skills that will come with it, the drug treatment, the employment 
skills, the opportunities that will come with that. 
 
It’s a start, but they need to deal with the other issues that are in 
those inner-city neighbourhoods. Those inner-city 
neighbourhoods are crime ridden. Most people would not want 
to walk down one of the Riversdale streets after 5 or 6 o’clock 
at night. There’s a huge problem with drugs, with prostitution, 
and they need to do some serious work in that area. And it’s a 
problem that the NDP government is absolutely ignoring by not 
going there, not looking at it, and denying it. 
 
There’s serious issues with gangs, and what they need to do is 
develop some aggressive programs that are there. And I want to 
urge them to do that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I notice as well when we go forward 
and we deal with the deficit issues that are there, one of the 
things that is not being brought forward is the mandatory 
gunshot and stab wound reporting Bill. That’s not on the list of 
Bills to be dealt with right now, and we expect that it will be. 
We’re hearing from police officers that that’s one of the tools 
that the police officers want to have so that they can move 
forward with aggressive crime reduction. And it’s our hope and 
expectation that this government will bring forward that Bill so 
it can be debated, and we want to know that that Bill is going to 
be in place. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we want to know as well where 
they’re at with other legislation that’s come forward this sitting 
on the order paper where they need to have . . . And what I’m 
talking about specifically, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the need 
to have the regulations that will allow the Bills to be brought 
into force. Because the gunshot wound and reporting Bill 
requires us to have regulations to make that work and make that 
in place. So that cannot work without it. And we’re also looking 
at the human rights legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have as well a serious issue in our 
problem with autistic children and we need to know that there’s 
going to be an aggressive program. We saw in this budget a 
small announcement of some additional funding that will be of 
some assistance to families with autistic children but we want to 
know where that money is going to be spent, how it’s going to 
be spread around. 
 
We also have serious issues and things with cancer treatment. 
We have people such as Terry Rak that are having very serious 
health problems and have spent literally tens of thousands of 
dollars on Avastin out of their own pocket. It’s a huge burden to 
families that are trying to wrestle for drugs so that they can deal 
with their own lives. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we also have highways in this 
province. We had a major announcement from that government 
that they were going to implement a 10-year program to try and 
deal with upgrades to highways, and so far we haven’t seen 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

where the plan is or the strategy. And unfortunately what it is, 
it’s an announcement that something is going to take place over 
10 years. The large amount of it will take place after the next 
election when that government will likely not be there. 
 
There’s a saying that one of the airlines used to use that getting 
there is half the fun. Right now in this province getting there is 
no fun at all because the highways in this province are a disaster 
to travel on. The potholes are there. We hear regularly from 
people that the highways are not adequately maintained. So 
right now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we expect to see something 
from this government with regard to highways. And the sooner 
we see it frankly, Madam Deputy Speaker, the better because 
the people of this province are discouraged and quite angry 
about that issue. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to read briefly from a 
StarPhoenix editorial that was in . . . [inaudible] . . . and I will 
read from the March 23 article in The StarPhoenix, and it will 
deal with debt: 
 

For Thomson to brag that the current government has paid 
down the debt by $1 billion, with $158 million dedicated 
to debt repayment coming from the 2007-08 one-time 
equalization payment of $226 million (the other $68 
million is earmarked for property tax relief over two years) 
makes no sense when this year’s financial performance 
adds $700 million to the debt.  

 
And that’s the reality that we’re facing. They’ve taken a $1 
billion surplus and turned it into a $700 million deficit. 
Something is seriously wrong with a government that can take 
the biggest surplus in this province’s history and turn it into one 
of the biggest deficits in the province’s history.  
 
David MacLean of the Canadian taxpayers association: 
 

This budget is unsustainable in the long term. We’ve got a 
$700 million deficit in a time when revenues have never 
been so high. This is serious trouble. 
 
We all know there’s an election coming. It’s almost like 
they’re salting the earth for if there is a change in 
government or if the NDP is re-elected. We’re going to see 
massive deficits in the years coming forward unless some 
serious spending restraint occurs. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a leaky budget. We saw leaks 
coming forward from the Finance minister in the days 
preceding it when they were trying to deflect issues on the 
Carriere thing. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, leaky budgets are 
like leaky ships. They will ultimately sink those that are inside 
them. So we’re expecting that’s going to take the situation 
that’s there. 
 
And then I want to say one more thing. In the Premier’s 
Partnership for Prosperity document released in 2001, the NDP 
had a goal dealing with net in-migration of youth by 2005. He 
has missed that goal by literally thousands of people. We have 
Manitoba, which does not have the resources, does not have the 
ability to attract people that this province does, and what’s 
happening is they are outperforming this province in 
in-migration from immigrants by a massive amount.  

I want to conclude by a quote from Oliver Cromwell that I’ve 
used before and I’m going to use it again, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And Oliver Cromwell said to the Rump Parliament, 
“Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of 
God, go.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, Madam Deputy House Leader. As the 
members will know, the Saskatchewan legislative internship 
program has a program over the supper hour to which all hon. 
members are invited. And so accordingly I would request leave 
of the House to recess until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
asked for leave to recess the House now until 7 p.m. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to agree with that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House does now stand recessed 
until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1003 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1004 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1005 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1005 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
 Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1006 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1015 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Importance and Future of Schools 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
 Junior Achievement’s Business Hall of Fame Awards 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
 Equality 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
 Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
 Oxbow Physicians Honoured with the Healthcare Excellence Award 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1008 
 Agenda for Crown Corporations 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
 Public Reaction to the Carriere Scandal 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1009 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Rural School Closures 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
 Future of Former Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1010 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1010 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1011 



 

  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1011 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1014 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1014 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1014 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1023 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1025 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1027 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


