


















































Hansard: March 20, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 33A  TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 893 
 March 20, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege this afternoon to present a petition on behalf of a 
group of concerned people from the Broadview area regarding 
access to dialysis services. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
today to present a petition on behalf of individuals from the 
Cypress Hills constituency very disappointed with the 
announced closure of the SaskPower office in Shaunavon. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Shaunavon, Climax, and 
Eastend. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of residents of the province and 
especially the people around the Broadview area. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to implement a strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people in the 

Coronach, Broadview, and the Cowessess area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are really concerned about 
the lack of cell coverage in the Porcupine-Weekes area. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
ensure SaskTel provides access for cell phone coverage in 
the Porcupine Plains-Weekes area. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Tisdale, Hudson Bay, Carragana, and Porcupine Plain. I so 
present on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Judging from the 
coffee stains on this petition I would assume it was in a coffee 
shop, but it’s signed by people who want to maintain full 
service of the SaskPower office in Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures — and there are a number of them 
on this petition — come from the communities of D’Arcy, 
Rosetown, Biggar, Herschel, Milden, and Saskatoon. And I am 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I again rise today 
with people who are concerned about the condition of Highway 
No. 5 and the safety of driving. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, St-Denis, 
and Quill Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine 
who are very concerned about the condition of Highway No. 
18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Lake 
Alma. I so present. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens who are opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Springwater, Biggar and district. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much-needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek and Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek-Willow Grove area 
of Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners come from the constituency of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, Gillam Crescent, Sears Cove, Peters Cove, and 
Perehudoff Crescent. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise with a petition from citizens who are extremely 
concerned about the possible closures of schools in the rural 
area. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Livelong, 
Glaslyn, and Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from the citizens of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with cellular coverage in rural areas, which is 
unreliable and/or in a lot of cases non-existent. And the prayer 
read as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in regions 
encompassing the constituency of Batoche. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of Jansen, 
Humboldt, St. Benedict, and of course, Middle Lake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highways 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous and also the city of P.A. [Prince Albert]. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the government’s 
failure to fund the cancer drug Avastin. I will read the prayer 
for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. 
I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today and present a petition 
calling on the government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Bengough. And I so present. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair for the Standing Committee on 
House Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its ninth report. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 33, The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment has requested leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole of this Bill. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be considered a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 33 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 7, the Public 
Health Amendment Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 7 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I was sleeping here; I 
was reviewing some notes for later in the day. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 7 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — With leave now, Mr. Speaker. We request 
that this Bill be read now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
given tremendous advice on this side of the House, here. Mr. 
Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration for Committee 
of the Whole for this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 7. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 7 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: —The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to table the seventh 
report of the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded 
by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 

concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Northeast, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now 
concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: —The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is hereby 
recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I have been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 11, The International Interests in 
Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 11 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration to Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When will this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 
Equipment Act / Loi sur les garanties internationales 

portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques 
mobiles 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 11 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 18, The Court Security Act 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 18 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration to Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration to Committee of the Whole of this Bill. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When will this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 18 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I have been instructed by the 
committee to report Bill No. 22, The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 2006 with amendment. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 22 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
to Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration to Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 22. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this 
amendment be read a first time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendment be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that these 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, the minister has 
moved that Bill No. 22 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 38 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: can the minister report as to whether or not 
the settlement agreement between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Murdoch Carriere announced on 
February 27 by the Minister of the Environment is subject 
to a confidentiality clause? If so, who asked for the clause, 
the Government of Saskatchewan or Mr. Carriere? 
 

And to the same minister, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: can the minister provide a copy of the 
settlement agreement between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Mr. Murdoch Carriere that was 
announced on February 27, 2007 by the Minister of the 
Environment? 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 38 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic Co-operative 
Development: how many government employees were 
charged with harassment for the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

I also have similar questions for 2002, ’03, ’04, ’05, ’06, and 
’07. 
 
Also: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development: how many government employee 
harassment cases resulted in convictions, disciplinary 
action, or firing in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

I also have similar questions for ’02, ’03, ’04, ’05, ’06, and ’07. 
 
Also: 
 

To the Minister of Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development: of the harassment complaints filed 
2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were verified? 
 

Also similar questions for years up to 2007. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: how many 
government employee harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 

2000-2001? 
 

I also have similar questions for the following years. 
 
And also I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: how many 
harassment-related complaints were filed in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
Also similar questions, and also up to the years 2007. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Riversdale, the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my distinct honour to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the House a large group of 
visiting scholars, Mr. Speaker, who are seated in the west 
gallery. These visiting scholars come to us from China, from 
India, and from the United States of America. 
 
They are in the province as guests and invitees of our 
province’s universities, Mr. Speaker. And while they’re here, 
they’re taking the opportunity to meet with a variety of 
government officials and government departments, Mr. 
Speaker, in a process which we hope will strengthen and deepen 
the relationships between our province and our guests’ 
respective homelands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting these visiting scholars 
later this afternoon. And I would ask all members who are 
present in the Chamber today to welcome the visiting scholars 
from India, from China, and the United States of America. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the Premier to 
welcome our international guests to the Assembly today. We’re 
always grateful for the added wisdom that international scholars 
can bring to us. We think we have something to learn from the 
world and that the world has something to learn from us. 
 
And so I’d welcome them here today. And we look forward to 
their visit today and in the future — another delegation of this 
sort — and we hope that your time here is spent very 
successfully. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
C’est un honneur pour moi de vous présenter à vous et mes 
collègues une délégation ici présente pour souligner La Journée 
internationale de la francophonie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to translate that: it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to my colleagues a delegation here today to 
commemorate the International Francophonie Day. 
 
The weeks of March 9 to March 25 have officially been 
proclaimed Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie in 
Saskatchewan. March 20, International Francophonie Day, is 
the focal point for the two weeks of festivities celebrating the 
French language and culture, and I am honoured to observe this 
occasion today in our provincial legislature. 
 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And if I could ask 
them to stand as I mention their names, our guests are here 
representing a variety of Fransaskois community organizations. 
First, Monsieur Paul Heppelle. He is the vice-president of the 
Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise. He is joined by a 
number of other members of that organization: Denis Desgagné, 
Ronald Labrecque, Hélène Bourget, Geneviève Lapierre, 
Isabelle Boucher, Nicole Rioux, Chantale Larose, Brinda 
Ramlochun, Majid Benjelloun, Radouane Zinoun, and Carl 
Aubin. 
 
Also joining them is Francine Proulx-Kenzle, of the Institut 
français de l’Université de Regina, as well as Nathalie Faye and 
Lorraine Laliberté. 
 
Joining us from the Division scolaire francophone is Sophie 
Charbonneau. 
 
From the Conseil de la coopération de la Saskatchewan: 
Catheline d’Auteuil, Siriki Diabagaté, Sylvain Lejeune. 
 
And from the Conseil culturel fransaskois, Stéphane Rémillard. 
 
From the Société historique de la Saskatchewan, Frédéric 
Beaulieu. 
 
From the Association canadienne-française de Regina, 
Christiane Soucy. 
 
And from the community, Marie France Kenny. 
 
And from the Service fransaskois de formation aux adultes et la 
corporation du Collège Mathieu, Michel Vézina. 
 
And last but not least, Karen Pozniak of the Canadian Parents 
for French in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all of my colleagues to join with me 
in wishing these folks a very warm welcome. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. C’est mon 

plaisir de dire bienvenue à tous les fransaskois et fransaskoises 
qui sont ici aujourd’hui de voyez notre assemblée. Cette 
semaine — et des deux semaines — sont pour la francophonie 
et je veux dire bienvenue ici. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to say 
welcome to all the Fransaskois who are here today to see our 
Assembly. This week — and these two weeks — are for the 
Francophonie, and I would like to say welcome here.] 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, yesterday I had 
the pleasure of introducing Mr. Msantsi from South Africa. He 
is the Sergeant-at-Arms and head of safety and security for the 
East Cape provincial legislature. He is here today again, but 
today he is joined by Mr. Hasani Ngobeni who is the 
Sergeant-at-Arms from Limpopo province in South Africa. 
They are here to learn and study and compare security hardware 
and security policies and are special guests of our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw. Members please welcome Mr. 
Ngobeni and Mr. Msantsi back to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn Student Wins Regional Spelling Bee 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m delighted to rise in the Assembly today to share 
some good news from the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 
 
The spelling bee is becoming a proud Canadian tradition. 
Beginning in 2005 the CanWest CanSpell program has 
cultivated year-round interest in spelling with teachers, parents, 
students, and communities supporting them. The spelling bee 
encourages young people to take learning to a fun and exciting 
level and to develop skills that will last a lifetime. The program 
engages individuals from the local school level all the way to 
the national stage as regional finalists from across the country 
are brought to Ottawa to compete each year. 
 
This past Saturday one of twenty CanWest CanSpell regional 
spelling bees was held here in Regina, and it is my pleasure to 
inform the House that the CanWest CanSpell Southern 
Saskatchewan regional finalist is Dakota Thiel, a 12-year-old 
student from St. Michael Junior High School in Weyburn. On 
Saturday, Dakota flawlessly spelled the word gingham to win a 
$3,000 RESP [Registered Educational Savings Plan], an 
invitation to the CanWest CanSpell National Spelling Bee in 
Ottawa, and to the Scripps National Spelling Bee in 
Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. 
 
Dakota owes thanks to his parents, Tracey and Darwin, who 
have encouraged him and studied with him. Dakota’s mother 
has described her son’s achievements as a personal victory and 
a morale booster. 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that I have to spell it out to the 
Assembly that congratulations are in order to Dakota, his 
parents, and teachers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

100th Anniversary of St. Paul’s Hospital 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday St. Paul’s 
Hospital in Saskatoon celebrated its 100th anniversary. Among 
those gathered to celebrate this auspicious occasion were the 
Minister of Health, the Minister for Healthy Living Services, 
and the Minister of Industry and Resources who announced 
approximately $3 million funding for a new MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] for the hospital. 
 
Another highlight of the date, Mr. Speaker, was a $1 million 
donation from Les and Irene Dube to help kick start an $8 
million capital campaign for a new urology centre of health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Grey Nuns opened St. Paul’s in 1907 it 
was a small 17-bed facility, but it was destined to have a 
profound effect on the city. For many years the school of 
nursing was associated with the hospital. I’m proud to say that 
I’m a graduate of the last class of hospital-trained nurses from 
St. Paul’s. 
 
Over the years the hospital has undergone numerous expansions 
and dealt with many, many of the city and province’s health 
challenges. But one thing that has remained constant from 1907 
to today is the dedication of everyone involved with St. Paul’s 
Hospital to meeting the health needs of the community. Mr. 
Speaker, St. Paul’s serves as an excellent example of quality 
health care provided by an organization in co-operation with the 
health region and the provincial government. 
 
In this anniversary year we honour the hospital’s founders. We 
honour the health professionals, employees, and volunteers 
who, every step of the way, make quality health care possible. 
And we honour the innovations that have distinguished St. 
Paul’s Hospital from the very beginning and will continue to be 
a part of this outstanding health care facility in the future. I ask 
all members to join me in congratulating St. Paul’s Hospital on 
their 100th anniversary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is National 
Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month. Colorectal cancer is the 
second largest cancer killer in Canada after lung cancer. More 
than 600 people are diagnosed in Saskatchewan each year. 
 
The NDP [New Democratic Party] government has refused to 
cover the cost of Avastin, the cutting edge cancer drug that is 
the standard of care for colorectal cancer, forcing patients in 

this province to fork out hundreds of thousands of dollars to 
access this drug. Not only has the NDP failed to cover the drug 
Avastin, we have seen very little action on a colorectal cancer 
screening program. If caught early, colorectal cancer is 90 per 
cent preventable. According to the Colorectal Cancer 
Association of Canada a screening program would reduce 
mortalities from this disease by 30 per cent. 
 
Last fall Ontario became the first province to introduce a 
comprehensive screening program. Since that time Manitoba 
and Alberta have also introduced the same program. It is a 
shame that this NDP government in the home of medicare is 
falling so far behind other provinces. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank two Saskatchewan men for their tireless effort to raise the 
awareness for colorectal cancer and to lobby the NDP 
government for funding of Avastin. Mr. Terry Rak of Saskatoon 
and the late Bob Loeppky from Swift Current — these men 
have stood up for hundreds of people in this province to bring 
awareness to this colorectal cancer situation in the province and 
the situation around Avastin. I would like to thank these 
gentlemen and their families for their effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Outstanding Community Service Honoured 
in Prince Albert 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, four extraordinary women 
were honoured at Prince Albert International Women’s Day 
celebrations for outstanding contributions to their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Julie Pitzel is an original committee member for 
Community Against Family Violence. She was on the 
committee for the first women’s safe shelter and helped open 
the first employment and training centre in La Ronge. Julie’s 
work with the Prince Albert Indian Métis Friendship Centre, 
Aboriginal Head Start, and Women of the Earth are all part of 
her exemplary work for Métis and First Nations people. 
 
Tammy Burns is originally from James Smith Cree Nation. She 
was honoured for her work as youth representative for Women 
of the Earth. Youth of the Earth offer after school activities for 
local young people. 
 
Rose Henry has been an active member of the community for 
many years. She’s been a volunteer on several boards, actively 
encourages others to become involved in the community, and 
for the past 23 years has worked at the Prince Albert Indian and 
Métis Friendship Centre. 
 
Bernice Waditaka is an elder of the Wahpeton Dakota Nation. 
As a nurse, Dakota language instructor, and an associate teacher 
at Prince Albert Indian Student Education Centre, Bernice has 
contributed to her community in many different ways. She is 
currently a board member on a Wahpeton organization assisting 
troubled families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

these four women and in conveying our thanks for their 
outstanding service to their communities and to the province. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Reginan Wins National Recognition for Excellence 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are known 
around the world for their friendliness and charming nature. 
Now one of our very own has been singled out for national 
recognition. 
 
In today’s Globe and Mail Wal-Mart Canada took out a 
full-page ad to announce the 12 finalists in its Shining Star 
program, a program that allows more than 70,000 associates to 
appreciate and recognize each other by nominating a peer who 
demonstrates respect for individuals, service to customers, and 
striving for excellence. Two hundred and eighty-nine stores 
across Canada nominate one employee from each of their 
stores. 
 
Among this year’s 12 finalists in the Shining Star program was 
Regina’s very own Will Walters. Will Walters, who is fondly 
known by the name as Wal-Mart Willie, has worked at the 
Southland Mall location as a greeter for 12 years. He is well 
known in Regina and has consistently shown great enthusiasm 
for his customers. Staff at the store say he’s never slowed down 
in all the years he’s been with them. 
 
The company has made a donation on Will’s behalf to the 
charity of his choice. I would ask all members of this Assembly 
to join with me in congratulating Will Walters, Wal-Mart 
Willie, on this very special recognition. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

National Social Work Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s National Social 
Work Week, a time to honour and celebrate the tremendous 
contribution social workers make every day here in 
Saskatchewan and across the country. Social work is a 
profession born of compassion, caring, and service. 
 
Social workers address the barriers, inequalities, and injustices 
that exist in society. They respond to crisis and emergency 
situations, and they help individuals and families deal with the 
problems that can arise in everyday life. Mr. Speaker, the theme 
for the week is, Social Workers Make a Difference in 
Children’s Lives. Social workers make a difference whether 
they’re helping a troubled family, working with a young person 
in conflict with the law, or finding safe shelter for a child or 
youth who is unable to live at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Community Resources is the 

largest employer of social workers in the province. But social 
workers also work in private practice, schools, hospitals, 
correctional centres, and nursing homes. No matter where they 
work, social workers make a difference in people’s lives. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in expressing 
thanks and appreciation to Saskatchewan’s social workers for 
the countless ways in which they make a difference in the lives 
of children and their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Budget Tradition 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as you know, it’s a tradition that the Minister of Finance gets 
new shoes to deliver his budget. Now that the minister’s budget 
is leaking all over the place, it seems to me that there’s only one 
suitable kind of footwear, and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has bought the minister a brand new pair of 
rubber boots — NDP orange rubber boots. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the member has made his point. 
Would the member please yield the exhibits. Would you go and 
pick those up and take them out of here. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Boots are very versatile. The minister 
can use them to wade through his budget leaks. He can use 
them to wade through the red ink that will spill off of his budget 
on Thursday. He can use them to wade through the potholes on 
most NDP highways, and he can use them to wade through the 
droppings that the NDP leave on the floor of the Assembly 
every day. So, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to present these 
rubber boots to the minister in the rotunda after question period. 
 
Now that I see the rest of the NDP MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] are looking quite jealous that the 
Minister of Finance is getting boots. Don’t worry because very 
soon the people of Saskatchewan are going to be giving each 
and every one of you the boot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member is . . . I just remind the member 
once again that all remarks should come through the Chair. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Premier’s Knowledge of Allegations 
Regarding Murdoch Carriere 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have an 
opportunity to question the Premier on his hastily called press 
conference on Thursday afternoon. It appears, as I mentioned 
yesterday, that the Premier’s conscience started to bother him 
just about after 5 o’clock. That’s when, that’s when, Mr. 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

Speaker, he realized that the answers he gave earlier in the day 
to questions posed by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition on 
the Carriere scandal were not close enough to reality even for 
his own conscience. 
 
Despite repeated claims that the Premier and the cabinet did not 
know — prior to the press breaking the story — of the Carriere 
scandal, of the Carriere affair, Mr. Speaker, he apparently 
changed his mind on that point late on Thursday afternoon. He 
had a press conference to say no, that he did, was aware of it 
well before the story broke in the media. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why has he been telling 
Saskatchewan people that he only found out about the Carriere 
affair after it broke in the media when that clearly wasn’t the 
truth? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when invited by the press 
to speak to a question on this issue, I responded on Thursday 
afternoon. I indicated to the press, Mr. Speaker, that in fact I 
had received a letter brought to my desk about March 25 of that 
year, I believe, that indicated that there was concern about 
events in the Department of the Environment concerning Mr. 
Carriere and a number of employees, that Mr. Gillies had been, 
had undertaken a study, Mr. Speaker. And I did what I believed 
at that time to be the appropriate thing. I directed those letter 
writers to the deputy of the Environment. Mr. Speaker, this is 
information I’m very glad to share with this House or with the 
public. 
 
But we know, Mr. Speaker, what’s going on in this House. 
Obviously the Leader of the Opposition does not want to talk 
about other important issues for Saskatchewan people like the 
number of new jobs in our province, Mr. Speaker, like the 
growing economy, nor does he want to talk about his federal 
cousins yesterday betraying a promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that one of the, if not 
the most important issue before this Assembly is the credibility 
of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
In a newspaper article dated April 3, 2003, they quoted the 
Premier who said, and I quote: 
 

I may say we all read with interest The StarPhoenix 
coverage, but before that I and the ministers had no 
particular knowledge. 
 

That’s what the Premier has been saying since April 2003 of 
this affair. He answered similarly to the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition on Thursday and then called a press conference, 
scrambled to call a hastily assembled press conference at 20 
after 5 to admit that he wasn’t telling the truth. What is the 
Premier . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He admitted it, Mr. 

Speaker. What is the Premier going to do about the fact that he 
has, since 2003, not been complete with the facts, with the truth 
on this case, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again let me 
say to the Leader of the Opposition and members assembled, on 
Thursday last I was invited by the press to answer some 
questions. I’m very pleased to answer these questions, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, again I report that I received a letter 
on or about March 25, and responded to it, which indicated to 
me for the first time that there were some concerns in the 
Department of the Environment in the Prince Albert office 
involving Mr. Murdoch Carriere. On April 1 of that year, we 
saw the graphic detail that was released to the press about the 
Gillies statement, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts and again, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I acted appropriately at that time. 
 
Now maybe the Leader of the Opposition would like to stand up 
in the House and explain how he, as leader of that political 
party, today is taking taxpayer dollars and running ads in the 
province of Saskatchewan which are at best, Mr. Speaker, 
misleading. How does that jibe with his commitment and his 
own code of ethics, Mr. Speaker? I’d like an answer to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — From The StarPhoenix, April 3, 2003, this is a 
quote of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the 
member that was just speaking: 
 

I may say we all read with interest The StarPhoenix 
coverage, but before that I and the ministers had no 
particular knowledge. 
 

Does he stand by that statement today? Was he telling the truth 
when he said that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I and every member of this 
cabinet — and I believe the large majority of Saskatchewan 
people — on April 1, when we read in The StarPhoenix the 
particular details of this circumstance, it caused us, Mr. 
Speaker, to take some very dramatic action. It caused the 
minister, knowing that information released to the press, to 
recommend to me that Mr. Murdoch Carriere’s employment 
and presence in the province of Saskatchewan’s public service 
should be terminated. We did, Mr. Speaker. We did it in the full 
knowledge, Mr. Speaker, that we were not following the 
process and that, as a result, there would likely be costs to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We made that choice. I made that 
choice, Mr. Speaker, and the result of the cost we’ve had to pay 
out today. 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

Again I ask, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition would 
please defend at least the kind of advertisement that he’s doing 
across this province — paid for by tax dollars — which is so 
misleading, Mr. Speaker. Does that stand the test of his own 
code of ethics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the ads are pretty clear. This 
government paid $275,000 to someone, a senior manager of 
their government fired for harassment and convicted of assault, 
while the women got $15,000. The ad goes on to question the 
fairness to women, the message it sends to women. You bet we 
stand by that advertisement. You bet we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The Premier admitted, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
admitted that in the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] scandal — do you remember the 
SPUDCO scandal? — he admitted that the government failed to 
be as forthcoming as it should be. Here’s what he wrote 
February 17, 2003, within days of the memo going out thanking 
Murdoch Carriere for his valuable contributions. The Premier 
writes: 
 

Questions of why decisions were made, the public 
portrayal of those decisions and political . . . 
[responsibility] have not been clearly addressed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the Premier and his government learned 
nothing from SPUDCO. They only come forward with the truth 
when it looks like they’re going to get caught, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, to the Premier on the Carriere scandal: what is his 
government hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government is hiding 
nothing. The plain facts, Mr. Speaker, are well, well-known, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there was incident happened in the 
Department of the Environment. Issues were raised by staff 
members. Appropriate investigation was done, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the individuals corresponded with me about six days 
before we read all of this in The StarPhoenix. At that time, Mr. 
Speaker, when I and we became aware of the detail that was 
presented in The StarPhoenix, we took I believe the appropriate 
action. That appropriate action at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
resulted in the termination, the removal of Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere from the workplace, Mr. Speaker, in an inappropriate 
process, the result of which was Mr. Carriere’s legal action. 
 
It is not as the Sask Party ads want to portray, that somehow 
Mr. Carriere was rewarded for this harassment or abuse, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they want to portray. And then what they 
try and portray, Mr. Speaker, what they try and portray in this 
ad that I happened to hear on Saturday, Mr. Speaker, they try 
and portray my comments totally out of context. 

They take taxpayers’ dollars. They inappropriately 
communicate with the public. What kind of a breach of their 
own code of ethics is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Government Response to Harassment Complaints 
Regarding Murdoch Carriere 

 
Ms. Draude: — One of Murdoch Carriere’s victims was 
interviewed by CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
yesterday. The victim said she was, and I quote: “mistreated by 
the government.” That’s what she said. She was mistreated by 
this NDP government. The woman is obviously still very upset 
with Murdoch Carriere but she’s just as upset with the NDP 
government. 
 
That’s where we are today, Mr. Speaker. The victims of 
Murdoch Carriere’s harassment think that the NDP government 
is just as bad as the man who harassed them in the first place. 
People are phoning from all over the province about this issue 
and they think so too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Minister of PSC [Public Service 
Commission] finally begin to clear the air and start answering 
the questions about Murdoch Carriere? When will the minister 
tell the House when the first complaint about Murdoch Carriere 
was brought to the attention of her NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to make this observation because this really does 
speak to the credibility of the members opposite. They 
attributed quotes to Justice Laing that do not appear in a 
document that they tabled in this House. They stated a piece of 
evidence, a hard drive, was wiped clean. That’s simply not the 
facts. They’ve repeatedly said that Mr. Carriere was awarded 
$275,000 for harassment and that is clearly incorrect, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have referred time and time again to Mr. 
Carriere’s transfer to Regina as a promotion, but we know 
clearly that he was suspended without pay for three months. He 
was demoted three levels and his salary was red circled, Mr. 
Speaker. That is clearly not a promotion. But these members 
opposite who try to be credible say that all the time. And 
yesterday, they tried to insinuate that the Minister of the 
Environment was a friend of Murdoch Carriere and that’s 
simply incorrect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder what the nine women 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

who were harassed by Murdoch Carriere think about this 
government’s answers, about the way they’re being treated right 
now. 
 
I guess the NDP old boys’ club just didn’t think that women 
being harassed in the workplace was very important at all. The 
victim said, and I quote: 
 

Justice will never be served. As long as the old boys’ club 
exists in the workplace, women will always be 
second-class citizens. 

 
Mr. Speaker, exactly how does that fit into the NDP’s 
zero-tolerance policy in their workplace? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the same minister, when were the very first 
complaints about Murdoch Carriere brought forward? Who 
were the complaints made to? And most importantly, what was 
done to address the complaints? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the former minister of the 
Public Service Commission indicated in this House on April 2, I 
believe, or April 1, that this became . . . The two ministers, the 
minister of the Environment and the former minister of the 
Public Service Commission, became aware of this situation in a 
very, not in a detailed briefing way on February 12, 2003. 
 
And the minister, the minister of the Environment, former 
minister, indicated that Mr. Carriere had contacted him in 
December of ’02 and he explained to Mr. Carriere that he could 
not get involved because it was a departmental matter and 
ministers don’t insert themselves into the day-to-day operations 
of government departments. 
 
But I do want to say this to the Sask Party who pretend to be the 
purveyors of equity and equality in the province of 
Saskatchewan. There was a woman, which they don’t go to, on 
the John Gormley show that simply doesn’t want further public 
humiliation. And if they cared about the women, they would 
stop this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 
minister should know when you tell the truth, you’re supposed 
to tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. Order 
please. Order please. Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. The members, I remind members not to reflect on 
other members in the House. And I would ask the member 
before she proceeds with her question to withdraw the last 
remark, then proceed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the last remark. 

I’m going to finish the quote that was given by this lady on 
John Gormley’s show. When Gormley asked if he should lay 
off government, the victim said, “Absolutely not.” And I’m sure 
that that could be looked at. 
 
When asked when the first complaints were brought forward, 
the Minister of PSC said things like, I can’t answer that 
question with any precision. 
 
I have a very straightforward question and I deserve, the 
members and the women deserve a straightforward answer. The 
women were wanting to know, when did the NDP finally learn 
about their harassment? And what did you do about it the 
minute you found out about the harassment complaint? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Did any 
minister have the Gillies report in their possession before April 
1 of 2003? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. Not one minister had 
the Gillies report. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we read about it on 
the front page of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. And by the way, 
Mr. Speaker, they say no one’s going to believe me. Well it is 
the absolute truth. Not one minister had the Gillies report before 
we read it on the front page of The StarPhoenix on April 1, Mr. 
Speaker. But I do want to say this to the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. The members 
will come to order. Members will come to order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — But, Mr. Speaker, I know who’s been 
taking licence. The members opposite have quoted Justice 
Laing, and they haven’t tabled one document indicating what 
they said in this Legislative Assembly. They’ve said the hard 
drive was wiped clean. And it’s simply not true. It was a 
incorrect statement. They said there was a gag order on the 
women and that’s not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the woman interviewed by CBC 
yesterday, and the other eight women who came forward, have 
lots to be angry about. The woman yesterday said she still, and I 
quote, “works with people who looked the other way . . . [far] 
too long.” Sounds like Murdoch Carriere was busy harassing 
women for quite some time. 
 
Why didn’t this NDP government listen to the women who 
complained about Murdoch Carriere years ago? It may have 
saved other women from going through the same hell. Why did 
this NDP government ignore harassment complaints that they 
knew about? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that people’s confidential personnel files are 
not shared with the front benches of the cabinet. It goes against 
the very freedom of information and personal privacy 
protection Act of which these members know nothing about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
settled with Mr. Carriere was because personnel records were 
splashed all over the front pages of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is simply unacceptable according to the 
law, Mr. Speaker. People are entitled to have their personal 
records protected, including their health record, their school 
record, and their personnel record. I can neither confirm nor 
deny anything further about Mr. Carriere’s personnel record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yesterday the victim said about Murdoch 
Carriere, and I quote: 
 

All of his minions are still working out there. You know 
all of the people who covered his butt all the years, they’re 
still out there and that’s the one thing that I can’t 
understand, why didn’t they do a total housecleaning. 

 
Who in this NDP government was covering for Murdoch 
Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what does this 
really speak to? What it speaks to is where the members 
opposite are at when it comes to the public service in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it really speaks to that 
people can say anything and these people will believe it. They 
talk about a hit list, Mr. Speaker. They talk about, let’s clean 
house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well that’s exactly what we heard prior to the 2003 election 
campaign when the leader of the opposition at the time said 
they had a list, they know where the skunks were, and they 
were going to clean house. That’s where those members are at, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Communication of Budget Information 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we learned that the NDP is now leaking its own 
budget in a desperate attempt to deflect attention away from the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 

Yesterday the Minister of Finance said he was launching an 
investigation — we give him credit for that — to find the 
source of the budget leak. It might have been a pretty short 
investigation, Mr. Speaker. All the minister really had to do was 
walk to the bathroom and look in the mirror. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is the minister’s so-called investigation 
going? Has he found the source of the budget leak yet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a truly 
baseless accusation and extremely crass approach from the 
member opposite and he should know better. 
 
I said to the media and I’ve said to this Assembly that it’s my 
preference to present to this House the full financial plan of the 
government. I intend to do so on Thursday. The review that’s 
been called I do hope will provide me with an understanding of 
the circumstances of how the information was made available to 
the public without authorization. But the member opposite 
really should know better than to cast baseless accusations. 
Shame. Shame. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Shame on that minister, Mr. Speaker, for 
ignoring traditions of this Legislative Assembly and leaking his 
own budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a serious 
question for the minister and I’d ask him, I ask him, I ask him 
to listen carefully. I want to ask the Minister of Finance, and I 
want him to think about his answer. Was the Minister of 
Finance involved in any way in authorizing this budget leak? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Anticipating Budget Policies 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well stay tuned and see if we hear any 
more on that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for this 
tired, old government, their budget leaks aren’t getting the kind 
of response they were hoping for. First, former NDP Finance 
minister, Janice MacKinnon, says the budget is unsustainable 
and is plunging the province back into deficit financing. And 
now on last night’s news a member of the University of Regina 
Students’ Union says she is not too impressed with the NDP’s 
tax plan for young people. She said and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Students don’t take tax credits into consideration. I mean 
it’s a pretty small detail and especially students who 
haven’t paid taxes before really. I don’t think it’s a big 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

consideration. I mean students are going to be going where 
the jobs are. 
 

Mr. Speaker, young people are not impressed with the NDP’s 
attempt to buy their vote. They want a growth agenda for this 
province. Why is the NDP so out of touch with young people in 
this province today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s interesting, coming from a critic 
who has no ideas on how to keep young people in this province, 
who has no credibility on this issue, and cannot even keep track 
of what his own spending estimates are. What I thought was 
particularly interesting is that the Leader of the Opposition says 
that he would rather find money for tax cuts for some of the 
wealthiest landowners in this province than to find money to 
help keep young people in the province. 
 
I found it interesting that the Leader of the Opposition, that the 
Leader of the Sask Party says that there’s no way that this 
province can afford to cap the drug costs for seniors, but he’s 
got more money when it comes to supporting big business. I 
find it very curious what the positions are of the Saskatchewan 
Party. I will tell you this, Mr. Speaker, they are not the positions 
of the Saskatchewan people and we’ll have an opportunity to 
test that soon enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister 
should be ashamed after taking half of their platform from the 
Saskatchewan Party 100 Ideas if that’s the best he can up with. 
He should be ashamed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s even better, here’s what’s even 
better, Mr. Speaker. The young woman who criticized the 
NDP’s budget plans last night on the news isn’t just a member 
of the U of R [University of Regina] student executive. She is 
also on the executive of the Saskatchewan Young New 
Democrats, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder this 
budget is leaking. Mr. Speaker, it’s being shot full of holes by 
the NDP’s own members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first Janice MacKinnon said the NDP budget is 
unsustainable. Now a member of the Saskatchewan Young New 
Democrats says the NDP’s tax plan isn’t right for students. How 
embarrassing for the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not even the NDP believe the minister is capable 
of delivering a good budget. Why should anyone else in 
Saskatchewan believe in this tired, old NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Speaking of tired and old, I would 

point out that that critic started work in this building long before 
I did. And I can assure this member, I will be at work in this 
building long after he’s done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. This 
budget is not crafted in a way that is trying to curry support of 
any one political party. This budget is designed to speak to the 
values of Saskatchewan families, and on Thursday I will 
present a budget that does just that. 
 
Unlike the Leader of the Opposition that says there cannot be 
enough money to support the capping of drug costs for our 
seniors, this government will present a budget that will do that. 
The member opposite says that there will not be enough money 
in this budget for us to be able to find tax measures to support 
young people to start their careers here. I will show him on 
Thursday that those members are wrong. 
 
Their priorities are not the priorities of Saskatchewan people 
and Saskatchewan families. And the Saskatchewan Party should 
be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 
pursuant to rule 61, I seek to move a motion of urgent and 
pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Premier please state the nature of 
the motion and read the motion into the record? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Federal Budget 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I will, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the people 
of Saskatchewan learned that a promise made to the people of 
Saskatchewan by the federal Conservative government had 
been broken. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan learned 
that a betrayal of that promise was in the federal Conservative 
budget. Mr. Speaker, never mind on the principle of the promise 
but on the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask if the Premier would read the 
nature of the motion so that he can ask leave of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if I may say, the nature of 
the motion, the nature of the motion is for this Assembly 
unanimously to express its disappointment, Mr. Speaker, so that 
this Assembly unanimously can express its disappointment to 
the federal Conservative government for breaking their promise 
and that this Assembly on behalf of the whole people of 
Saskatchewan unanimously would call on the 14 members of 
parliament from Saskatchewan to vote against a budget which 
breaks this solemn promise to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded 
by the member for Regina South, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly express its disappointment with the 
federal government’s decision to break its promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan with regards to equalization and 
that this Assembly call on all 14 Saskatchewan members 
of parliament to vote against the federal Conservative 
government’s budget. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier’s requested leave under rule 61 
to proceed with a priority debate on the motion just read. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Order, please. 
Why is the member from Canora-Pelly on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave to move a motion under rule 61. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member for Canora-Pelly read the 
motion into the record and state the nature of the motion briefly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
question period on March 15, 2007, the Premier was asked the 
following question: 
 

Was the Premier ever briefed by any government official 
on the Murdoch Carriere harassment investigation and the 
subsequent disciplinary action prior to April 1, 2003? 

 
And the Premier’s answer, and the Premier’s answer as 
recorded on page 857 of March 15 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. On the point of 
order, what is the point of order? Government House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, clearly under rule 61 the hon. 
member is entitled to describe the nature of his motion, not to 
enter into debate. The hon. member is clearly entering into 
debate, has not provided . . . hasn’t had the courtesy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Unfortunately, I was unable to hear what the 
member . . . the point of order that was being raised. So I would 
ask members to respect the right of a member to make a point 
of order or any member to make a statement, and it should be 
heard. The Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I simply rise to make the 
point as you correctly advised the hon. member that it is in 
order to describe the nature of the motion he wishes to 
introduce, not to enter into debate which clearly he was doing, 
and in addition to which, Mr. Speaker, hasn’t had the courtesy 
to provide advanced notice to the government of the desire to 

proceed to an emergency motion. 
 
Clearly there is not intent to do this seriously, Mr. Speaker. And 
I honourably suggest that the hon. member’s position is out of 
order. He should immediately give notice of his motion, and 
then we can proceed. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — To respond to the point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
know that in proper conduction of fair and balanced decisions 
by yourself, you will extend to the official opposition’s deputy 
leader with the same courtesy and latitude that was extended to 
the Premier appropriately. Mr. Speaker, clearly the member 
from Canora-Pelly was outlining the reasons for his motion. 
And I would suggest that he be allowed to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for the point of order. I 
will rule that the members, any member is permitted to make a 
request under rule 61. I will allow the person who is, the 
member who is proposing the debate under rule 61 to proceed 
and to state his motion and to use a suitable amount of time, 
approximately the amount of time that I had allowed the 
previous member. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 

Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have had ample time to listen to the question period today. We 
know that the Premier’s response to my question last Thursday 
was “appropriately, no.” Mr. Speaker, then within four hours, a 
news conference was called to give a different interpretation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this needs to be cleared up right now and I will 
move this, the motion is the following: 
 

That this Assembly censure the Premier for misleading the 
Assembly regarding the date that he became aware of the 
Murdoch Carriere harassment investigation; and that this 
Assembly order the Premier to apologize for these actions; 
and further, that this Assembly order the government to 
table all legal opinions and advice that it received in 
regard to the Murdoch Carriere settlement. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Canora-Pelly has requested 
leave of the Assembly to proceed with a motion he just read 
under rule 61. Is leave granted? 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Order please. The 
Assembly will come to order. Order, order. The Assembly will 
come to order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Assembly will come to order. 
Once again the Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 485 to 539 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 485 through to 593 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. A rare event yesterday at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 
did find myself speechless, and today I would like to address 
the issue. Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move 
second reading of The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Agriculture Societies Act was first drafted 
before Saskatchewan became a province. Since then 
Saskatchewan has developed a much more advanced economy. 
As such the Act no longer reflects the current activities of 
agriculture societies here in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions or 
SAASE has been responsible for overseeing the operations of 
agricultural societies in a director role. 
 
For the past four years, SAASE has been reviewing the current 
Act to include needed changes and updates. Mr. Speaker, 
because of major changes in the roles of SAASE, the provincial 
government and the university extension division, a large 
number of changes and amendments to The Agricultural 
Societies Act were required. Therefore in 2005, SAASE 
proposed to its member agriculture societies that the Act be 
repealed and they agreed. Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food 
and the University of Saskatchewan, who are both SAASE 
board members, agreed the Act should be repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Agricultural Societies Act was last amended 

in 1978. At least 26 amendments or changes are needed to bring 
the Act up to date. Moreover several provincial Acts already 
exist that may provide and make loan guarantees to agriculture 
organizations and associations. Excuse me. In the absence of 
The Agricultural Societies Act, agriculture societies can apply 
under The Non-profit Corporations Act to form legal entities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAASE is a provincially incorporated, non-profit 
association made up elected and appointed representatives of 
member agriculture societies and exhibition associations. The 
association has its own bylaws and regulations. 
 
SAASE also includes representatives from the federal and 
provincial governments and the University of Saskatchewan. If 
The Agricultural Societies Act is repealed, the University of 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food could 
still retain its membership on the SAASE board if required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision to repeal The Agricultural Societies 
Act follows extensive consultations. These consultations to 
review the current agriculture societies Act began four and a 
half years ago through the Saskatchewan Association of 
Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions. At the association’s 
2005 annual general meeting, members generally agreed that 
the Act did not accurately reflect its role. So SAASE proposed 
to its members that The Agricultural Societies Act be repealed. 
The SAASE board of directors represents all provincial 
agriculture societies. 
 
The repeal of The Agricultural Societies Act will also affect 
four other Acts: The Auctioneers Act, The Cities Act, The 
Municipalities Act, and the Credit Union Act. Consultations 
with the Department of Justice have provided recommendations 
and changes to these affected Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the repeal of The Agricultural Societies Act will 
give agricultural societies new opportunities in the 21st century. 
Therefore I move that The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act be 
read a second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 45, The Agricultural 
Societies Repeal Act be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise and speak on Bill No. 45, An Act to 
repeal The Agricultural Societies Act. Mr. Speaker, I think that 
everyone understands — and I believe the minister 
acknowledged — that agricultural societies in our province 
have really been a cornerstone of many worthwhile activities in 
our communities. 
 
Agricultural societies very often are the epitome of promoting 
and making sure that the heritage of our agricultural 
communities and our farm community are accentuated and 
made to be part of our very fabric of our province. Agricultural 
societies I know in my community are very much responsible 
for running an annual fair and keeping many of the agricultural 
events alive and well in our communities. 
 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

I listened with interest to the minister’s explanation, and I am 
pleased to hear that this decision was made with a great deal of 
consultation and involvement of the various agricultural 
societies that make up their parent organization. I know that our 
Agriculture critic will be interested in talking to these 
organizations and making sure that this repeal is indeed in their 
best interests and that they have other vehicles and 
methodologies in order to preserve the heritage and culture of 
our agricultural community. And in order for that to happen I 
would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 45 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and 
Mortgage Administrators Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I rise today to move second reading of 
The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act. 
The last 10 years have seen a transformation of the Canadian 
mortgage market. As of mid-2006 the total mortgage market in 
Canada was valued at $687 billion. Industry projects the market 
will reach $808 billion by the end of 2007. Presently, mortgage 
brokers account for approximately 27 per cent of the mortgage 
market share among all purchasers in Canada. Only 10 years 
ago, mortgage brokers accounted for just 3 per cent of this 
mortgage market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to update and modernize 
Saskatchewan’s mortgage brokerage legislation by providing a 
regulatory framework to address issues that have arisen as a 
result of the expansion of the mortgage brokerage industry. The 
Bill repeals the existing mortgage brokers Act which was 
originally enacted in 1967 and has not undergone any 
substantial changes since that time. 
 
The Bill establishes four categories of licences. It will require 
businesses that broker mortgages to have a mortgage brokerage 
licence. It will require individuals who broker mortgages on 
behalf of the mortgage brokerages to have either a broker’s or 
an associate’s licence. Businesses that administer mortgages for 
investors will be required to have a mortgage administrator’s 
licence. 
 
The Bill provides for a brokerage model for the sector that will 
ensure that individual brokers and associates are supervised and 
acting in accordance with the Act. It will require mortgage 
brokerages to appoint a principal broker to act as the 
compliance officer for the mortgage brokerage. 
 
The Bill also provides for requirements surrounding the 
handling of trust property. For example, mortgage brokerages 
will be required to obtain a specific endorsement on their 
licence in order to receive or hold trust money. Mortgage 
brokerages and mortgage administrators that receive or hold 
trust property will be required to ensure that comprehensive 

records are kept regarding all transactions involving trust 
property. 
 
The proposed legislation establishes disclosure requirements to 
ensure borrowers and investors are able to make informed 
decisions with respect to their mortgage transactions. 
 
The Bill allows for regulations to be established setting 
requirements for the capital, errors and omissions insurance, 
and education or other proficiency requirements for licensees. It 
also allows the superintendent to require applicants and 
licensees to file financial security with the superintendent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 
Administrators Act will require mortgage brokerages and 
mortgage administrators to act in the best interest of borrowers 
and private investors. The Bill also protects borrowers and 
private investors by prohibiting unlicensed entities from 
collecting fees for services when they should have been 
licensed. 
 
The Bill also includes provisions that prohibit unfair or 
deceptive practices, prohibit offering guarantees in respect of 
mortgage investments, and prohibit making the receipt of a 
product or service contingent on the purchase of another 
product or service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also updates the administrative 
framework, including the superintendent’s investigative and 
enforcement powers, in order to effectively regulate the 
industry. The proposed legislation does not include licensing 
requirements for mortgage lenders and traders. These 
businesses will be regulated under The Trust and Loan 
Corporations Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have consulted with mortgage brokerages, 
licensees, financial institutions, and trade associations in 
preparation of this Bill. Overall the result of the consultations 
have been positive and show a broad industry support for a new 
Act. The submissions provided by these various groups have 
greatly contributed to the development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 49, The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 
Administrators Act be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise and speak on the Bill No. 49, An Act respecting Mortgage 
Brokerages, Brokers, Associates and Mortgage Administrators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister has quite correctly outlined, 
mortgages are a very important part of the framework of 
building an economy and building a province. Every single one 
of us from time to time, I’m sure, have undertaken a mortgage 
to buy a home, to buy a business, to be involved in growing the 
economy directly or indirectly. And I think that it is a useful 
exercise to make sure that legislation governing the conduct of 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

those providing mortgages are appropriate and time sensitive in 
an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister outlined a very comprehensive piece 
of legislation with many parts to the table of contents outlining 
the Bill. It’s some 37 pages long. And there is a great deal of 
technical detail in this piece of legislation that I’m sure that the 
official opposition is going to want to scrutinize with some 
detail. And in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, at this time 
I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No 49 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 50, 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
The municipal employee pension plan is a defined benefit plan 
administered by the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission. The plan provides retirement benefits to the 
employees of school divisions, urban and rural municipalities, 
regional colleges, public libraries, and other local authorities 
within the province. 
 
It is desirable, Mr. Speaker, to amend the terms of appointment 
of the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission so 
that it coincides with the fiscal year of the plan. For transition 
purposes, those currently elected to the positions of chairperson 
or vice-chairperson will continue to serve until their successors 
are elected, prior to December 31, ’07, for the ’08 year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, employers participating in the plan have the 
ability to designate firefighters and police officers under the 
terms of the plan. Designated members and their employers pay 
higher contributions to be entitled to an early retirement date 
under the plan. We are introducing an amendment, Mr. Speaker, 
to comply with the ruling provided by the Canada Revenue 
Agency. 
 
As such, designated members will no longer be able to purchase 
an early retirement date for the period of time the member was a 
firefighter or a police officer with the employer but was not, 
quote, “designated” under the terms of the plan. These members 
however will continue to have the option to convert their 
regular service to designated service to increase the value of 
their pension and provide themselves with an early retirement 
date. Although we have been ordered to do this by the Canada 
Revenue Agency, I would note that this impacts a few members 
of the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at present when a retired member gets married 

after retirement, the new spouse is not eligible for a survivor 
benefit upon the death of the retired member. We believe it’s 
desirable, Mr. Speaker, to offer retired members the opportunity 
to restructure their pensions to provide a surviving spouse 
benefit for a new spouse. 
 
The pension will be based upon the total value of the retired 
member’s pension immediately prior to the recalculation date, 
and the spousal benefit than it can be . . . sorry, and the spousal 
benefit it can provide given the ages of the retired member and 
the new spouse. The new benefit will be cost neutral to the plan 
and the retired member. The cost of the recalculation will be 
borne by the retired member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members who are entitled to a small pension at the 
time of retirement receive the value of their allowance in one 
lump sum payment. This practice provides the administrative 
cost savings to the plan and affords the members the 
opportunity to use the lump sum payment in a manner that best 
meets their retirement needs. 
 
This amendment causes the plan to use the small benefit 
allowance provided by The Pension Benefit Act, 1992. The 
amendment removes a requirement of the legislature to amend 
this Act as changes are made to The Pension Benefit Act of ’92. 
It’s proposed that these changes will all come into effect upon 
assent. 
 
As such I am pleased to move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 50, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise and speak on Bill No. 50, An Act to amend The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has outlined some very important 
reasons why this piece of legislation is being introduced to 
ensure that our municipal employees’ pensions are appropriate 
to the changing circumstances in the economy and the world, 
and make sure that spousal benefits are appropriately allocated 
in the event of the passing away of a primary beneficiary. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that these changes are indeed very important 
and provide a great deal of comfort and security to people that 
are insured under these pension benefits. 
 
However we would like to make sure that we have an 
opportunity to consult with the affected people as much as 
possible, and in order to facilitate that I would move at this time 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 50 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move 
second reading of Bill No. 51 which is The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007. The public employee 
pension plan is governed by the public employee pension board. 
This board consists of nine members — four appointed from 
participating employers and four from the employee 
associations. The Chair is selected through an independent 
selection process undertaken by the board. 
 
The right to make these appointments is actually fixed in the 
Act. At present SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology], the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority], and Sask Property Management 
Corporation are indicated in the Act to jointly appoint a 
member of the board. 
 
Effective April 1, 2005, however, the Property Management 
Corporation became a department of the government, and the 
Public Service Commission appointee now represents the 
employees of this former corporation. As such, it’s necessary 
for us to amend this Act to remove the Property Management 
Corporation as an employer that may jointly appoint a member 
to the board. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Code amendment Act 
of ’06-07 is currently being considered by this Assembly. If the 
Act receives Royal Assent, mandatory retirement will be 
removed from the employee pension plan. This Bill that I’m 
tabling today will allow members to contribute to the public 
employee pension plan for leaves of absence that occur after the 
age of 65. In so doing, the amendment ensures that members 
will be treated equally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Income Tax Act requires that a 
member of a retired savings plan commence receipt of his or 
her pension by the end of the calendar year when a member 
turns 69. This rather rarely happens. But on occasion, members 
do forget to apply for a pension, which they may be entitled, 
and the public employee pension board cannot locate the 
member. 
 
Since the member’s money cannot remain in the pension fund, 
it’s necessary to ensure that processes are in place to address the 
situation. At present when a member cannot be located, an 
annuity is required to be purchased on the member’s behalf. 
Once the annuity is purchased, it cannot be altered even when 
the board locates the member and the member determines the 
annuity does not suit his or her needs. This board allows the 
public employee pension board to select a prescribed pension 
benefit on behalf of the member that best meets the perceived 
needs of the member at the time. 
 
In May 2006, the public employee pension plan introduced the 
variable pension benefit. I know this was an item of some 
debate within the Assembly. The variable benefit allowed the 
board, however, to retain a member’s funds in the plan and to 

pay a pension. Once the board is able to locate the member, the 
member may make changes to the benefit payable; how the 
variable benefit account is invested; or if the member so 
chooses, they may elect to move the monies out of the plan or 
choose some other retirement income method. The variable 
benefit therefore offers more flexibility for the member than if 
the funds were used to simply purchase the annuity as was the 
old practice. 
 
When a member of the plan elects the variable benefit, Mr. 
Speaker, the member is required to obtain consent from their 
spouse. In the case of the board electing on behalf of the 
member to undertake the variable benefit, if it cannot locate the 
member and the member’s spouse can also not be located, it’s 
necessary to deem spousal consent. I appreciate this sounds like 
a rather technical set of amendments, Mr. Speaker, and in fact it 
is. 
 
This Bill will however give the board the permission to move a 
member’s pension to the variable pension benefit on behalf of a 
member if it cannot locate that member by the end of the 
calendar year and the member turns 69. And it also gives the 
ability for the board to deem spousal consent when necessary. 
We believe that this will permit the board to direct pension 
payments to the General Revenue Fund if the member is 
located. 
 
The terms and conditions to be placed on the board when 
electing a variable benefit on behalf of the member need to be 
permitted through regulations. These will include beneficiary 
designations, instructions for investing the member’s funds, 
determination of the annual payment amount, and determining 
the method of payment. Again as earlier stated, Mr. Speaker, 
the provisions are needed only — only — where the public 
employees pension board is placed in a situation where it can’t 
locate a member who is turning 69. 
 
The board will still be required to take all reasonable steps to 
locate the member prior to making decisions on the member’s 
behalf. And as such, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note 
that this Bill is really intended to address the needs of a very 
specific set of members of the public employees pension plan. It 
also prescribes processes that are in place to allow the board to 
act in what it perceives to be the best interests of members that 
it can not locate. 
 
This Bill also ensures the composition of the public employees 
pension board adequately reflects the membership of the 
pension plan and its participating employers. This Bill also 
removes the provision that affects members on the basis of the 
age when there’s no reason in policy to do so. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, I do move second reading of The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act of 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 51, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2007 

briefly on Bill No. 51, an Act to amend The Public Employees 
Pension Plan Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, it’s a very technical piece 
of legislation that updates this pension plan, and I think it’s very 
appropriate. One of the clauses that I noticed, particularly in 
light of the federal government’s budget changes yesterday, is 
that I believe they moved from age 69 to age 71 for 
consideration of pensions and the related implications of 
pensions. And I note that in the piece of legislation before us 
today, they’re still speaking of age 69. And it may well be 
important for us to consider a possible amendment to move it 
from 69 to 71 to make it continuous and in keeping with the 
changes that are happening at the federal level. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that can be addressed later as we have 
an opportunity to consult with the people affected to see if they 
would support the notion of using age 71 as a more appropriate 
benchmark for consideration in this legislation. And in order for 
that consultation to occur, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on Bill 51, second reading, be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member for 
Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce a motion to substitute on committees. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted for the member for Melfort to 
introduce motions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Committee Substitution 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the name of Nancy Heppner be substituted for the 
name of Lyle Stewart on the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort, seconded by the Member for Estevan: 
 

That the name of Nancy Heppner be substituted for the 
name of Lyle Stewart on the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work later this day by the Standing Committees on Human 
Services as well as Crown and Central Agencies, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:12.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................893 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................894 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................895 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................895 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................896 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................895 
 Bill No. 7 — The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................896 
 Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act 
 Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................896 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................897 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................897 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................899 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................899 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................899 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Weyburn Student Wins Regional Spelling Bee 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................899 
 100th Anniversary of St. Paul’s Hospital 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Colorectal Cancer Awareness 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Outstanding Community Service Honoured in Prince Albert 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Reginan Wins National Recognition for Excellence 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................901 
 National Social Work Week 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................901 
 Budget Tradition 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................901 



 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Premier’s Knowledge of Allegations Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................902 
 Government Response to Harassment Complaints Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................903 
 Communication of Budget Information 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................905 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 Anticipating Budget Policies 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................905 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................906 
MOTION UNDER RULE 61 
 Federal Budget 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................906 
 Murdoch Carriere 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................907 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................907 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................908 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................908 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................908 
 Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................909 
 Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................910 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................910 
 Bill No. 51 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................911 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................911 
MOTIONS 
 Committee Substitution 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................912 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




