






















































Hansard: May 14, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 61A  MONDAY, MAY 14, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1587 
 May 14, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, I wish to table the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan — volume 1, year 2007. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today again to present a petition on behalf of residents 
of the province of Saskatchewan regarding health care, and 
more specifically the need for dialysis services in the 
Broadview area. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
folks from the communities of Broadview, Grenfell, 
Whitewood, Regina, Cowessess; Winnipeg, Manitoba; and 
Ochapowace. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise concerning the lack of cell coverage in Fishing 
Lake community. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
ensure that SaskTel provides access to cellphone coverage 
in the Fishing Lake community area. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Yorkton and 
Springside. And I present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the discontinuing of the 
basic education classes at the Estevan campus of the Southeast 
Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 

continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan and 
Bienfait. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present a petition for fairness with Crown leaseholders. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land leases maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Scott and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present yet another petition on behalf of the 600 
children under six years of age and their parents in the 
Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek, Willowgrove 
neighbourhood of Saskatoon. They are hoping this will be their 
year. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek and in Willowgrove. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from northeast 
Saskatoon, Peters Cove, Lashyn Cove, and Wright Crescent. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of individuals and communities whose 
schools are under threat of closure. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Neville, Admiral, 
Climax, Tompkins, Piapot, and Richmound schools 
remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed exclusively by 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

individuals from the community of Tompkins. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services 
from the Lafleche and District Health Centre would cause 
undue hardship to residents, particularly seniors. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Lafleche and 
Glentworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are concerned with the health 
care system and the potentially dangerous situation that’s 
looming in that area regarding recruitment and retention of 
physicians. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Shellbrook, 
Leask, Deer Ridge, Spiritwood, Big River, and Victoire. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 
20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Duval, Strasbourg, and Nokomis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in the 
House to present a petition calling for mandatory drug and 
alcohol testing in fatal motor vehicle accidents. I will read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are many pages to this petition. They are 
from North Battleford, Saskatoon, Wilkie, Unity, Leask, and 
elsewhere throughout the province. I’m pleased to present it on 
behalf of all of those citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today and present petitions calling on the 
government to make a commitment to the community of 
Coronach on a clean coal power unit. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to commit to building a second clean 
coal power unit at the Poplar River power station. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from 
Coronach, Fife Lake, Assiniboia, Willow Bunch, Radville, and 
Big Beaver. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been instructed by the Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure Committee to report Bill No. 37 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 37 be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 37. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendment be read a first time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 
Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I 
move that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for third 
reading now. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Justice that Bill 37 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Chair for the Standing Committee on the 

Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
been instructed by the Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure to report Bill 43 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 43 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of this Bill. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 43 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been 
instructed by the Standing Committee of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure to report that it has considered certain 
estimates and to present its eighth report. I move, seconded by 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure now be 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

Northeast, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena, 
that the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure be now concurred 
in. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce His Excellency, Ihor Ostash. He’s the 
ambassador of Ukraine to Canada. And he’s seated in your 
gallery, and he’s now standing. 
 
This is His Excellency’s first official visit to Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan has cultivated an important friendship with 
Ukraine, with the help of our strong Ukrainian community. This 
visit provides an opportunity for Saskatchewan to better 
understand the current political environment in Ukraine and for 
us to provide an update on the development of 
Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations. 
 
I know that the ambassador has met with a number of ministers 
and other members of the Assembly. It’s a real privilege and 
pleasure to have him visit us. I would ask all the members to 
join me in extending a very warm welcome to His Excellency. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition it is my 
pleasure to welcome His Excellency to the Legislative 
Assembly and to the province of Saskatchewan. We have a 
great many Ukrainian-Canadians throughout Canada but a large 
percentage of Ukrainian-Canadians in Saskatchewan. And we 
had an opportunity to discuss many of the contributions of 
Ukrainians, but we also had a chance to discuss a lot of the 
relationship between Saskatchewan and Ukraine. And we look 
forward to a long-lasting relationship, both for Ukrainians and 
for people in Saskatchewan. So again on behalf of the official 
opposition, welcome to Saskatchewan and have a great time. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister for Advanced Education and 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my distinct honour to introduce to you and to all members 
of the House 23 public servants that are visiting the legislature 
today. Mr. Speaker, these individuals provide valuable services 
on behalf of the public day in and day out in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They’re here today to have a behind-the-scenes 
look at the inner workings of the legislature, to observe the 
proceedings in the House, and to visit with you, Mr. Speaker, 
and other members. 
 
I’d like to take a moment, if I could, on behalf of all members 
of the legislature to thank these public servants that dedicate 
their working lives to the service of our citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
The individuals are seated in your gallery. They work in the 
departments of the Environment; Government Relations; 
Health; Culture, Youth and Recreation; Industry and Resources; 
Justice; and the Legislative Assembly. I look forward to 
meeting this afternoon. I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming these public servants to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the 23 public servants who are 
visiting with us today and taking time out of their busy schedule 
to see how the legislature indeed functions. 
 
Many of us that sit in this Chamber are deluded by the fact that 
we are the real engines of making change in this province. The 
fact of the matter is the public servants are those who really 
deliver these changes and services to our citizens, and we’re 
very much grateful for all the work that they do in our province. 
And I look forward to meeting with you later on this afternoon 
for a bit of a discussion on how this whole Assembly works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like everyone to join with me in 
welcoming these public servants to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, j’aimerais vous présenter 45 
étudiants de la quatrième et cinquième année de l’École St. 
Mary dans la circonscription électorale Regina Walsh Acres. 
Ma fille, Morgan, est une étudiante à la quatrième année. Elle 
est ici aujourd’hui avec sa classe et leur enseignante, Mme. 
Linda Michaud — s’il vous plaît. Nous avons aussi la classe de 
la quatrième et la cinquième année avec leur enseignante, Mme. 
Stéphanie Dufour-Jerrett. Merci beaucoup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, École St. Mary a la meilleure augmentation de 
toutes les écoles de la division scolaire catholique élémentaire 
de Régina. Presentement l’École St. Mary a une population de 
369 étudiants, et les nombres d’augmentations à l’automne 
continue à augmenter. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 45 grade 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

4 and 5 students from St. Mary School in the constituency of 
Regina Walsh Acres. My daughter, Morgan, is a grade 4 
student. She is here today with her class and their teacher, 
Mme. Linda Michaud — please. We also have the grade 4 and 
5 class with their teacher, Mme. Stéphanie Dufour-Jerrett. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, St. Mary School has the biggest increase of all the 
Catholic elementary schools in Regina. At present there are 369 
students registered at St. Mary, and registration numbers for fall 
continue to increase.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are the proud creators of the 
beautiful, beautiful Saskatchewan centennial quilt on display in 
the legislature gallery. These students are excited to be here 
today because each student was assigned to research an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] so this visit provides 
them with the opportunity to see the MLAs that they’ve 
researched in action. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to have them visit the legislature 
today, and I’d like to ask all of my colleagues to welcome them 
here today and wish them much success for the completion of 
the school year. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly 
two people sitting in your gallery, Walter Dutchak and Michael 
Androsoff, who are here today not necessarily to watch the 
proceedings during question period, but more importantly to see 
a Bill go through or not through committee, the regional health 
authorities Act, and the impact that that Act has on their 
business, the ambulance business. 
 
Walter runs an ambulance service out of North Battleford, and 
Michael has been very involved in the industry for many, many 
years. The impact of such a Bill could be devastating to their 
industry. I think you’ll see a number other operators coming 
into the Assembly over the next couple hours to witness the . . . 
Hopefully the government realize some of the impact it is 
having with the Bill that they have introduced. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d ask members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Seated in the gallery, the east gallery is a group of 
students. This particular class I think has been visiting the 
Legislative Assembly for as long as I’ve been a member of the 
Legislative Assembly. In this particular case it’s a group of five 
students. They are from the grade 12 Social Studies 30 class at 
Balfour Collegiate. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Karen Jackson. I look forward for the opportunity again to meet 
with this group following question period. I would ask all 
members to extend them a very warm welcome today. Thank 

you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my huge honour 
today to introduce someone who is no stranger particularly to 
members on the government side, but seated behind the bar is a 
former member of this Legislative Assembly, in fact a former 
minister in the Blakeney government, Mr. Clint White, who 
represented the constituency of Regina Wascana. And Clint 
pops by about once a session. I encourage him to come twice a 
session or three times because he’s always fun to visit with and 
we always learn something important from this gentleman. I ask 
all members to join me in welcoming my friend and our friend, 
Clint White. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I see in your gallery today, four people who are 
prominently involved in the arts here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and take a strong and enthusiastic interest in the 
well-being of professional artists. I’d like to introduce them to 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, through you and to all 
members, and just ask them to wave as I introduce them. I see 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Marnie Gladwell, who is the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance. And also 
in your gallery on the other side of the bench is Patrick Close, 
who is from CARFAC, the Canadian Artists Representation/Le 
front des artistes canadiens; and with him is Mike Burns from 
ACTRA, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and 
Radio Artists; and widely known actor and also member of 
ACTRA, Kent Allen. I’d ask all hon. members to welcome 
these prominent artists to their gallery here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce, sitting in your gallery, Boris Kischuk, who is 
accompanied by Ms. Wojcichowsky, and I believe they were 
here having lunch with you, Mr. Speaker, and the ambassador 
from Ukraine. And I know Mr. Kischuk better. 
 
Boris is an engineer in Saskatoon, and he served as head of the 
public utility rate review committee and also has provided 
distinguished service on our public school board in Saskatoon. 
And I’m not as familiar with Ms. Wojcichowsky, but I know 
that both of them are involved in the Ukrainian-Canadian 
community. And I’d like all members to join me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Green Ribbon of Hope 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The month of May 
marks the 16th annual Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign by 
Child Find Canada. Every parent’s worst nightmare is to have a 
child go missing. Unfortunately this nightmare is a reality for 
thousands of parents across Canada, as thousands of children 
are reported missing each year, nationwide. 
 
According to Child Find, the Green Ribbon of Hope is 
recognized as a symbol to remember children who have gone 
missing and to seek their safe return. 
 
Sixteen years ago students and teachers at Holy Cross 
Secondary School in St. Catharines, Ontario launched the Green 
Ribbon of Hope Campaign following the abduction and 
subsequent murder of their fellow student, 15-year-old Kristen 
French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the month of May, Child Find 
organizations across the country will sponsor a number of 
activities, including fingerprint clinics and other community 
fundraising events. During the Green Ribbon of Hope 
Campaign, May 25 is recognized as Missing Children’s Day. 
 
Proceeds generated by the campaign will help Child Find 
Canada and its provincial offices, like the one right here in 
Saskatchewan, continue their efforts in helping search for 
missing children, as well as educating children and adults about 
personal safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank everyone involved with 
Child Find Saskatchewan, headquartered in Saskatoon, for their 
tireless efforts during the Green Ribbon Campaign, and all 
through the year to find missing children and their compassion 
in dealing with families who face uncertainty and unimaginable 
feelings of loss and hopelessness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Pink Ribbon Day 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is Pink Ribbon Day 
here in the legislature. Many of us will be dressed in pink or 
wearing a pink ribbon in support of breast cancer research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are three important aspects to every breast 
cancer ribbon. First, they’re pink in celebration of the courage 
of thousands of women who are diagnosed with breast cancer 
each year. Secondly, they’re lined with black in honour of the 
memory of the thousands of women who have died from the 
disease. Finally, Mr. Speaker, the pink ribbon is shaped like a 
teardrop for the many tears shed at the time of every diagnosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, breast cancer is the most common cancer among 

Canadian women, affecting one in nine at some point in their 
lives. An estimated 22,300 women will be diagnosed with 
breast cancer this year alone, and more than 5,000 will die as a 
result. Breast cancer affects us all, Mr. Speaker, whether we are 
unfortunate enough to contract the disease or not. In 2004, after 
years of brave struggle, I lost my own mother to this disease, 
and my daughter, Morgan, lost her Oma. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that one day there will be a cure for 
breast cancer, but until that day it is the responsibility of every 
one of us to help raise the awareness of Saskatchewan people 
and to ensure that research continues. Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to seeing as many pink garments and ribbons in this 
Assembly as possible during tomorrow’s Pink Ribbon Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Royals Junior B Hockey Champs 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Royals Junior B 
hockey team had a fantastic season this year, and I would like to 
share some of the highlights with members of this Assembly. 
 
Under the guidance of coaches Ray Hudson, Jim Peichel, Al 
Paquin, and trainer Don Brickner, the Saskatoon Royals 
finished first in the North Sask Junior B league play. Mr. 
Speaker, the team then went on to defeat the Saskatoon 
Westleys in the semi-finals, and later edged out the Saskatoon 
Quakers to win the North Sask Junior B playoffs. From there 
the team continued its winning streak by trouncing the Pilot 
Butte Storm to win the Provincial Junior B Championship. 
 
But the Royals’ success doesn’t end there, Mr. Speaker. At the 
end of the season, the Saskatoon Royals competed in their very 
first ever Western Canadian Championship. At this level, the 
team systematically eliminated the provincial champions from 
northern Ontario, Manitoba, British Columbia, and the host 
team Fort Knox, to win the Western Canadian Junior B 
Championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my congratulations to the 
players of the Saskatoon Royals on a season that was both 
exciting and rewarding. I would also ask members to join me in 
congratulating the coaches, trainer, equipment manager, 
parents, billets, volunteers, as well as Saskatoon Royals 
vice-president, Bill Fitzsimmons, and general manager, Robert 
Renneberg, on such a successful season. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, last Thursday evening I, along with my colleague, the 
Minister Responsible for the Status of Women, and a capacity 
crowd, had the pleasure of attending the 19th annual Prince 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

Albert YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] 
Women of Distinction Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the award organizers and the 
volunteers for what was a very enjoyable evening, and I want to 
congratulate each and every one of the nominees for their 
ongoing contributions to our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s YWCA Women of Distinction are 
Gloria Mahussier for the community enhancement; Debbie Roy 
for business and entrepreneurship; Donna Brooks for recreation, 
sport, and active living; Gillian McCaffery for the arts. Holly F. 
Young was the winner in the professional series category and, 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s winner of the SaskPower Roberta 
Bondar Scholarship is Rebecca Gustufson, a grade 12 student at 
P.A.C.I. [Prince Albert Collegiate Institute]. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the winner of this year’s distinction Lifetime Achievement 
Award is Tena Bannerman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating these nominees and the winners of this year’s 
Prince Albert Women of Distinction Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Montmartre Student’s Prize-winning Essay 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to announce to this Assembly today that the town of 
Montmartre is celebrating the achievement of Marley Kotylak, 
a local grade 8 student. Marley is the author of an essay entitled 
“The Meaning of Freedom.” Her essay was submitted to the 
Royal Canadian Legion Remembrance Day contest and won 
first place at the branch level, first place at the district level, and 
first place at the provincial level. At the national level Marley 
received an honourable mention for her essay. She will appear 
with the other national winners in the Legion Magazine 
published in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Remembrance Day contest is one of the 
contests the Royal Canadian Legion sponsors every year in 
order to foster the tradition of remembrance among Canadians. 
Marley’s essay is a well written and thoughtful expression of a 
teenager’s perspective on the meaning of freedom. She notes 
that in Canada there are a variety of freedoms we take for 
granted — such as the right to an education and the right for a 
woman to be outdoors without a male escort. 
 
At a time when some Canadian youth are becoming less and 
less engaged, we have a young woman in the town of 
Montmartre who not only appreciates the struggle for freedom 
but who also has been able to articulate her appreciation in an 
award-winning essay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
congratulate Marley Kotylak on her achievement and to wish 
her well in her future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Salute to Saskatchewan Farmers 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, in the words of the late Stan 
Rogers: 
 

For the good times come and go, but at least there’s rain 
So this won’t be barren ground when September rolls 
around 
. . . watch the field behind the plow turn to straight dark 
rows 
Put another season’s promise in the ground. 

 
Mr. Speaker, over this past weekend I had the opportunity to 
drive through a good part of rural Saskatchewan — from here to 
my home near Macdowall, and from Choiceland and Smeaton 
to my hometown of Rockglen. And everywhere there were 
visual reminders that while we have been engaged in the theatre 
and theatrics of this Assembly, farmers are out seeding this 
year’s crop. 
 
This in spite of accelerating input costs, uncertain and volatile 
commodity prices, escalating freight rates, negative net farm 
incomes, federal sabotage of collective marketing, and of course 
the vagaries of weather from drought in the Southwest to 
flooding in the Northeast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good life we lead in this province is derived in 
great part from our long and continued history of farming the 
land. Our economy and the livelihood of most of our 
communities depend one way or another on the soil. And most 
of us, Mr. Speaker, have no more than one degree of separation 
from the family farm. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as we near the end of the spring 
session, I ask that all members join me in saluting the farmers 
of this province as they put another season’s promise in the 
ground. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Responses to Mailer 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month the 
Saskatchewan Party launched a postcard campaign asking 
Saskatchewan residents to weigh in on the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government’s decision to reward Murdoch 
Carriere with $275,000 and a generous top-up to his 
government pension. This is a former senior government 
official who was fired for harassment and convicted of assault. 
 
Our office is still getting responses a month and half later, and I 
would like to share some more of those responses with the 
members opposite. From Prince Albert, and I quote: 
 

This decision is SO wrong! IF Carrier was threatening to 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

sue, it should have gone to court where 12 responsible, 
intelligent jurors would have made the right decision. 
Shame on you, NDP. I can’t believe you could have made 
such an asinine decision. 
 

And from Regina, and I quote: 
 

One more example of the lack of moral fibre displayed by 
NDP leaders. We have, unfortunately, come to expect this 
type of performance. 
 

From Saskatoon, and I quote: 
 

What has this come to? When did harassment in the 
workplace become a way to become rich on our tax 
dollars? All this is utterly disgusting. The NDP show no 
respect for how our hard earned tax dollars are spent. 
Think about it Mr. Premier, do you really mean you would 
do it again? 

 
Mr. Speaker, to date we have received almost 7,500 responses 
to this campaign and 92 per cent of those who responded 
expressed similar sentiments of disdain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Shortage of Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
under this NDP government we have the worst nurse retention 
record in all of Canada. The NDP government is working on 
passing a deficit budget that puts the people of Saskatchewan 
$700 million in the hole, but with all that spending, all they 
could muster was 18 new training seats for nurses next year, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s a shame. 
 
Now we have the largest health district in the province using 
paramedics to cover a shortage of nurses in intensive care units. 
The Royal University Hospital is short five full-time nurses as 
well as six temporary nurses in ICU [intensive care unit]. The 
head of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says that using 
paramedics to fill for nurses is not an ideal situation. 
 
Why is this government continuing to fail when it comes to 
introducing a comprehensive strategy for nurse recruitment and 
retention in our province? Why is this minister continuing to 
manage in crisis mode? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to respond to this question. The 
member opposite, as members of the public are aware, last year 
we put in place $25 million recruitment and retention strategy. 
Mr. Speaker, that strategy is already having . . . It’s already 
making significant progress, Mr. Speaker. We’re having 

significant success with that strategy. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we recognize — that’s why we 
put the program in place — that health workforce requirements, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very competitive environment. And we 
have to continue to be very creative in the efforts that we make 
to ensure that all of our operating rooms, emergency rooms, 
acute care facilities, and long-term care facilities are adequately 
staffed, Mr. Speaker, for the care of the individual . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government has known about the nursing shortage for 
years. They created it. And they still fail to work effectively 
with front-line workers to find solutions. 
 
In the 2006 report from the Canadian Institute for Health 
Information, it highlights this problem. For a fifth year in a row, 
only 50 per cent of registered nurses have full-time 
employment. Roughly one-third of nurses educated in 
Saskatchewan, PEI [Prince Edward Island], and Newfoundland 
no longer work in the province where they were trained. 
 
When will the minister begin working with the health care 
professionals to come up with mechanisms that will ensure we 
keep most, if not all, of our graduates in our province? That is 
the solution. When will he start working with the front-line 
workers and ensure full-time work for our graduating students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the comment of the member opposite that the NDP 
created this crisis. And I’m sure that the 2,000 vacancies in 
British Columbia, the 900 vacancies in Calgary, the 1,000 
vacancies in Ontario . . . I’m sure that those health care human 
resource managers, Mr. Speakers, are looking at Saskatchewan 
at having created this crisis right across the country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we put in place, this government put in place 
a program that this year is going to devote $6 million alone this 
year, Mr. Speaker, $6 million alone to deal with retention 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker. The application deadline for those 
workplace applications closed just a few weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker. In the week prior to that, we had more than 30 
applications for those retention programs, Mr. Speaker. Those 
programs will be effective . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time is elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The difference 
between the other Western provinces and Saskatchewan is 
Alberta increased the number of training seats for registered 
nurses by 400. In Manitoba they have twice the number of 
training seats than we do in Saskatchewan. But under this NDP 
government, what they’ve decided to do is $700 million deficit 
and create 18 new training seats for nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
You’re never going to fix the problem when we’ve have 400 
vacancies and up to 500 retirements looming in the next year or 
two. How in the world will 18 seats fill that void? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Interesting use of numbers. Let’s go back to the election of this 
government in 2003, Mr. Speaker. Fifty-five per cent more 
registered nursing seats in this province today than there were 
in 2003 — 55 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. For LPNs, 
licensed practical nurses, Mr. Speaker, the number of seats 
since 2003 is up 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is committed to increasing the number of seats 
for health care professionals across the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, today as we speak here, there are close to, there are 
more than 1,500 students in nursing seats in this province, Mr. 
Speaker — 1,500. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this minister 
identified the problem. Yes, they’ve increased the number of 
training seats by 70 per cent. But when you knock it down to 
less than 100 training seats in this province under that NDP 
government, that’s why we have the crisis we’re facing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have an NDP government 
that is pushing for a deficit budget. We have an NDP 
government that’s only increased the number of training seats 
by 18. We have hundreds of vacancies around the province. 
Now the government’s solution is to manage some of these 
vacancies by bringing in paramedics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will he start dealing with the real issue? It’s 
the number of training seats, the number of full-time positions, 
the number of retained graduates. When will he deal with that 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
couple of things — first and foremost, paramedics are trained to 
deal with issues in the emergency room and in acute care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. And we are happy to work with 

paramedics to the full scope of their capacity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite does forget that 
on the retention side of things with graduates, we were able to 
announce 90 per cent of last year’s graduates are working in the 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, the only advice 
the members opposite have given us so far this year, Mr. 
Speaker, the only advice is more auditors or freeze the budget at 
the rate of inflation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they had been elected in the last election, Mr. 
Speaker, the health care budget this year would be $200 million 
less than it is today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week it was learned that the maternity ward at Weyburn 
General Hospital is going to close June 1 for the summer. And 
an official from Sun Country Health Region said the closure 
may even go further into the fall, all because of a shortage of 
nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the loss of maternity services is a serious concern. 
It’s one that I’ve heard from constituents over the last week and 
over this weekend. Can the minister explain to the expectant 
families of Weyburn and area why they will not have a 
maternity ward for potentially many months? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite will know that I answered this exact question 
for him in estimates just a week ago, Mr. Speaker — the exact 
question. And at the time, I very specifically said this issue was 
not specifically to do with the nursing shortage, Mr. Speaker. 
The member opposite heard me say that. He thanked me for my 
answer, and he didn’t pursue the question any further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this matter is not a matter of dealing with, on a 
political basis, across the floor about a nursing shortage. This is 
a matter about managing all the health resources within a 
facility to ensure the safety of the patients and the individuals 
who reside within that health region, Mr. Speaker. The health 
region is working very hard to manage the human resources — 
all the human resources — in the Weyburn area, Mr. Speaker. 
And the member opposite knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister last week said 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

he was confident that this temporary suspension of maternity 
services would end by the summer. Now Sun Country Health 
Region officials say that it could go in to the fall. Families will 
be forced to travel to Regina or Estevan to have their babies in 
facilities that are already facing nursing shortages. This will add 
uncertainty and extra cost for families from Weyburn and area 
during a very emotional time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister believe it’s acceptable that a city 
the size of Weyburn cannot offer this important health service? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite knows that I indicated to him in committee, 
Mr. Speaker — I indicated to him — that emergency room 
services would be able to provide any emergency deliveries that 
needed to be made, and that physicians were going to work on 
the planned deliveries, Mr. Speaker, the non-complex deliveries 
in other facilities in order to ensure that the health region could 
manage the human resource capacities within the emergency 
room, the acute care units, the ICU [intensive care unit], Mr. 
Speaker, and the other units within the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Weyburn can have confidence that 
the regional health authority is taking this issue very seriously 
and they’re taking the steps that they have in order to protect 
the safety and security of the people who need the services in 
Weyburn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s hope there are no emergencies over the summer while this 
government can’t offer maternity services. Mr. Minister, on 
CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Morning Edition, 
this morning an official from Sun Country said this nursing 
shortage goes even deeper, and it’s affecting other services at 
the Weyburn hospital. When asked if it was possible that, 
beyond maternity, this nursing shortage could lead to other bed 
closures or other areas of treatment in the Weyburn area being 
shut down, the response was, and I’ll quote: 
 

It is very tight. There is no doubt about it. And we have 
had some shifts where we weren’t able to cover our 
intensive care unit. So, yes, there are vacancies throughout 
every department. 

 
Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of NDP government, why hasn’t 
this NDP government, and this minister been able to address the 
nursing shortage? Why have they allowed cities like Weyburn 
to reach crisis situations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

to clarify one more time — because the member opposite by the 
introduction to his question proves that he did not hear what he 
said or chooses purposely not to understand what I had to say, 
Mr. Speaker — emergencies will be dealt with in the 
emergency room at the Weyburn hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
Emergencies will be dealt with; the capacity exists. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have answered on the floor of the 
Chamber. I have answered to the public through the media, and 
I have answered in committee where the member was present, 
Mr. Speaker, exactly the same answer I gave the member 
earlier. We have increased the number of nursing seats in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, by 55 per cent since 2003; for LPNs, 
Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent. Our retention rate is now 90 per cent 
for new graduates. And, Mr. Speaker, we are working every 
single day with health professionals in this province to ensure 
that we can deal with nurse . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Disciplinary Process for the Judiciary 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the NDP government 
appointed Terry Bekolay as a Provincial Court judge. 
According to news reports, Terry Bekolay was unassigned from 
the bench in early December, 2005, six months before a formal 
complaint was lodged against him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Justice minister: who made the decision to 
remove Terry Bekolay from the bench, so he cannot preside 
over any cases six months prior to an official complaint that 
was lodged against him, and why? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little shocked 
that the member from Saskatoon Southeast could be compelled 
by his colleagues to ask this question. As he well knows — and 
there were some written questions from the opposition which 
the members opposite wouldn’t read out loud — as they well 
know from the answers to those questions and from other 
sources, the discipline of judges is within the control properly 
of the judicial council, a non-executive council of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it has been a year and a half 
since Terry Bekolay hasn’t been able to hear any cases in court, 
yet he has been collecting his judge’s salary the whole time. Mr. 
Speaker, how much has Terry Bekolay been paid since 
December 2005, and why has it been one and a half years and 
the council has yet to conduct their inquiry? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are three 
branches of the government. There is the Legislative Assembly, 
in which we sit. There is executive government, Mr. Speaker, 
and there’s a judicial branch. And the judicial branch is not only 
independent of the executive branch, Mr. Speaker; it’s 
independent of the Legislative Assembly and has its own 
processes for discipline. And these kind of questions that the 
member is asking could properly be directed towards the 
judicial council. I believe the judicial council will answer the 
member’s questions if he asks them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, according to The Provincial 
Court Act, the Justice minister is one of the individuals who 
receives complete details about complaints against judges. It 
has been 11 years since a judge has been suspended in this 
province, so the complaints against Terry Bekolay must be very 
serious. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the nature of the 
complaint against Terry Bekolay? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if the legislation required 
complete details to go to the Legislative Assembly, it would, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, The Provincial Court Act states 
that the Justice minister takes part in selecting two individuals 
to represent the public on that council. They’re appointed by 
order in council. Mr. Speaker, the Act also states that such 
hearings are to be held in public unless otherwise ordered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week a city police officer was put through a 
very public process because of alleged misconduct. It would 
seem appropriate that any judge who has presided over the 
judging and sentencing of individuals should be subject to a 
public hearing when a serious complaint is lodged. And given 
the fact that Terry Bekolay is the former president of the NDP 
Party, this NDP government must take steps to remove any 
possible appearance of partisan politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister today commit to ensuring that 
Terry Bekolay’s inquiry be held in public? Will the inquiry be 
held in public? When will the hearing be held? And who will be 
on that hearing committee, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this government will not 
compel to direction to any members of the judicial council how 
the judicial council proceeds in this matter. Judicial council will 
proceed according to the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
many schools all across this province are closing. At the same 
time, most property owners are seeing their tax rates go up 
significantly. In the Good Spirit School Division, some areas 
are seeing their mill rate go up by as much as 20 per cent. Some 
in the Prairie Valley School Division are seeing mill rates rise 
by over 10 per cent. Others in the Living Sky Division are 
facing mill rates increases of approximately 12 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the long-term property tax relief that this 
NDP government promised as a result of the much vaunted 
amalgamation of school boards process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve seen over the last three years is some 
drastic changes in the education system in the province of 
Saskatchewan, starting with the Boughen report when it was 
tabled in May 2004. Since then we have seen a major overhaul 
of the school divisions. We have gone from 82 divisions down 
to 28. We are seeing those divisions begin to settle in and make 
the changes that they need. Mr. Speaker, we will continue on 
with education reform in the province of Saskatchewan so we 
see a good system that sees good results and good outcomes for 
students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has 
promised property tax relief for years. Tommy Douglas even 
promised it in 1944 when he promised to do away with 
educational property tax because he said it was a regressive 
legislation. Instead mill rates are going up in the following 
school divisions: North East, Northwest, Prairie South, 
Chinook, Creighton, Englefeld, Good Spirit, Holy Trinity 
Roman Catholic, Horizon, Living Sky, Northern Lights, North 
West Roman Catholic, Prairie Valley, Prince Albert Roman 
Catholic, Regina School Division, Regina Roman Catholic, 
Saskatoon, South East Cornerstone, and Saint Paul’s Roman 
Catholic School Division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this NDP government going to stop 
offloading the cost of education onto the backs of property 
taxpayers and live up to its promise to provide meaningful, 
long-term property tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, during these last number of 
years when we have seen a majority of the changes in the 
system within Saskatchewan, and previous to that, over the last 
10 years we’ve seen an increase of $200 million into the 
foundation operating grant. We have seen an increase in the 
number of teachers in the system, but we have also seen during 
that decade a drop of enrolment of almost 27,000 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is some changes that need to be made, and 
we know that. And we’ll continue working through the 
recommendations to provide that good system for students in 
Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to go back to 
Tommy Douglas. We just have to look at the member from 
Canora and he said in 1992: 
 

The province is too small in terms of population for all the 
educational facilities it provides. There must be less 
duplication and a greater sharing of services, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should understand 
and know that when you lose students, you don’t lose nice, even 
blocks of 20 students per classroom so that the actual expenses 
of school divisions can be minimized. The minister should 
know that, even though enrolments are decreasing, expenses for 
many school divisions are increasing. And as a result, we see 
this phenomena where school divisions and citizens are getting 
fewer educational services and are paying more dollars for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister deliver on long-term 
property tax relief and higher quality education in this province 
for our citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, during the last couple of 
years also we have seen the education portion property tax 
credit on each and every one of our tax notices as they come out 
— 38 per cent on agricultural property and this year increased 
to 10 per cent on residential and commercial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s fine for the opposition to stand up and 
criticize. But we have the Leader of the Opposition; he stands 
up and says well we’d keep the schools open. Then we have the 
member from Melfort, he stands up and says well we should 
have schools of necessity and then says in the paper in Tisdale, 
well that may not work, may not work in many cases, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, then they stand out in front of the 
Save Our Schools rally and say everyone needs to be involved 
in this decision. Then they say on the media that — on the CBC 
radio, the member from Melfort said — well the school boards 
need to be left alone to make the decisions. Mr. Speaker, this 
group is all over the map on this one, and they continue to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has 
been entirely consistent when it has said there has to be a 
greater commitment for the funding of educational funding 
from the province. We’ve been absolutely consistent when we 
say that more people in communities need to be involved with 
school boards in the decision about the future of their schools. 
We’ve been absolutely consistent when we say there are 
circumstances where schools of necessity apply. We’ve been 
consistent in saying that there should be consideration of 
schools of opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as opposed to that government, the official 
opposition at least has a plan that people of this province can 
rely on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, when will this government 
take responsibility for its botched leadership and admit to the 
fact that there is no long-term property tax coming under this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what 
plan he’s talking about. It depends on odd days of the week or 
even days of the week what proposal he’s putting forward. 
 
This government, this NDP government over the past 10 years 
has put an additional $200 million into the foundation operating 
grant. That’s a 52 per cent increase when we have seen over 
that time a drop in enrolment of almost 27,000 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, And then we have to look at the Sask Party. This 
is their big plan, Mr. Speaker, the big plan. What they say in 
their policy document is that they want to: 
 

. . . encourage increased cooperation between all publicly 
funded school systems in an effort to streamline both 
systems and eliminate unnecessary and costly duplication. 

 
What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? And then the Leader of the 
Opposition says well we’ll keep those schools open. But yet the 
decade that he worked for the Grant Devine . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t have to 
take my word for the fact that school divisions do not think 
there is a plan. The Good Spirit School Division says, and I 
quote: 
 

The provincial government’s inability to appropriately 
address the funding of education in the province has 
contributed to the loss of over $4 million in grant revenue 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

compared to the combined grant . . . received prior to 
amalgamation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister said amalgamation was 
necessary to, quote, “provide long-term sustainable property 
tax.” The current Minister of Learning says the same thing, but 
clearly it’s not happening. 
 
When is the provincial government, this NDP government 
going to live up to their commitment for long-term sustainable 
property tax relief in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government supports education and knows the value of 
education, and we will continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Sask Party platform and 
their policy book, they want to encourage “. . . co-operation 
between all publicly funded school systems in an effort to 
streamline both systems [what does that mean?] and eliminate 
unnecessary and costly duplication.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, when he’s out 
and about in the public, says well we’re going to keep these 
schools open. It sounds good when you’re in front of a crowd. 
But when you look at the Conservative record during the 1980s, 
it was the worst decade on record in this province for school 
closures — 162. Now he forgets that, doesn’t he? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table a 
letter from the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 
Commissioner dated May 14, 2007. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 68 — The Status 
of the Artist Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
stand in the House today to participate in the debate on Bill No. 

68, An Act respecting the Status of the Artist and Professional 
Relations between Artists and Engagers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a Bill with a fairly lengthy title, reminiscent of 
course of the amount of time that has been used in discussing 
this particular piece of legislation. I think at this point we’ve 
probably spent more hours going over some of the nuances of 
the proposals from the government, listening to various artists’ 
associations, engaging the public in public hearings and 
conversation. We’ve probably spent more time trying to get a 
grasp on what this particular piece of legislation means to the 
community of artists in this province and what their 
expectations and hopes are as a result of this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to belabour the topic 
much today. My colleague from Moosomin spent a 
considerable amount of time last week putting on the record the 
position of the official opposition and some of our areas of 
support and some of our areas of concern with this particular 
Bill. But I think that we need to, for the record, once again 
enunciate some of the, some of the areas of discussion, maybe 
repeat just a little bit of the history of this particular piece of 
legislation, and then make the appropriate decision as to what to 
do with it a little later on. 
 
As the Speaker will know, this Bill has grown out of a previous 
piece of legislation introduced in this House by the government, 
Bill No. 40, regarding the status of the artist. That particular 
Bill was considered to be incomplete and not substantial enough 
to meet the needs of the artistic community and some of the, 
some of the topics that had been covered by a committee struck 
by the minister to look at issues relating to financial security for 
artists in this province. 
 
And when Bill No. 40 was sent to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services, the minister sent with it a challenge that he 
asked the committee to address. In fact he specifically asked us 
to look at three questions. The questions are as follows, Madam 
Deputy Speaker: number one, under what circumstances and 
using what processes should artists be able to enter into 
collective bargaining? How should they select their 
representative association? And what would be the scope of that 
representation? 
 
Question two, how should current national collective 
agreements, bargained through voluntary collective bargaining 
processes, be handled in a provincial labour relations system? 
 
And question number three, how should disputes arising from 
collective bargaining between artists and engagers be 
adjudicated? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these three questions formed the basis 
of considerable discussion within the committee. The members 
of the committee were simply unable to come to grips with the 
questions that were being asked by the minister, and so it was 
resolved by the committee to basically say to the minister, look, 
we’re dealing with an issue that is too broad in scope and really 
too undefined for us to attend to adequately. And we 
recommended that the committee invite the minister to present a 
mock piece of legislation that we could evaluate — something 
that we could get our heads around; something that we could sit 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2007 

down and read and hopefully understand. 
 
The minister was good enough to do that. And as a result of the 
committee process — and I think we spent something like 20 
hours in public hearings and debate in the public domain, and 
several hours in addition to that in the in camera sessions of the 
committee, but having gone through that process — we finally 
as a committee came up with a number of recommendations. 
 
There were five recommendations that the committee brought 
back to the legislature upon which broad consensus and 
agreement had been reached. And I won’t bother reading them 
into the record now, Madam Deputy Speaker, but nevertheless I 
think that those five recommendations indicated a preparedness 
of the committee as a whole, who were looking at this 
legislation, to deal with some of the issues of primary concern 
to the artistic community in this province. 
 
I don’t think there was a moment in all of the discussions and 
all the attendant hearings that went into this particular piece of 
legislation, at which time any one of the committee members 
could say to somebody else, you don’t seriously take the 
concerns of the artistic community at face value. Or you don’t 
understand the importance of this issue to the artistic 
community and ultimately to the people of the province; you 
don’t, you aren’t interested in the issues facing this community. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that as a result of this fairly 
comprehensive exercise, the one common element that came 
out of this was a very broad understanding by the members of 
the committee that there is a thriving arts community in this 
province. There is a very creative group of people operating in 
this province. They contribute in significant and substantial 
ways to the life of this province and that they, in every way 
possible, should be recognized both officially and unofficially. 
And I think that the members of the committee were agreed that 
there are certain fundamental principles that ought to be 
incorporated into the legislation. 
 
And there were one or two very pragmatic areas that really 
should be addressed. And to the credit of the government, 
we’ve seen those particular two specific areas referred to in this 
Bill, and let me just bring them to the attention of the House, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The first most pragmatic element that this particular piece of 
legislation addresses is found in section 3 where it says, and it’s 
very simple but it says clearly: “The Crown in right of 
Saskatchewan is bound by this Act.” Why is that important, 
Madam Deputy Speaker? Well for one very clear and specific 
reason. Even though the Crown might have said it was bound 
by this Act previously in some of the pieces of legislation that 
represented status of the artist concerns, in fact the policy of the 
Crown being bound by the Act was undermined by the fact that 
Executive Council didn’t think that it had to pay any attention 
to the legislation. 
 
And in fact, when photographers in particular brought their 
work to Executive Council or to Crown agencies or government 
departments for use in promotional or advertising venues, artists 
who are photographers in this province were told that they 
weren’t even allowed to bid for work on behalf of the 
government unless they gave up the right to their intellectual 

property. And in fact, that obligated these artists, these 
photographers, to give up what is most fundamental to any 
artist. The most important element any artist has ownership 
regarding their work has to do with the intellectual property. 
 
And when Executive Council insisted that photographers in this 
case give up their right to hold on to their intellectual property 
as part of an agreement to even be allowed to bid on work, not 
only was the law of the province being violated, the very spirit 
of the legislation was being violated. 
 
And I think that in this particular piece of legislation where it 
says here that “The Crown in right of Saskatchewan is bound by 
this Act,” this is an admission, this is an admission by the 
minister and by this government that they have failed to act 
honourably in dealing with artists, and particularly 
photographers in this province, but maybe other artists as well. 
So there was a clear agreement on the part of all members of the 
Human Services Committee, when we looked at this legislation, 
that this is an appropriate part of this Bill. 
 
The other pragmatic element that comes in this legislation is 
found in section 9 dealing with individual contracts — goods or 
services from professional artists. And here it says: 
 

9(1) Subject to the regulations, no engager shall contract 
with, or retain the services of, a professional artist for a 
purpose mentioned in subclause 2(e)(i),(ii)or (iii) without 
having entered into a written contract with that 
professional artist. 
 

And subsection (2) of section 9 says: 
 

Every written contract entered into for the purposes of this 
section must contain the elements prescribed in the 
regulations. 

 
What this clearly says, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that before 
an artist produces work or provides work for a display or a 
show of some sort, a written contract must be entered into by 
the artist and the engager or the company or organization that is 
going to show the art. And while that might make common 
sense from a business perspective in the rest of the world, it 
doesn’t appear that a written contract was a formality or a 
requirement previously in this province, and for many artists 
they found themselves on the short end of the stick, so to speak, 
when it came to being remunerated or rewarded or paid for their 
artistic work. 
 
And I think it only makes common sense in this day and age 
that before an artist puts a work on display that there be some 
clear-cut written contract that will assure the rights to the artist 
that are necessary and will assure the rights and benefits to the 
engager. But not only that, not only the rights and privileges of 
both parties, but the obligations of both parties. And so, a 
written contract forms part of this piece of legislation. 
 
But what’s interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that this Bill 
runs about 55 sections, I believe, over 24 pages. And the two 
most pragmatic and important parts of this legislation — both 
of which would make a significant impact and be of real import 
to the artists of this province — are taken care of in just the first 
couple of pages in very brief articles within this piece of 



May 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

legislation. 
 
And the vast majority of the Bill has to do with how artists can 
form associations and how engagers must form associations and 
all the attendant rules and regulations surrounding, basically, 
negotiations. And I think that this particular element of the 
legislation is the part that has probably caused the official 
opposition members on that committee the most difficulty, 
because we weren’t at all certain or clear how this would work. 
And we’re still not absolutely certain, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
how it will work. 
 
The fact of the matter is, however, that in the public hearings, 
even though several hundred invitations were sent out to artists 
and organizations around the province, of the number of groups 
that appeared, the vast majority of them said that they felt that 
this particular arrangement — allowing artists’ associations to 
come together and to bargain collectively on behalf of their 
members with engagers — was something that they wanted. 
 
And I think they recognize, and we certainly recognize, that this 
is a tool. But it’s not the only tool that is going to advance the 
cause of artists, the financial cause of artists in this province. 
We think there’s much more that can and ought to be done in 
order to achieve the goals that we’re all looking for, and that’s 
basically financial stability on behalf of the artistic community 
in the province. 
 
However, having said that, I think while there’s some element 
of disagreement on the virtue of this particular element of the 
Bill, I don’t know that the official opposition would see it as 
being so pivotal and so significant that we would want to duke 
it out with the government — can I use that expression? — on 
this particular issue. 
 
I think that there are questions that need to be asked. We need 
to be absolutely comfortable that this is the appropriate way to 
deal with this area. We also need to have an opportunity to 
discuss with the minister and his officials some of our 
questions. We need to put some of our concerns and objections 
on the record and I think the best place for us to do that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, would be in committee, the Committee on 
Human Services. So it’s my pleasure now, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to suggest that this Bill move forward to committee. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 68, The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 68, The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 68, The Status of 
the Artist Act, 2007 be now referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to 
accommodate the good works of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy as well as the Standing Committee on Human 
Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House does now stand 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:48.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1587 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1588 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1589 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .................................................................................................................................................................1590, 1591 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Green Ribbon of Hope 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
 Pink Ribbon Day 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
 Saskatoon Royals Junior B Hockey Champs 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1592 
 Prince Albert Women of Distinction Awards 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1592 
 Montmartre Student’s Prize-winning Essay 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
 Salute to Saskatchewan Farmers 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
 Responses to Mailer 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1593 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Shortage of Nurses 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
 Disciplinary Process for the Judiciary 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
 



 

 Education Portion of Property Tax 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1599 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1599 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


