


















































Hansard: March 08, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 27A  THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 749 
 March 8, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this morning to present a petition regarding the 
highways in the province of Saskatchewan and, more 
specifically, Highway No. 27. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade Highway No. 27. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks from the communities of Prud’homme and Vonda and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning the condition of highways outside of the 
Cypress Hills constituency. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford, and the Livelong access road to 
No. 795. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions come from people 
living in the community of Livelong, Fairholme, and 
Thunderchild. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today to present on behalf of the people and highways 
of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good communities 
of Preeceville and Humboldt. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to maintain full service at the SaskPower office at Rosetown. 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition express a concern 
that SaskPower has announced a March 31, 2007, closure of the 
customer service office in Rosetown. And the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open and to provide full service to the 
community and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Sovereign, Zealandia, and Harris, 
and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition today to present on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people to do with the sad state of highways in Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators are from the communities of 
Saskatoon, Bruno, Canora, and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a number of 
petitions with citizens concerned with the safety of Highway 
No. 5 and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Pilger, Leroy, 
Humboldt, Muenster, St. Gregor, Bruno, Saskatoon, and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I too have a petition regarding the condition of 
Highway 18. The people in that area are very concerned about 
the condition of it. And the prayer reads: 
 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today 
to rise to present a petition from citizens who live near and 
drive on the Murray Point highway north of Emma Lake. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to repair the Murray Point highway 
north of Emma Lake off of Highway 263 and to clearly 
communicate to the area residents the timeline for the 
necessary repairs. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, literally I have hundreds, hundreds, and hundreds 
of signatures. And they come from the citizens of Christopher 
Lake; Prince Albert; Saskatoon; Sunnyside; Dalmeny; Hague; 
Birch Hills; Innisfail, Alberta — it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker 
— of course the people at Murray Point; Swift Current; and Red 
Deer, Alberta; and many, many hundreds of other people that 
have signed this petition. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with our shape of our 
highways in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road to 
No. 795. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from Shell Lake, 
Turtleford, Livelong, and Biggar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition on Highway No. 368: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Muenster, 
Annaheim, Humboldt, St. Benedict, and of course Middle Lake. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition, citizens calling 
on the Government of Saskatchewan to retain the Department 
of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highway employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Nokomis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise today with a petition on Highway 368, that the condition of 
Highway 368, starting four miles south of Lake Lenore to four 
miles south of St. Brieux, has seriously declined over the last 
number of years and that the condition of this highway 
endangers the safety of drivers and harms economic growth in 
the area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 368 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people of Muenster, Humboldt, and Lake 
Lenore. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the following petitions at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the special committee on 
intergovernment and infrastructure is recognized. 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure has instructed me to report Bill No. 20, The 
Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act with 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read a first time? The Chair recognizes the 
minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds 
Mandatory Reporting Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds 
Mandatory Reporting Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — By leave I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for this Bill 
to be read a third time. At this time, is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the minister that this Bill be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure has instructed me 
to report Bill No. 12, The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 12 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
[10:15] 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how many harassment-related 
complaints were filed in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for 2001-2002, 
2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006, 2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: of the harassment complaints 
filed in 2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were verified? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 
2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006, 2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how many government 
employees were charged with harassment for the fiscal 
year 2000-2001? 
 

And I have similar questions for years from 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how many government 
employee harassment cases resulted in convictions, 
disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

I have similar questions for the years from 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much money was paid 
out as a result of firings related to government employee 
harassment in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the years 2001 
through to 2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many harassment-related 

complaints were filed in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: of the harassment complaints 
filed in 2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were verified? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many government 
employees were charged with harassment for the fiscal 
year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years from 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many government 
employee harassment cases resulted in convictions, 
disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how much money was paid out 
as a result of firings related to government employee 
harassment in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many 
harassment related complaints were filed in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: of the harassment 
complaints filed in 2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were 
verified? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many 
government employees were charged with harassment for 
the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many 
government employee harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shall give notice on day no. 32 to ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how much money 
was paid out as a result of firings related to government 
employee harassment in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2001 through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to ask leave of the House for an extended 
introduction of our crop reporters who are celebrating 25 years 
recognition today. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and members. I would like to introduce to you, and it is a 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
five of Saskatchewan’s nearly 300 volunteer crop reporters. 
These crop reporters are recognized today by Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food for 25 years of volunteer service to 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry. 
 
For the past 25 years these crop reporters have volunteered their 
personal time during the crop season to collect information 
about crop development and precipitation in their rural 

municipalities. And every Sunday afternoon or evening, for at 
least 30 weeks of those 25 years, these reporters submitted their 
information to the department to meet the weekly crop reporting 
deadline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information provided by Saskatchewan’s crop 
reporters helps to provide a timely and accurate crop report 
about the development of Saskatchewan crops to all farmers 
and rural municipalities in the province and to the general 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the crop reporters here today for 
their commitment and dedication to the Saskatchewan crop 
reporting service. I would ask the crop reporters and their 
spouses to stand as I introduce them. Don Payak of the RM 
[rural municipality] of Weyburn No. 67 and his wife, Charlotte; 
Allan Hardy of the RM of Wolseley No. 155 and his wife, 
Marion; Edward Datchko of the RM of Ituna Bon Accord No. 
246 and his wife, Charlotte; Emile Robin, RM of Leask No. 464 
and his wife, Marie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately two crop reporters who are 
celebrating the 25th anniversary and their wives were not able 
to join us here today. They are Percy Schiele of the RM of 
Meadow Lake No. 588 and his wife, Anniliese; and Jim 
Hornford of the RM of Elfros No. 307 and his wife, Sharon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce a crop reporter 
whose long service from 1980 to 2004 was recognized in 2005, 
but who was unable to attend the recognition event in Regina in 
2005. He and his wife are able to join us here today. He is Larry 
Kuntz of Battleford — who represented the RM of Prairie No. 
408 prior to amalgamation and who now represents the RM of 
Buffalo No. 409 — and his wife, Rita. 
 
Would the members of the Legislative Assembly please join 
with me in recognizing these crop reporters who have 
volunteered their time and effort for the good of the province 
during these past 25 years. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join with the Minister of Agriculture in 
welcoming our crop reporters here today, thanking them for the 
time they put in in volunteering for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and congratulating them on their 25 years of 
service to the province of Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the 
official opposition I want to congratulate them and thank them 
for the work they have done in the past and look forward to the 
work they’ll do in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A special welcome to 
Al and Marion Hardy from Grenfell, excellent agriculture 
producers in our area, and also to Edward and Charlotte. 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

Charlotte’s sister, Delsy, happens to be the administrator for the 
RM of Willowdale. A special welcome to them this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature 26 
grade 10 students from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, who are 
seated in the west gallery. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Delaine Anderson. And they’re here to observe the 
legislature which happens to be in their neighbourhood. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the teams from Sheldon-Williams 
Collegiate who will be playing in the city basketball final 
tonight, the senior teams. The junior girls’ team got the silver 
medal two nights ago for the city, and I congratulate them as 
well. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them a little later and I ask all 
members to welcome the students from Sheldon-Williams 
Collegiate. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too am pleased to be joined by a couple of students who are in 
your gallery today. Janelle and Apolline Lusyk are students at 
Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School in Regina. They’re actually 
headed off to Ottawa in the next month to participate in two 
very important programs that are offered in our country to help 
young people get a better understanding of parliamentary 
democracy and of the institutions of government in this country. 
 
Apolline is going to be participating in the Forum for Young 
Canadians, which is a great program. It’s one I participated 
myself a few years ago, and one in which I’m sure she’ll find a 
great opportunity to debate and to talk with people from across 
this country about issues of national unity and things that are 
important to this country. 
 
Janelle is also headed off to Ottawa to attend Historica 
Encounters. This is a week-long program that brings together 
young people from different regions in the country to talk about 
the things that are happening in the nation today, the institutions 
that we use to govern ourselves with, and to focus on not only 
Canadian issues but also international affairs. So I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming these two 
sisters to our legislature and wish them well in their trip to 
Ottawa. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today is International Women’s Day and today we celebrate 
progress made in advancing the cause of equality for women. 
And as we’ve seen around the world, Mr. Speaker, this can’t be 
taken for granted. Today we consider all the challenges still 
facing women and what steps can be taken to bring about 
equality — full equality — for all women in all their diversity. 
 
This year’s International Women’s Day theme is: Ending 
Violence Against Women: Action for Real Results. And the 
theme highlights the need to put noble words into meaningful 
action — or walk the talk, so to speak, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
think of no more fitting action than having the federal 
government reverse its ill-conceived decision to slash the 
budget for the federal Status of Women office, the national 
daycare plan, and literacy programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a disturbing disregard for some of the most 
vulnerable and voiceless members of Canadian society — 
low-income, disadvantaged women and especially single 
mothers. And these actions, I believe, reduce productivity in 
Canada and they lack compassion and thereby hurt all of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to say that the 
Saskatchewan Status of Women office remains committed to 
working with all people of goodwill across our province. And I 
plan to celebrate tonight by hearing the great, young, all-woman 
band, the Cracker Cats, as they pump up the volume on 
women’s equality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 
March 8, is International Women’s Day. International Women’s 
Day has been celebrated around the world since the early 1900s. 
It is a day where we take stock of the successes of women 
across the globe, where we celebrate their many achievements 
in a variety of fields, and where we remember the many 
challenges women have overcome. 
 
International Women’s Day is also a day that commemorates a 
number of historic events, including the devastating Triangle 
Shirtwaist Factory fire in New York City on March 25, 1911, 
which caused the death of more than 140 female garment 
workers. The tragedy ultimately led to legislation to provide for 
better safety standards in factories. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity on International Women’s 
Day to recognize the many women in Saskatchewan who are 
not necessarily in the spotlight but who have contributed and 
continue to contribute to who we are as a province. They 
include our first female settlers, war brides, immigrant women, 
farm wives, working women, professional women, mothers, 
homemakers, and more. 
 
[10:30] 
 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

On a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank a woman who has always been an 
inspiration to me. That’s my mother, Alma Vickary, who lives 
in Estevan. I grew up in a family of eight children. Of course 
Dad was the sole breadwinner in our family, and that left Mom 
in charge of the daily routine at home. Mom claims her 
paycheque was being able to see all her children grow up to be 
successful. Thanks, Mom, for your love and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
International Women’s Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Government’s Approach to Workplace 
Harassment of Women 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the women 
of Saskatchewan, particularly women working under this NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government in the public service, may 
find it difficult to take seriously what this government says 
about women on International Women’s Day. 
 
While this NDP government says it cares about women, 
especially working women, what about the nine women who 
made complaints about Murdoch Carriere and accused him of 
sexual harassment? These women were paid $15,000 each, a 
paltry sum in comparison to the more than $300,000 given to 
Murdoch Carriere. Not only is the amount Mr. Carriere received 
insulting to these women, it also amounts to revictimizing these 
women and minimizing what happened to them. 
 
It’s a shame that the NDP government continually says it 
respects working women but does not respect these nine women 
enough to let them speak freely about the harassment they 
suffered in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Telemiracle 31 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Kinsmen 
Foundation has been doing its extraordinary brand of good 
work in this province since 1971. This volunteer-driven 
organization is dedicated to providing special equipment and 
access to medical assistance to the people of Saskatchewan 
while at the same time improving their quality of life and 
independence. 
 
In 1977 the Kinsmen held their first-ever telethon to help fund 
the Kinsmen Foundation. Since that time, Telemiracle has 
raised nearly $74 million. This year, Mr. Speaker, Telemiracle 
31 smashed the old donation record set in 2004. The official 
total for 2007 was $5,604,682. 
 
This speaks loudly of the hard work of the volunteers from 
Saskatchewan’s Kinsmen and Kinette Clubs. It requires some 

1,200 volunteers to enable Telemiracle to be on air for 20 hours, 
and as Chair of the Premier’s voluntary sector initiative I 
particularly want to acknowledge their efforts. 
 
Last year I was particularly proud to present, on behalf of the 
Minister of Healthy Living Services, the Centennial Medal to 
Bob McGrath for his contributions and commitment to this 
event. 
 
In addition to thanking the organizers and participants of this 
year’s Telemiracle, I also want to thank all of those who made 
donations and made Telemiracle 31 such an overwhelming 
success, allowing the Kinsmen Foundation to make miracles by 
helping people every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Community Fundraising for Breast Cancer Research 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, on February 5, 2007 the 
Prairie Women on Snowmobiles stopped at Rosetown to raise 
money for breast cancer research. A supper was held, hosted by 
the St. Theresa’s Catholic Women’s League of Rosetown to 
raise money for their cause. 
 
In total 140 people from Rosetown and area turned up to enjoy 
an evening of good food and moving speeches by each of the 
women involved with Prairie Women on Snowmobiles. The 
dinner was supported by Rosetown’s four financial institutions 
and Shop Easy Foods grocery store. Their support covered the 
cost of the dinner and in total $1,000 was raised. 
 
Dorothy Rollheiser, a Rosetown resident, presented the cheque 
from St. Theresa’s Catholic Women’s League. Armella 
Rollheiser presented a cheque of $430 from pledge sheets from 
the Canadian Cancer Society, and Bobbie Crossman presented a 
cheque for $100 on behalf of the Preceptor Iota Chapter of Beta 
Sigma Phi. Elaine Stang of Rosetown served as a local rider 
who led the core group from Milden to Rosetown and raised a 
total of $290. 
 
Other locals who participated as lead riders and helped raise 
funds were Diane Ahrens, Greg Hannay, Dave Foursha, and 
Patrick Pappenfoot. In all the community-wide event that was 
held by Rosetown residents was a great success in support of 
breast cancer research. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Humboldt 
just informed me that her constituency assistant, Susan Dunne, 
also of the Prairie Women on Snowmobiles, raised a whopping 
total of $6,000 for this cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this international day recognizing women, let’s 
offer congratulations to all the people involved for their hard 
work in helping raise funds for such a worthy cause right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

Saskatoon-Eastview. 
 

Business and Professional Women Celebrate 
International Women’s Day 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m a proud member of 
the Business and Professional Women’s Association of 
Saskatoon, also known as BPW. Every year for the past seven 
years the BPW has celebrated International Women’s Day with 
a special evening event. This year’s celebration was held 
Tuesday night, and I was very happy to attend with my 
colleague from Nutana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day is a day to reflect on 
the issues of significance to women and to bring those issues to 
the attention of others. It’s a day to appreciate the achievements 
of women, that women have made in their pursuit of equality. 
And that’s exactly what the evening was about. Janice 
MacKinnon was the keynote speaker and gave an excellent talk 
on celebrating women’s success and facing our challenges. 
 
Every year BPW of Saskatoon awards an educational bursary to 
a mature woman advancing her career through post-secondary 
education. This year’s recipient was Terriann Walling who told 
a moving and inspiring tale of how she got where she is today. 
 
The BPW also sponsors an International Women’s Day 
essay-writing competition on the topic, what International 
Women’s Day means to me. This year’s winner was Tori-lynn 
Wanotch whose essay was so eloquent she had the audience in 
tears. As well, Mr. Speaker, Marla Adams was recognized as 
the 2006 recipient of the BPW Athena Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want thank the organizers of the seventh annual 
Business and Professional Women’s International Women’s 
Day celebration and congratulate Ms. Walling, Ms. Wanotch, 
and Ms. Adams on their awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Provincial High School Curling Championships 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the high school staff and students of Kipling and 
Whitewood hosted the provincial senior boys’ and girls’ high 
school provincial curling championships. Despite inclement 
weather and driving conditions, 16 senior boys’ rinks from 
across the province arrived in Kipling while 16 senior girls’ 
rinks travelled to Whitewood. 
 
Competitions for both provincial championships began on 
Thursday, March 1 at the Kipling and Whitewood curling 
arenas. I had the pleasure of joining many local people as well 
as family members of the curlers who came out to observe some 
excellent curling on the weekend. 
 
It was also my privilege to enjoy a very delicious banquet put 
on by the Whitewood high school staff. The guest speaker at the 
provincial senior girls’ curling banquet was Mandy Selzer, a 
young lady who members of this Assembly will remember, not 

only as the skip of the 2006 junior women’s Canadian curling 
champions, but as well as one of the Pages who served our 
Assembly well in the last session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, events of this nature don’t just happen. They take 
place as a result of the time and effort put forward by the host 
committees and the numerous volunteers who give of their 
time, ensuring the success of these events. 
 
Following the weekend of curling, this year’s provincial senior 
high school boys’ curling champions are from Weyburn while 
the senior high school girls’ champions are from Watrous. Mr. 
Speaker, a special thank you to the high school students and 
staff in both Kipling and Whitewood for the excellent job they 
did in hosting this year’s 2007 provincial high school senior 
boys’ and girls’ curling championships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Consultation Regarding Settlement 
with Murdoch Carriere 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission led 
this house and everyone else to believe that the women harassed 
by Murdoch Carriere were consulted prior to Murdoch Carriere 
receiving any taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
She said, and I quote from Hansard, “my understanding from 
the Justice officials is that the complainants were checked with 
before this was given to Mr. Carriere.” Most people think 
consulting means sitting down, asking for feedback, and taking 
other people’s opinions into consideration. The NDP appears to 
have a different definition. 
 
Is this in fact the case? Were the women harassed by Murdoch 
Carriere consulted prior to the NDP government deciding to 
hand over $275,000 to him? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can tell the members opposite is that the government no 
longer wanted Murdoch Carriere in the employment of the 
government. The government terminated Mr. Carriere. And as a 
result of that, we are now paying for the process that we used to 
terminate his employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — The record will show that the minister did not 
answer a very direct question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women Murdoch Carriere harassed weren’t 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

consulted prior to the settlement with Carriere. They were told 
about it after the government already agreed upon a settlement. 
In fact, they were told about it the morning of February 27 just 
minutes before the Environment minister announced it to the 
media. 
 
The news release had already been sent out before some of 
these women found out. Some of the women even heard about 
it through voice mail. That’s consultation? That’s what the NDP 
considers listening to victims? This is the NDP’s definition of 
consultation — leaving a voice mail? You call that 
consultation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 
Government of Saskatchewan did not want Murdoch Carriere in 
its employment. We did not want him in our employment. He 
was fired. We did not follow the process. And as a result, Mr. 
Speaker, we were told by the Department of Justice that we 
were going to lose the case, and we settled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said yesterday that 
the complainants were checked with before this was given to 
Mr. Carriere. We have given the NDP chances to answer about 
rewarding Murdoch Carriere and we’re receiving very few 
answers. 
 
We have a recording that we will gladly play for the media and 
anyone else who wants to hear after question period. The 
recording is from a SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management] official informing the victim that a 
settlement had been reached, that the government is paying 
Murdoch Carriere, and that if the victim would like to talk 
about it, to give him a call back. Why weren’t the harassed 
women truly consulted prior to Murdoch Carriere getting 
rewarded? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 
we listened to the Leader of the Opposition on some radio show 
indicate that he would have taken this case to court, that he 
would have gone against legal advice, and he would have done 
this at great cost to the taxpayer, and that he would have had the 
women re-testify all over again. A year ago his Justice critic in 
this Assembly said, and I quote, “Refusing to settle a lawsuit 
when the cost to taxpayers would have been much lower is 
patently unreasonable.” 
 
What is it? Is it what the Justice critic said a year ago or is it 
what the Leader of the Opposition is saying now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Heppner: — The difference between this party and that 
party is that this party would have fought for these women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, understandably the women who 
came forward against Murdoch Carriere were very brave. They 
risked a lot to make sure that this man was stopped. Mr. 
Speaker, the women are worried about their jobs. They think 
that if they tell the truth to anyone that this NDP government 
will either fire them or take action against them. And I’m 
asking a very direct question today, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
minister guarantee that this NDP government will not fire or 
take any action against any of these nine women who want to 
be able to tell their stories? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of what came 
to our attention in April 2003, the former minister of the Public 
Service Commission had the Public Service Commission 
review its anti-harassment policy. Mr. Speaker, there is zero 
tolerance for harassment in the workplace, whether it’s directed 
towards men or whether it’s directed towards women. 
Everybody is protected. They have the right to come forward if 
they believe they are being harassed, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
harassment policy. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, I say to the member 
opposite, that every person in this province that works in the 
public service is protected when they bring forward a 
harassment complaint. And they’re protected in law, Mr. 
Speaker, and we follow the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Disposition of Murdoch Carriere’s Computer Hard Drive 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP continues to tell us they are not hiding anything in the 
Murdoch Carriere case. I would like to quote from a ruling by 
Queen’s Bench Justice Laing dated August 25, 2005. Justice 
Laing refers to a memo signed by an RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] constable, L.D. Lair, dated April 22, 2003. 
That’s three weeks after Murdoch Carriere was fired for 
harassment. The memo said, and I quote: 
 

Writer received fax from DOCC that Jim Pattison of 
SERM wanted a phone call at home . . . Pattison believes 
that Murdock Carriere of Fire Control is under 
investigation by the RCMP. Pattison has been directed by 
Senior Management to erase Carrieres hard drive off of his 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

computer. Pattison is afraid that evidence may be 
destroyed and wanted the RCMP to be aware. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: who ordered that Murdoch 
Carriere’s hard drive be erased? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I see we have Perry Mason at it 
again. What I can say to the member opposite that . . . You 
know what he does? You know what he does? Every time he 
has an opportunity, he besmirches people’s reputations. That’s 
what that member opposite does. And we’ve seen it time and 
time and time again in Hansard, but he’s afraid to go outside 
and say the same thing. He’ll go out and ask questions — oh, 
I’m going to ask questions to the media, but he leaves the 
impression that certain people’s reputations are besmirched, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite: be careful, be careful. 
Whatever you have to say in here, you go outside and say it, 
Mr. Speaker. Say it outside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this is a report by the Queen’s 
Bench of the province of Saskatchewan that I am quoting from. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP keep telling us they are not hiding 
anything, but they have a gag order on the women who were 
harassed. They won’t explain why they paid off Mr. Carriere. 
And now we learn that someone in “senior management,” 
quote, ordered a SERM employee to erase Carriere’s hard drive. 
Let me repeat that quote from Justice Laing’s ruling. Pattison 
. . . And I quote: 
 

Pattison has been directed by Senior Management to erase 
Carrieres hard drive off of his computer. Pattison is afraid 
that evidence may be destroyed and wanted the RCMP to 
be aware. 

 
Mr. Speaker, who gave that order? And was Murdoch 
Carriere’s hard drive eventually erased? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The members of the opposition have 
said outside of this Assembly that certain members of the 
Assembly interfered in the Murdoch Carriere case. That’s what 
the opposition members have said and I want to say, through 
innuendo, Mr. Speaker. What I want to say to the members 
opposite, that no cabinet minister, no cabinet minister in this 
government interfered with the Murdoch Carriere case, Mr. 

Speaker. Not one cabinet minister, including the member from 
Athabasca, who they have insinuated interfered, who was the 
minister of the Environment at the time. So I say to the 
members opposite: go outside, say it again. Be careful. Say 
outside what you . . . [inaudible] . . . to say in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to repeat that 
question again as in the Justice Laing’s report: who gave the 
order from senior management to have the hard drive erased? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — . . . members of the opposition that are 
desperate to become the government of the day fail to 
understand is that there is a separation between the public 
service and the elected. The public service are involved in the 
day-to-day administration of departments. They are involved in 
the day-to-day hiring and firing of public servants. The 
government of the day directs public policy, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what those members opposite fail to understand. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s so incredible, they flip-flop from one 
issue to the other. A year ago their Justice critic, who is a 
lawyer, said in this Assembly that we need to settle cases; don’t 
drag them out. And now what the Leader of the Opposition is 
saying in contrast to his Justice critic is, drag them out, cost the 
taxpayers more. But we received legal advice that we would 
lose the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s find out what else this 
minister is trying to cover up, and let’s refer again to Justice 
Laing’s report. It goes on to say that Murdoch Carriere’s 
computer was eventually sent to a Donna Kelsey, who worked 
in an Environment office in Regina. Why was Murdoch 
Carriere’s computer sent to Regina and was the hard drive 
eventually erased? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the cabinet 
ministers sitting on the government bench are not involved in 
the day-to-day activities of government departments. These 
folks here think, no doubt, when they get into office if they ever 
get into office, they will be handling the day-to-day activities of 
all government departments and politically interfering, Mr. 
Speaker. We did not. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, order. Order please. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the public needs to 
know is that these people opposite would politically interfere in 
the day-to-day operations of government departments. That’s 
what the public service needs to know, that this is the kind of 
people that these folks across the way are. The government sets 
policy direction. The public service is involved in the 
day-to-day operations of government departments. That’s how 
the system works and it’s time they found out about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, three 
weeks after Murdoch Carriere was fired, while he was under 
investigation by the RCMP, someone, someone in senior 
management ordered that his hard drive be erased. I think the 
NDP have some questions to answer. Who gave that order? 
Why did they give that order? What was on the hard drive they 
didn’t want anyone to see? What are they hiding? What are they 
covering up? Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to stand up 
and start answering these questions. Who ordered Murdoch 
Carriere’s hard drive to be erased, and what were they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, government ministers are 
not involved in the day-to-day activity of government 
departments. We are not involved. There is clearly a separation 
between what politicians or the elected do and what the public 
service do. There’s clearly a distinction which the members 
opposite — who are just itching, itching to sit on these benches 
where they want to be — don’t understand, is there is a 
distinction. 
 
The public needs to understand that these people over here 
would be interfering in the day-to-day activities of the public 
service. They don’t understand the role of the elected, Mr. 
Speaker, and the public and the public service needs to 
understand that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s again review what actually 
happened. Murdoch Carriere had just been fired for harassment. 
He was under investigation by the RCMP, and someone in 
senior management of this government ordered that his hard 
drive be erased. Now that’s a very serious matter. In fact it 
could be obstruction of justice. 
 
Who did it? Who gave this order? What are they hiding? Was 
Murdoch Carriere’s hard drive erased? Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people deserve these answers. Why did the 
government order a public servant to erase Murdoch Carriere’s 
hard drive? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the member . . . 
what Mr. Perry Mason fails to do is to table the finding, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what Mr. Perry Mason fails to do. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I will say this again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would . . . Order. I 
would remind the member, the minister, that when referring to 
other members she should refer to the member by the title or by 
the name of the constituency. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the 
member. Mr. Speaker, I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the member needs to do is table the findings. 
He hasn’t done that. Mr. Speaker, I will say again, I will say 
again . . . I’m talking about the finding of the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I will say again is there is clearly a 
distinction between the elected and the public service. The 
public service is involved in the day-to-day activities of 
government departments. The elected sets broad policy, public 
policy direction. 
 
Obviously the members opposite don’t understand this 
distinction. Obviously — and they’re dying to be government 
— if they were government they would be involved in the 
day-to-day activities of government departments. And I think 
the public needs to understand that and so does the public 
service, Mr. Speaker. It’s an important principle, something 
they didn’t understand when they were in government in the 
1980s. It’s something clearly that our government understands. 
The public needs to know that and so does the public service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current and Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Women in the Workplace 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly the 
government’s trying to cover something up. Consider what’s 
happened. Consider that this government paid $275,000 to one 
of its senior employees who was fired for harassment and then 
convicted of assault. Consider then that an official with the 
Department of the Environment was informed, instructed by a 
senior official in this government to erase the hard drive of the 
perpetrator of that harassment. Consider as well that while that 
minister has said the women were consulted prior to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. 
Members will come to order. The Chair . . . Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is calling 
Justice Laing a liar. That’s what he just did from his seat. That’s 
how bad this government has gotten on this particular issue. 
 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

The facts and evidence are pretty clear. This government, this 
government is trying to cover something out about the fact that 
it paid $275,000 to someone fired for harassment and convicted 
of assault. When will the Premier stand up and answer 
questions to the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this. It was my 
decision in 2003, on the recommendation by a minister, that Mr. 
Murdoch Carriere’s employment with the Government of 
Saskatchewan be terminated. I made that decision, Mr. Speaker, 
in the full knowledge, in the full knowledge that I was violating 
the process — the process which is that the public elected, the 
politician, the Premier, is not to be engaged in the hiring and 
firing in government. I made that decision in that knowledge. 
 
I made it, Mr. Speaker, not only with the support of the 
opposition at that time but with their encouragement. And we 
made that decision in the full knowledge that having taken that 
decision there may well be financial costs to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we’ve got this unprincipled opposition who 
say now today, perhaps I shouldn’t have fired Mr. Carriere; or 
now we shouldn’t pay; or they go out on public radio with 
innuendo on people in this province. The Leader of the 
Opposition just stood up in his place and said something that’s 
blatantly not true. Mr. Speaker, they tell us we should fight the 
case. The best legal advice said this is going to cost the taxpayer 
of Saskatchewan, and we are not willing to put those 
complainants through the public process again. 
 
Do we like this, Mr. Speaker? You bet we don’t like it. Would I 
do it again? You bet I would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — There it is. The Premier says he’s done the right 
thing. The Premier says this is responsible government to pay 
someone fired from harassment and then convicted of assault 
$275,000, to do so without consulting his victims who are in 
that Premier’s employ. He says that’s the right thing to do, that 
he would do it again. That’s why the people of this province 
have had enough with him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s why the people of this province would like 
a Premier and a government that would stand up for women in 
the workplace, who would take their side over the side of the 
harasser. What is the Premier trying to hide in this case, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, anyone listening to the 
Leader of the Opposition a moment ago knows what he said. He 
said the people of the Department of the Environment are, 
quote,“ in the Premier’s employ.” Mr. Speaker, those public 
servants in the province of Saskatchewan are in the employ of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, we know those guys. 
We know those folks. You get them in government, Mr. 
Speaker — this unprincipled opposition — you get them in 
government, and they believe that the public service is in their 
employ. We saw it before, and if they ever should sit on the 
government benches, we’ll see it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I made a decision to violate the principle 
which says that the Premier and the politician shouldn’t be 
hiring and firing. I made that decision, I believe, on the right 
moral ground, Mr. Speaker. It’s a decision I’d make again. But 
if those folks ever sit on the government side of the bench, you 
can be sure you can count on that kind of decision getting made 
on a daily basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when these folks sit on the 
government side of the House, the civil service of the province 
can count on one thing. Women in the workplace in the civil 
service can count on one thing: when it comes down to 
choosing between those who harass and those who are harassed, 
we will choose the victims. We will fight a case like this in 
court to ensure that someone convicted of assault, fired for 
harassment doesn’t get a thin dime of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This Premier yesterday, this Premier yesterday, 
from his seat because he wouldn’t stand up and answer any 
questions, he told me that he can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. One at a time, 
members; one at a time. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — From his seat yesterday because he wouldn’t 
stand on his feet and say this, said that the women, the victims 
were consulted with prior to the settlement being given to Mr. 
Carriere. Well we find out today that they got a phone call after 
the press release went out, that messages were left onto voice 
mail. The Premier says this is about protecting them from 
further anguish. How can he possibly know that when his 
government didn’t have the decency to talk to the victims 
before they gave all this money to the harasser, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this Leader of the 
Opposition stands in this House and likes to pretend that he’s 
the friend of women in this province. Well if he’s the friend to 
women, why has he said nothing about his cousins in Ottawa 
cutting the daycare programming and the child care funding? 
Why has he said nothing, Mr. Speaker, about his friends in 
Ottawa cutting the literacy funding in this province? Why has 
he said nothing when his friends in Ottawa take the equality 
clause out of the Status of Women.? Why has he said nothing 
when they’re cutting the Status of Women activity in this 
country, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. 
 
Because you know why, Mr. Speaker? He’s more keen on 
electing conservatives, whether they’re Conservatives in Ottawa 
or conservative Sask Party in Saskatchewan. He’s more keen 
about the future of the Saskatchewan Party than he is about 
Saskatchewan people, including the women of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just not about programs for 
women. It can never be just about advocacy for women, as 
important as that is. The measure, the measure, Mr. Speaker, is 
a government that is prepared to stand up and defend and 
protect women, especially those for whose protection that 
Premier is responsible as the head of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Premier failed, failed to consult with women, 
with the victims in this case, prior to Mr. Carriere getting his 
money, which is different than the story the minister told 
yesterday and different from what the Premier said from his 
chair. They deserve an apology. They deserve an apology. On 
this International Women’s Day, will the Premier stand in his 
place and apologize to these nine women who were victimized 
by the senior manager in the Premier’s government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is truly 
an unprincipled opposition. They say at the time of these 
events, they say we should fire. They do that in the full public 
knowledge that this would cost the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I acted to make that decision. 
 
Now they say we shouldn’t pay. Now they say, Mr. Speaker, we 
should go to court against the advice of their own Justice critic 
over there, they say we should go to court, we should encourage 
even higher payments to Mr. Carriere, and we should put these 
nine complainants again through the public process, through the 
public exposure. Mr. Speaker, I’ve made a decision. I made a 
decision to fire Mr. Carriere. I’ve made a decision and this 
government has made a decision to accept the best legal advice 
and, Mr. Speaker, it is my view, it is my view that subjecting 
these nine complainants again to another civil process, another 
public exposure, is the wrong thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that special? It’s 
the Premier’s view that this is what would be the implication for 
these women if the government took this action. Will he check 
with them then? Why didn’t his government check with them in 
the first place? Yesterday, remember, in this Assembly his 
minister said, oh we consulted with the women, the nine women 
first. We checked. But you know what they did? They left 
messages on voice mails for them; they issued the press release 
prior to even making the calls, the press release about Mr. 
Carriere’s settlement. 
 
Will he (a) apologize to these women for not checking for sure? 
And secondly, will he commit to them, will he commit to them 
that his government will find out what their wishes are and what 
they would’ve been? Would they rather have this government 
stand up and fight for them or settle with someone fired for 
harassment and convicted of common assault, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of this entire 
circumstance in 2003, this government has put in place the most 
stringent of anti-harassment policies that I know anywhere in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, there is a zero tolerance in this 
government. 
 
Beyond that, Mr. Speaker, we are working with women and for 
women right across this province. In light of the cuts of these 
Conservatives across the way federally, yes, we’re standing 
behind child care and daycare in this province. We’ve put 
together a significant missing persons initiative in this province, 
much of which is directed to those missing women. We are 
working in education to build early childhood education. We 
have built a literacy program of $2 million, Mr. Speaker. We 
are building housing for the poor — many women, many 
women, single moms getting the benefit of housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that believes in working for 
Saskatchewan families, for making life better for Saskatchewan 
families. That’s an opposition that’s only interested in the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Morgan: — It is, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please, order. Order please. We 
can only entertain one point of order at a time. So I would just 
ask . . . I would . . . We are at orders of the day. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on a point of order. 
Yesterday, March 7, in the House the Minister Responsible for 
the Public Service Commission stated, and I read her comment 
in the House: 
 

Mr. Speaker, my understanding from the Justice officials 
is that the complainants were [and I use her words] 
checked with before this was given to Mr. Carriere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there was a news release that was issued by the 
department. That news release was circulated to the media and 
is date stamped on the fax machines February 27, and reached 
the Saskatchewan Party office and the media outlets at 8:39 in 
the morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a tape recording that was from 
somebody’s answering machine by somebody that identified 
themselves first and then they called to one of the complainants 
first . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order 
please. What the member’s dealing with is really points of 
debate which have been dealt with and are being dealt with in 
the House. I find that the member . . . that this is not the point of 
order. 
 
Before we go any further . . . Order please. Order please. Order. 
I wish to deal with another point of order at this time. 
 
During the 11th question — I think it was the 11th question — 
the Leader of the Opposition reflected upon a minister by 
making a personal charge against the minister that would 
impute actions on the minister that would be unparliamentary. 
And I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw that 
statement. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I need to know the nature of those 
words please. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order. Order please. Order please. 
 
I do believe it’s better . . . Order please. I do believe that it’s 
better to deal with these matters at this time; otherwise I would 
have referred the minister to a part in the Hansard. But 
however, because I believe it’s better to deal with these issues 
at the time, it was when the member or the Leader of the 
Opposition referred to another member having lied about some 
particular issue. And that’s the part that I would like him to 
withdraw. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I said the minister was accusing the 
Justice of lying — that’s what I said — not that the minister had 
lied. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member apologize for implying 
that the minister made improper statements. 
 
Mr. Wall: — If that was the implication, then I apologize and 
withdraw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his apology. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Legislative Page 
 

The Speaker: — Now before orders of the day, I still wish to 
introduce . . . Order please. Order please. Just one more item 
. . . I wish to . . . Members, just take a break for a minute here 
please. I wish to at this time inform the Assembly that Julianna 
Hill will be joining us as the sixth Page for this session, and I’d 
ask all members to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the last round of debate 
the members opposite — and several of them were heard to use 
the words, and they were speaking in the course of debate — 
they used the words, something was patently untrue. And they 
were directing these words . . . And the effect of that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they are saying something is patently untrue. 
And the Premier said it in his own answer, and the effect of 
that, Mr. Speaker, is to call somebody with the equivalent of 
using the word to lie or to use that kind of an untruth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unparliamentary language. They have done 
indirectly what they cannot do directly. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
would only be appropriate that the Premier be called upon by 
the Speaker to withdraw that comment. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order, the Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to the point of order, what 
we are seeing here in the House today in a series of ways is the 
use of innuendo by the opposition, the use of innuendo as 
opposed to direct accusation. It will be kind of interesting to see 
whether they will repeat those same statements outside the 
House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on the point, I speak to the style of 
questioning that has been used today. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the view of the government that several things that 
were said today by innuendo are patently untrue. Mr. Speaker, 
there was not . . . It was not a statement, that it was done in the 
way the opposition members would refer to as lying. However, 
Mr. Speaker, it has been, it has been a concerted effort, a 
conscious effort of communicating by innuendo, Mr. Speaker, 
and making statements that are patently untrue. 
 
The government stands by that view and considers that to be in 
order. And I ask that you find the hon. member’s point of order 
not well taken. 
 
[11:15] 
 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

The Speaker: — First of all, I thank the member for raising this 
point. Quite often the case is where the Speaker has to make a 
decision as to whether a statement is parliamentary or 
unparliamentary, and sometimes the lines are very, very 
difficult to draw. And at other times they’re also . . . One of the 
things that the Speaker has to take into account also is the effect 
of the statement. And I have however tried to be consistent, and 
I will rule the same way again today that using the words untrue 
has been regarded parliamentary providing it is used in a 
fashion which does not imply direct intent to falsify. So I 
therefore do find the member’s statement not well taken, 
however worthy of discussing. 
 
Order please. Order please. Order please. I would remind all 
members that they are not to reflect on the ruling of the 
Speaker. The member for Canora-Pelly is not on record but has 
been . . . Order please . . . Would the member from Cannington 
— and I appreciate his volunteering — would he kindly refrain 
from reflecting on the Speaker, on any ruling of the Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Roads and Transportation Needs 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today 
to enter into the 75-minute debate, and I’d like to start my 
comments off by reading into the record the motion. The 
motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the NDP government for 
failing to properly plan for the province’s transportation 
needs and for letting the road system fall into disrepair, 
compromising business opportunities and the safety of 
travellers. 
 

This is moved by myself and second by the member from 
Humboldt. I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s quite incredible thinking about the lead-up to 
the government’s announcement the day before yesterday. One 
would think with the NDP government sitting on a mound of 
money and their dismal polling results and the dismal elections 
results in Martensville where the NDP party placed a very 
distant second and had the worst showing in the history of the 
CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party] Party that they would come out with an 
announcement about something. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they did come out with an announcement 
concerning highways and transportation, and I was at the news 
conference, Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly, I thought when we 
put this motion forward last fall that naturally the government 
would come out with something — and they did, of course — 
and I assumed that it would be something that would be 
difficult to argue about and debate about. But to my 
astonishment, Mr. Speaker, the government really came out 
with another announcement about a pending announcement. I 
don’t know if this is number four or number five 
announcements about a pending announcement. 

This announcement, Mr. Speaker, did not outline any roads or 
highways that are going to be built or repaired or new 
construction, new payment, absolutely nothing in this 
announcement by the Premier and the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation. So it’s quite easy to debate this issue again 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve presented numerous petitions in the last number of years 
concerning the terrible state of roads and highways, and we’ve 
presented a number again today. And there’s nothing in the 
future that says that these roads and highways and the 
infrastructure of the province is actually going to be built and 
improved. 
 
And I just want to point to the government’s own 
announcement that they made the day before yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker. They spoke about a $9 billion investment over 10 
years. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not quite accurate. It’s not $5 
billion over 10 years, which would average over $500 million 
per year. It’s not new money. It’s just that includes the current 
budget for the Highways and Transportation department. 
 
Well last year, after all the numbers come in, the department is 
at about just slightly over $400 million in their current budget 
for the current year, after the initial budget and the 
supplementary and some new announcements that are coming. 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s say for easy math, it’s $400 million. So 
they’ve only announced on an average of $500 million per year. 
Take $400 million off that. That leaves $100 million of 
so-called new money for the highways and transportation 
infrastructure in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now we know of course that over 10 years, 
there’s going to be considerable inflationary pressures. And so 
you take a look at, you know, approximately inflation at 1.6 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. You also take into account the actual 
inflation that the road builders have been talking about and that 
could be, well it could be 10 per cent increase. In some cases 
the costs of construction of new highways are up to 25 or 30 per 
cent. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day when you take all the 
increased costs and inflationary pressures in the future, now 
we’re into somewhere around $80 million of new money per 
year. Well, Mr. Speaker, if that $80 million went into roads and 
highways exclusively, well you could say that’s something 
towards those projects. But the government’s own admission 
was that this money is going to go into the so-called six pillars. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the six pillars, this 
increased spending is going to go to corridors, international 
gateways, urban connectors, rural and economic corridors, 
northern infrastructure, First Nations connections, regional 
short-line railways and airports. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is 
hardly enough money to make a dent on any one of those 
projected infrastructure projects. Mr. Speaker, so this money is 
going to be shared among all those six pillars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, during the news conference what did we 
find out? Well is there any announcement of any projects? Well 
there was none. What does the government say? Well they’ve 
got a weight advisory committee, made up of SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], SARM 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], other 
groups. And it’s very good to consult with those other groups. 
They’ve done a tremendous amount of work in their own areas, 
the RMs in their various transportation regions, and that’s 
important to consult with them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this announcement is made after 16 years of 
NDP government. This type of announcement you would 
expect to come out from a new government in the first few 
months of their mandate to lay out what they’re planning on 
doing in the next year or 2 years or 10 years. After 16 years the 
government comes out with an announcement and again no idea 
about which roads or highways or infrastructure projects are 
going to be improved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the government’s going to wait for the weight advisory 
committee to make recommendations to the government on 
which projects to go forward. Well Mr. Speaker, I am sorry the 
people of Saskatchewan spoke in Martensville that they’re very 
cynical about the intentions of this government. And, Mr. 
Speaker, again there’s no list of projects that are expected to be 
done. We’re waiting to see. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker it’s very interesting during the news 
conference, the Premier was asked by a member of the media 
about basically, you know, where have you been for the last 16 
years? How have you determined spending in the Highways and 
Transportation department in the past? And his answer was 
quite astonishing. I mean it’s no surprise to anybody in this 
province that the NDP government just kind of lurches from 
one disaster to another and try to fix it, but he said the tradition 
was that highways and roads and transportation in this province 
was funded on an ad hoc basis. There was no planning done. 
Well that’s an incredible admission from a Premier who leads a 
government that has been in power for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s incredible that after all this time, that’s the best he could do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I again go back to Martensville and the 
message that they have sent to the NDP that they have lost total 
confidence in this government to do any planning and, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, I believe the comment that the NDP have 
just made a deathbed conversion to try to put something on the 
table, to try to alleviate their dismal polling results and the 
dismal record in the Martensville by-election, and try to move 
forward from there. 
 
Now we’re going to wait for the budget. Well that’s fine and 
dandy; we’ll wait for some . . . we’ll see what’s in the budget. 
That’ll be — what? — number six announcement of what may 
happen in the future. But we’ll also have to wait for this 
advisory board to come down with recommendations. I suspect, 
Mr. Speaker, that there never will be actually a plan in place 
before the next election. I think all this process was just to say 
we have a plan. Well there’s nothing in the plan, Mr. Speaker, 
and people from all over the province are very concerned about 
their roads and highways. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as an example, as one example of many, is 
the Murray Point road. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to 
congratulate the Saskatchewan Party candidate in Saskatchewan 
Rivers, Nadine Wilson, for the work that she’s done up there 
bringing forward the concerns of citizens in her constituency, 
and particularly in that one area, their concerns over their road. 

And I’d just like to quote from the Prince Albert Daily Herald a 
few comments: 
 

A rough road means more than a bumpy ride for people 
going to an area of Emma Lake, says a merchant. 
 
The road leading to Murray Point was a hindrance to 
tourism in the first two months of the season, say Randy 
Roth, who owns Ferns Grocery with his wife. 
 
“Our delivery [truck] wouldn’t come down the road until 
July 1,” said Roth. 
 
He had to drive to the main highway to meet the truck for 
supplies. 
 
We had a good summer, but we lost money in May and 
June due to the road,” said Roth. 
 
The road used to be paved, but it was torn up around July 
1 and made into a gravel road, but it is still rough said 
Roth. 
 
“It still needs . . . [a lot] of love.” 
 
Roth wants to see it returned to asphalt because of the 
heavy traffic that uses it and because it is a tourist 
destination. 
 
People visiting Murray Point from out of province will not 
come back if they think their RV or camper might get 
damaged travelling over a rough road, he said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. And the Minister of 
Transportation the day before yesterday also admitted that the 
government has plans of converting more asphalt back to 
gravel. And so they certainly have . . . He certainly admits to a 
plan of letting roads deteriorate and deteriorating to the point 
where it goes back to gravel, but he hasn’t got a plan in place to 
actually lay any asphalt or improve the highways of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the people of Saskatchewan know last 
summer, the Saskatchewan Party put out a challenge. We 
invited people to make presentations, to go online to our 
website and tell us and the other people of Saskatchewan about 
what they think is the worst roads in this province. And the 
challenge was to Premier Calvert, the Premier, to travel those 
roads and so he could see first-hand what the condition of those 
highways were. Now, Mr. Speaker, our website had nearly 200 
invitations for the Premier to travel some 34 different highways, 
and there was certainly no shortage of prospects for the 
Premier. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just to, like, to lay out a few more highways 
that were presented to the website and an invitation for the 
Premier to travel: Highway 13, Admiral to Cadillac; Highway 
18; Highway 310; Highway 368, Lake Lenore to St. Brieux. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an incredible situation up in that area. 
 
There’s a $100 million worth of manufacturing going on in the 
St. Brieux area, and the highways are in such deplorable state, 
Mr. Speaker, that many of the manufacturers have to go north 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

or different directions in order to get their products out to a 
highway, so they can ultimately go south to the American 
market. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that — tomorrow actually, 
Friday evening — that the citizens of that area are having a 
Highway 368 dinner. They’re actually having a dinner to raise 
money to try to impress upon the government the need to do 
something with their highways in that area. 
 
Also other highways — 32 Highway, Leader to Swift Current; 
Highway 35; Highway 42 near Diefenbaker Park; Highway 
355; Highway 12 — it just goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a very timely moment in the 
legislature to be debating the infrastructure and highways of this 
province. And I certainly have come away from the 
announcement the day before yesterday and the phone calls and 
the messages we’ve had from people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just quickly, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. 
The Saskatchewan Party has been impressing upon this 
government to come out, do an economic assessment of the 
province’s infrastructure, to develop a multi-year strategy. And 
this, Mr. Speaker, is the best that the government can do after 
16 years in power. And it’s certainly a sorry state to see this 
government come up with this plan after all these years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, that 
something is done soon. And the people of Saskatchewan spoke 
in the Martensville by-election. And what they said in the 
Martensville by-election that people across this province are 
saying to us, it is time for a change, Mr. Speaker. The deathbed 
conversion of this government is not good enough. We should 
have a government that will do the job and do the work. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the NDP government for 
failing to properly plan for the province’s transportation 
needs and for letting the road system fall into disrepair, 
compromising business opportunities and the safety of 
travellers. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I am very 
pleased to enter this debate today. 
 
I find it absolutely astounding that this government has been in 
power for 15 years and they just simply do not understand. 
They don’t understand what the highway system needs. They 
don’t understand the economy of the province. They don’t 
understand the people of the province and what they are up 
against when it comes to developing the economy in rural areas 
of the province. 
 
It’s interesting that I found a quote from May 28, 1998, from 
the then Highways minister, Judy Bradley. And she said at that 

time: 
 

Highway work is underway across the province and we are 
working to meet our commitment [to spend] . . . 2.5 billion 
over 10 years to improve our highways. 

 
That’s a large commitment. At that time in 1998 she committed 
over 10 years $2.5 billion. And now we’re finding out that they 
made that commitment with absolutely no strategy in mind, no 
plan in mind, no idea of where the economy was being driven 
from and what their infrastructure needs were. There was no 
comprehensive provincial plan put into place and yet a big 
announcement was made. Why should we believe this 
announcement? Why in the world would we believe that this 
government now has figured it out after close to 16 years 
actually when they have done nothing? 
 
Let’s talk about what the Premier had to say. The Premier even 
admits to their failure. He said and I quote: 
 

“How we have been doing things in the past has been, in 
many cases, ad hoc without a long-term plan, a longterm 
plan that is built on economic advantage,” he said. 
 

And that is exactly the point I’m making. It’s a government that 
is void of ideas. It has no vision. 
 

The significance of today’s announcement is that we have 
put together a long-term plan . . . 
 

Well hello. After 16 years they’re going to put together a plan. 
 

We have worked with communities, we’ve taken a look at 
our needs, we’ve taken a look at our potential (and) we’ve 
laid out a strategy to meet those needs and potential. 
 

I found it interesting that the Premier says that we are now 
working with the communities. I met with a community group 
just last week, Mr. Speaker, and this government seems to have 
a very difficult time understanding what consultation is and 
what working with communities is all about. 
 
I met with the communities along Highway No. 27. It’s actually 
a relatively short highway that comes out of Saskatoon. It has 
industry along that highway and the goods and services and the 
products that are manufactured along Highway No. 27 are 
shipped then to and through Saskatoon. 
 
Has the Premier or the department, the minister met with that 
community prior to making this announcement? Are they a part 
of the strategy that they have now figured out that they need to 
have? And I dare to say, Mr. Speaker, that they are not. They’re 
not consulting with communities. I’m not even too sure they’re 
putting together a plan but we have to take their word for it 
even though there was an announcement made how many years 
ago by the Judy Bradley, the former minister. We had a big 
announcement. There was no plan. There was no vision. They 
have no clue. 
 
I have a number of letters, and I want to put them into record 
simply because the people that are actually the drivers of our 
economy along the Highway 27 corridor can put into words far 
better than I of the struggles that they are facing. One particular 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

company, Spray-Tech, is yet to forward a letter to me but I 
know they will be and they will also be forwarding one to the 
minister. It’s an extremely important industry that is in Vonda, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I do have a letter from Highline, another very important 
industry: 
 

The current Hwy 27 [and I’m quoting from that letter] is a 
lifeline for our business to Saskatoon and points elsewhere 
to connect with the world. At this present time we employ 
some 75 to 100 employees dependent on seasons and 
market. Our market has expanded this past year to include 
Eastern Europe, with increased business so goes the need 
for a good road system that people in the community and 
companies like . . . [ours] can rely on. If we expand our 
Plant further to accommodate growth in the market place, 
a good paved road is a real plus for recruitment of staff 
and safe reliable . . . [transportation] of our product. 

 
Have they consulted with this industry? Have they consulted 
with Spray-Tech? Have they consulted with Highline? Have 
they consulted with those communities that these companies are 
driving the economy up? 
 
I also have a letter, Mr. Speaker, from a woman who travels that 
area to bring a service, and I quote. It’s from Lisa Hammond. It 
says: 
 

I travel this highway regularly from Saskatoon to provide 
chiropractic care in the town of Vonda. Many times, I 
have debated about whether or not to go out there because 
of the condition of this highway. 
 

There’s a letter from Louis Dreyfus, again another huge driver 
within our province of the economy. And the letter says: 
 

The above mentioned provincial highway presently is a 
secondary highway that has been allowed to deteriorate 
into very poor condition . . . 
 
Louis Dreyfus Canada has announced intentions to 
construct a canola crushing plant in Yorkton Sk with 
completion date of Aug 2008. There will be truck traffic 
from our plant in Aberdeen to our crush plant in Yorkton. 
The ability to load trucks to primary weights for all loads 
leaving Aberdeen and area would reduce total traffic, 
reduce fuel usage and be more efficient. 
 

And, as Louis Dreyfus points out, that is being very much 
inhibited by the condition of Highway No. 27. 
 
We have another business along Highway 27 and the letter is: 
 

Vision Quest Developments Inc. is a new a company 
located in Aberdeen, Saskatchewan. Our primary business 
is the construction of Ready-to-Move . . . homes. 
 
With the continued growth of the housing starts and 
development of Saskatchewan, we chose to locate in 
Aberdeen primarily due to its location. We are the only 
builder in the Saskatoon area located on the East side of 
the South Saskatchewan River. 

Later in the letter it says: 
 

Choosing not to repair the surface of Highway 27 would 
be a direct hit to our growth and the number of employees 
we could potentially employ. If the governing party does 
not chose to improve the conditions of this highway, it will 
inflict an associated cost to moving homes in any Easterly 
direction from Aberdeen. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on because there is just so many 
letters on this particular highway and this corridor. There is a 
letter from the Hometown Insurance Brokers and how it is 
causing a detriment to their particular company. Leray Gardens 
has sent a letter. There’s a letter from the Foot Path of 
Reflexology. There’s a letter . . . This is an interesting letter 
from the Vonda Co-op on what it’s like to receive goods within 
this area. And the letter says: “The suppliers that come in with 
stock to the store are impeded by the poor condition of the 
road.” 
 
It says: 

 
The Saputo Milk Delivery truck more often than not finds 
his supplies turned upside down and spilled. We are not 
only concerned for the safety of our company drivers but 
also our patrons who must travel this road. 

 
There’s letters from other businesses in the area. There’s letters 
from municipal leaders from the villages, from the 
municipalities, and they all state how this highway and the poor 
condition of this highway affects their particular area and the 
economy within the area. And we have a government that’s 
now saying, well even after 16 years, well maybe we’ll put 
together a plan. Have they talked to these industries? Have they 
talked to these municipal leaders? 
 
Aside from just the economy and how these industries and these 
municipal leaders are driving the economy, we also have the 
safety factor that’s involved with Highway No. 27. I again have 
letters both from the Prud’homme fire and rescue and from the 
Vonda fire and rescue departments who express grave concern 
over the number of accidents that have happened on that 
highway, and they contribute it solely to the condition of the 
highway. 
 
So what is their plan? How are they going to address this 
corridor and other corridors because it’s not alone. There are 
many corridors within our province that have been neglected for 
16 years, and they no longer support the communities within 
. . . along those highways. They no longer support the industry 
along those highways. And they are no longer safe highways to 
travel. 
 
So how can this government begin to say that now they get it? 
Now they get it. And how are the people of Saskatchewan 
supposed to believe a word that they have to say? For 16 years 
they haven’t got it. It was in 1998 when Minister Bradley made 
the announcement. They didn’t get it then. They’re not going to 
get it now. They have no clue. They’re out of touch with the 
Saskatchewan people. And they have absolutely no vision on 
what it’s going to take to grow this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to begin by describing my pleasure to be able to 
join in this debate this afternoon. I’ve listened with some care 
the member from Biggar’s comments and the member from 
Humboldt, and what I suspected would be the response to the 
largest commitment to the Highways and Transportation 
infrastructure in this province was negative by members of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, understand their 
reaction to good news, to positive initiatives, and to good 
planning. And that’s what this $5-billion, 10-year 
announcement is a result of, Mr. Speaker. It’s the result of 
consultations with municipal leaders, with industry, with people 
of this province. And it’s a true vision for a transportation 
system that will in fact serve the needs of an incredibly growing 
economy in some of the areas that members opposite represent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Saskatchewan Party has a 
difficult time with good news. They have a difficult time when 
we reduce the provincial sales tax by 2 per cent. And they have 
a difficult time . . . And, you know, they don’t say a word about 
job numbers, and they walk out of the House. Eleven thousand 
new jobs for Saskatchewan young people announced, and what 
do they say? They stand up and point the finger, and they walk 
out of the House because they can’t stand to hear good news. 
 
Five billion dollars, a record amount of expenditures on the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, and what does the 
critic say? The critic says, too little, too late, not enough, in 
spite of the fact that it’s more than our neighbouring 
counterparts are committing, in spite of the fact that it’s the 
biggest commitment this province has ever seen to 
infrastructure. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s what an opposition party is, and the 
Saskatchewan Party is the epitome of an opposition party. No 
policy, no platform, no direction, criticize, criticize, criticize — 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what they’re about. And I want to tell you 
the other thing they’re about. 
 
The member from Biggar outlined petitions from about, oh 
golly, I got here one, two, three, four, five, about ten different 
road areas. Now, Mr. Speaker, one can only translate that into 
what the Saskatchewan Party is doing. You commit to 
rebuilding every road in this province to a paved standard, and 
you shouldn’t deny that you’re doing it. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I want to remind the member that all debate 
should be conducted through the Speaker and the member 
should do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
Sometimes my enthusiasm directs me to be commenting, but 
not through the Chair. So I will make a special effort to do that. 
 
But back to what I was saying, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party promises to do everything for everybody. And if anyone 

believes, Mr. Speaker, from industry to municipalities, that all 
of this can be done in a very short period of time, they should 
think again because it will take us some time to rebuild this 
infrastructure. And I want to tell you why. 
 
When these people were, in the 1980s, campaigning for the 
Grant Devine Conservatives, as they built up and rang up a $1 
billion deficit every year, every year, Mr. Speaker, spending 
money that they didn’t have, when we took power in 1991, Mr. 
Speaker — and I brought a little graph, the budget that Grant 
Devine put through, the last one was just a hair under $200 
million — Mr. Speaker, we had to take some action on 
highways and other expenditures because this province was 
bankrupt by that government. It was bankrupt by that 
government who was supported by the now Leader of the 
Opposition who wants his nose in the trough. Mr. Speaker, the 
$200 million that were committed was deficit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The member in 
his debate has I think crossed the line in terms of reflecting 
upon another member, and I’d ask him to withdraw the 
statement before he proceeds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again my enthusiasm. 
I withdraw and apologize for those remarks. The fact of the 
matter is this was borrowed money, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t 
money that the government of the day had. 
 
And there were some tough decisions made in 1991, some of 
them that carried through for many years within this 
department. That highways budget of ’91, in the ’92 budget 
went down to $165 million. Not because we knew that that 
infrastructure didn’t need the money — we know that, we knew 
that. But the government had been so mismanaged that we had 
no alternative. And we had to start balancing budgets and 
paying down debt so that we could be reducing taxes over a 
period of time. That’s long-term vision. That’s long-term 
planning. 
 
You balance your chequebook and then you pay some of your 
debt down and then you start reducing taxes. That’s a plan, Mr. 
Speaker. So no one on that side should talk about the lack of a 
plan after following the Grant Devine administration. Nobody 
on that side, those right wing people have nothing to say about 
how a government should be managed and delivered. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we get through a period of restraint. Our 
economy grows. We’ve got more jobs by the thousands in this 
province. We’ve reduced taxes to make this province 
competitive. What’s the result, Mr. Speaker? We have some 
cash flow. We have some money. So what do we do? Last year 
$400 million into the Highways budget, and just the other day 
we make a commitment to $5 billion into the transportation 
system. And what do they say, Mr. Speaker? No plan. 
 
Well you know who didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker, was SARM 
and SUMA, big city mayors, and the construction association. 
They never said that. They said we like your long-term plan. 
We like the multi-year plan, and we’re onside, and we’re going 
to work with you, and we’re going to make this a better system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know what members of that opposition are 
about. It’s nothing but a quest for political power, nothing but a 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

quest for political power. They have no vision. They have no 
plan other than gaining power. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Highways critic and he tells 
me today that they’ve got no confidence in this government. 
And I understand that. I understand that they have no 
confidence in this government because their vision is so myopic 
that all they can see is a quest for power and a desire for power. 
And the tax reduction they ignore, and the job numbers they 
ignore, and the fact that this economy is growing they ignore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you who isn’t ignoring it. The people 
of Saskatchewan will have an opportunity soon to make a 
decision. And I know they’re gloating over a win in 
Martensville, and they should do that. They should do that 
because, Mr. Speaker, they have told us they’re going to gain 
power every year since they formed that government in the dark 
of night. They haven’t done it yet, and they’re not going to do it 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . or that party, and they’re not 
going to do it in the near future. It’s going to be a long time 
sitting over there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why I’m interested in this debate today 
because I wanted to really hear what their commitment was. 
And I tell you what, I think maybe it’s time. I think maybe it’s 
time that we test this legislature. I think maybe it’s time that we 
find out whether or not this Legislative Assembly has 
confidence in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re debating a $5 billion unprecedented vision 
for this province. And I think therefore, Mr. Speaker, and I 
move, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to private members’ 
public Bills and orders, adjourned debates, item 1, motion 
no. 1. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to private members’ 
public Bills and orders, adjourned debates, item no. 1, 
motion no. 1. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who are opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 

[The division bells rang from 11:51 until 12:01.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the member for Prince Albert Northcote 
— order please — seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to private members’ 
public Bills and orders, adjourned debates, item 1, motion 
no. 1. 

 
Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. All members, both sides. 
Thank you. 
 
Atkinson Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 24] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris   
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
D’Autremont Krawetz Hermanson 
Bjornerud Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kerpan 
Kirsch Brkich Morgan 
Heppner Duncan  
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion — 28; those opposed — 24. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. We will now 
proceed to private members’ public Bills and orders, adjourned 
debates, item 1, motion no. 1. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

motion by Mr. Elhard.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is a great opportunity to stand in the House today and talk about 
. . . I’ve got quite a bit of time here. I’m going to talk about a 
number of things. I’m going to talk about highways and quite a 
bit about highways. I’m going to talk quite a bit about health 
care. 
 
But what I want to first talk about . . . It’s quite an interesting 
political move by the New Democratic Party, the NDP Party, to 
cling on to power for a little bit longer. And it was an 
interesting move because it was a quick vote. It was a sudden 
vote. And it was a vote that we weren’t expecting. And they did 
a very good job of catching us off guard. 
 
But I remember another vote that was taking place in this 
House. I remember a vote that took place in this very House 
about four years ago. And I remember that vote caught the NDP 
off guard. In fact I remember the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle running into the House with his phone trying to get 
a hold of the member from Athabasca. I remember many of the 
members running in, panic stricken on what was going to 
happen if they lost that vote. And I don’t quite remember, I 
don’t know if any of you remember what happened during that 
vote. During that vote the government lost significantly on an 
issue, on an issue on economic development. 
 
And it was interesting the next day, the next few days after that 
vote. And I remember the member from Moose Jaw North 
standing in his place and giving a rah-rah speech that; oh I can’t 
believe we would have got fooled on this vote. They were 
coming out of the rafters, and they were coming out of the 
bushes. That’s where all the members were coming out of. And 
how ashamed they should be and how ashamed they should be 
of pulling such a surprise vote. 
 
And isn’t it funny; now I see the member sitting in his seat all 
proud, smiling like a Cheshire cat, Mr. Speaker. He is so proud 
of himself on what a wonderful political move he has made in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely amazing because I 
remember that night. He was sitting about in the very same 
spot, and the picture on his face, the emotions on his face 
couldn’t have been further from what they are today. He’s 
extremely proud. He’s smiling away there with the red face that 
he’s got, but I have never seen such a pale face in my life, in all 
of my life as that night when the NDP lost the vote. And it was 
the first time a government has lost a vote in this House in 75 
years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventy-nine. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Seventy-nine years, I stand corrected. The 
member from Cannington was there. It was 79 years ago that 
the government on that side of the House lost a vote. And the 
panic throughout all of those members — I remember hearing 
stories that they were trying to get members from different 
establishments, trying to get them into this House so that they 

could stand in their place and vote to save what they thought 
was going to be a falling government. And it was on an issue 
that has never been more important to this government, an issue 
on economic development, and they couldn’t even fill their 
seats to beat the opposition — absolutely amazing. And you can 
see that’s the importance and the priority they have put on 
economic development for the 16 years this government has 
been in power. 
 
But once again I just . . . And for those members, and I know 
the member from Lloydminster was working in estimates 
asking the minister questions and when it came to voting on 
those estimates, the officials were asked to leave. And there is I 
think maybe 10 or 11 left in the House. You know, I mean the 
vote wasn’t even close. 
 
So when we called the vote and we said no we’re not going to 
agree with the placement of that money, we don’t agree with the 
economic plan of this government, and then the scrambling 
started. And that was, I think, a ten-minute bell and scrambling 
started. I remember the poor Sergeant-at-Arms; he couldn’t 
have stood by the door and throw the cellphones out fast 
enough as everybody was running in the door with a cellphone 
trying to get a hold of their members from local establishments 
from around the province. 
 
In fact I had one member that I found very curious . . . she’s 
been on her feet quite a bit over the last first two days of session 
. . . was the member from Saskatoon Nutana wasn’t here for the 
vote. Can you believe it? Wasn’t here for the vote. She didn’t 
stand in her place and vote in that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a 
long-standing rule in this House that prevents hon. members in 
their debate to referring to either the presence or the absence of 
members either in terms of participation in the House or in 
terms of voting. The hon. member just made that reference, not 
for the first time, in his debate. Clearly it’s not just a slip of the 
tongue, and I would ask that the hon. member would abide by 
the rules of the House and strike that reference. I’m sure, I’m 
sure he must have some other things that he would want to say 
in this debate and that he would like to get on to them and quit 
breaking the rules. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
speak to the point of order. Madam Deputy Speaker, the rule or 
the consensus that the Government House Leader refers to is 
referring to members currently in the House or not. In the case 
of a recorded vote in Hansard, it’s now part of the public record 
and as such can be referred to. It was a recorded vote at that 
time, and so the member’s ability to be in attendance for that 
vote or not would be matter of public record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I have listened to members from both 
sides of the House and reminded that we’re not to be reflecting 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

on a vote of the House, or members absent or present during 
votes. I would think that all members would want to respect that 
we’re not to refer to members who are absent or present in the 
House, and I would ask the members to get on with the debate 
before us. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I find 
that interesting because I certainly remember a number of the 
people that voted on . . . that voted . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . No, I’m not referring to anybody . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I believe the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone is now in his remarks 
trying to challenge the ruling from the Chair, and so I would ask 
him to get to the motion that’s before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I do 
remember that night, and it was a very interesting night as 
people were scrambling to their chairs. And what I will do is 
talk about the members that were here, the members that voted 
that night in favour of the government, and by extension a 
person would be able to draw a bit of an inference as to who 
was and who wasn’t here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe in the ruling it says not to 
reflect on members absent or present during votes, and I would 
ask the member now to abide by the rules of this Assembly and 
get on with the debate before the House. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was a very 
interesting night, and maybe I’ll move on to certain other 
subject matters such as highways and health care. And there are 
so many issues that a person can talk about. 
 
And I just thought it was very interesting that the members 
opposite are sitting there so proud of themselves getting this 
confidence vote off the paper. And I can certainly understand 
there’s reasons on that side that that might be done, and that is 
probably is a very good move on their part. Just similar to the 
issue on the vote that we had a number of years ago, that this 
government was defeated for the first time in 75 years. And I 
remember the consternation on their faces and how concerned 
they were. 
 
And somebody brought up the last couple of votes that really 
are of significance. I mean, this is a very significant vote in the 
House on the confidence of the government, and it’s extremely 
significant. I do know that there have been two votes in the 
province that has already talked to the confidence of this current 
NDP government. 
 
And I’ll certainly . . . and I’ve talked before about the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy and the fact that he received over 55 
per cent of the votes in that constituency. I remember talking 
about the confidence of that constituency . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the member from North Battleford is 
hollering from his seat: why did we have that vote? We had that 
vote to replace a member that was no longer wanting to serve in 
this House. It was as simple as that. 
 
Now we had that vote in a constituency that is traditionally an 
NDP stronghold — hasn’t been the last couple times — but I 
remember that seat in the last general election. I believe that it 

was a very close race, and the polls, especially in the city of 
Weyburn, went in the favour of the governing party. But since 
that time, two years past the general election when we had a 
by-election, polls in the city of Weyburn went strongly for the 
Sask Party. In fact in that constituency I believe that, in the 
2003 general election, the NDP won about 18 or 19 polls out of 
21. And in the last by-election in Weyburn we won 18 polls out 
of 20, a complete flip-flop which, if nothing else, tells me that 
the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy have absolutely no 
confidence in this government, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 
But even more importantly, even more significantly — not that 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and our young member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, that wasn’t significant — but the latest 
test of this government, the latest test of this government was in 
Martensville. And we all I think are pretty familiar what 
happened in Martensville but just . . . It was interesting standing 
in Warman that night in the . . . where the results were flowing 
in, and I was absolutely amazed when I saw poll after poll after 
poll after poll after poll where the results for the governing 
party, the NDP party, couldn’t get up to the number 10 or 
above. 
 
I would say — and I counted; there was half the polls, half the 
polls — there was about 43 or 44 polls where the governing 
party didn’t get more than 10 votes. Like I mean . . . And I 
don’t have locations. But even more significantly — and some 
of the members have beat me to the punch there — is that a 
couple of the polls . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . a number of 
the polls, in fact three of the polls, the governing party did not 
get one single vote out of a whole poll. Can you believe that? 
Not one single vote. 
 
Now the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is looking at me 
quite sternly. And I believe those polls, I think number three, 
poll no. 4, she was out door knocking in that poll because 
apparently they did have a couple of votes going into the 
by-election but — I’m not sure if she was or not — but 
something had an effect on the voters in poll no. 4 and they 
didn’t get a single vote. 
 
In fact, you know, I remember last year — was it last year or 
the year before? — the Premier having a big campaign, a big, 
fat zero. There was posters of the Premier talking about a big, 
fat zero. Now what was that on? That was on . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . equalization. I think he was talking about a big, 
fat zero. Well, you know, it would be very interesting to hang 
those posters up in poll no. 4 and also in poll number . . . the 
hospital poll, and the Hepburn advance poll, because what they 
received in those polls was exactly what the Premier talked 
about, and it describes exactly the confidence that those people 
in Martensville have of this government and that is a big, fat 
zero, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But more significantly is just the true numbers, how the people 
voted in that constituency on whether they have confidence in 
this government. Seventy-seven point . . . Let me just refer to 
this again because this will be very useful; 77.32 per cent voted 
for the Saskatchewan Party. That is the highest number of 
popular vote any Sask Party — and I would probably submit 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] — has received in 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

the province. If it isn’t, it’s darn close to it. It’s the highest 
percentage that we have received. 
 
And in fact right after that by-election the headlines in The 
StarPhoenix read, “Heppner cruises to byelection win.” That’s 
exactly what The StarPhoenix headline said after that 
by-election. And cruising to a win would be understating when 
you have 77.32 per cent of the vote. 
 
Now if that, you know . . . So that leaves a total of about 12.68 
per cent of the vote left for the other parties to scrap over. I 
remember . . . 22.28 or something like that. It’s not very darn 
many anyway, and when you divide it between the other six 
parties, none of them did very well. 
 
But I think it is significant that the NDP Party, the governing 
party of the province who’s had this province 16 years and have 
had opportunity after opportunity to make announcements and 
to improve — whether it’s the economy, the highways, the 
health care, whatever it might be — I would believe that they 
should have received more than 10.5 per cent of the vote, 10.5 
per cent of the vote. That is absolutely amazing. 
 
And what 10.5 per cent of the vote works out to is they received 
482 votes. Absolutely amazing! Four hundred and eighty-two 
votes in a constituency with a voting populace of 8,000 people. 
There’d be 8,000 or better eligible voters in a constituency of 
Martensville and the NDP, the governing party, was able to 
muster 482 votes. Absolutely astonishing. 
 
But they can take some solace from this. They should be very 
happy with the results in Martensville because they finished 
second — second — as opposed to Weyburn-Big Muddy where 
they finished third. And in Weyburn-Big Muddy, I forget 
exactly, but I believe there were three parties running in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy so they could have finished third or some 
people would look at them as finishing last, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now I think they are very, very . . . They’re feeling very 
confident. They’re feeling very confident because in 
Martensville there were seven parties running and quite frankly 
I thought, you know, if they finished third out of three parties 
their chances of finishing five or six out of seven parties were 
pretty darn good. But they did end up finishing second with 482 
votes out of a possible voting populace of over 8,000 people. 
Absolutely amazing. 
 
And then you know it’s interesting after each by-election 
trouncing, after each by-election slaughter they come out with 
more policy then. Now they’re going to . . . Oh, we’ve heard the 
message. And they talked about the PST [provincial sales tax] 
and a family holiday after Weyburn-Big Muddy. And how did 
that help them? It didn’t help them a bit. And now that they’ve 
heard from the people of Martensville it didn’t take the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote very long to get on his feet and 
say, jeez, we’d better do something about this and, you know, 
introduce this $5 billion over 10 years. 
 
You know I think the only way it could have been more 
effective if he could have said . . . Well let’s say over the next 
50 years we’re going to introduce, I’d say, $25 billion. Because 
realistically people don’t take this as any sort of a plan 

whatsoever. 
 
And I want to talk about highways in a little bit. I don’t want to 
get to that just yet because I have another few comments that I 
want to say about Martensville and the fact that we have 
received 77.32 per cent of the vote. That’s over . . . well over 
3,500 votes compared to the NDP’s four hundred and 
eighty-some votes. Unbelievable plurality, unbelievable 
plurality. 
 
But I think it has some reflection on what has been in the news 
over the last couple of weeks and what has been dominating 
question period. I believe the people in Martensville — and 
especially the people in Martensville — were sending this 
government a message. A message on how they have treated the 
. . . some of the female workers within the civil service, and 
how they have treated one of their employees that was charged 
with harassment and convicted of assault and received a 
$275,000 payment. And that was what has been made public so 
far, because we know there’s far more costs to this case, far 
more costs. 
 
It was interesting that in that announcement, when they said that 
they were going to pay this person $275,000 for being released 
from government early, through the member from Regina . . . 
the former head of the Public Service Commission, Minister of 
Public Service . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Regina Rosemont. That’s why they said 
they had to pay this extra money. And it was interesting — 
through question period yesterday we found that there’s going 
to be far more, far more costs associated with the Carriere 
harassment case. We feel that . . . And there’s certainly lots of 
evidence to say that it’s going to be well over $500,000 to the 
public purse. 
 
And I truly believe, because I had the opportunity to get up to 
Martensville and I knocked on a couple of . . . in a couple of 
polls in Osler and Hague. And I remember distinctly people 
saying at the door, what is going on with this Murdoch Carriere 
case? They just paid $275,000 to a person that was charged and 
then convicted of assault, charged with harassment and 
convicted of assault and is that what this government, is that 
where this government has got to? And you know, frankly, 
what do you say to the person? I’m embarrassed that the 
provincial government got to that point. And I did have to say 
to them . . . They’re saying is that all the cost? And I said I 
don’t believe it will be all the cost. That’s all the cost that the 
government have talked about so far. 
 
But we learned yesterday in question period that his pension is 
paid for three more years and the government is going to be, the 
government is going to be on the hook for more pension costs 
on the back end. 
 
Well, you know, they’re hooting and hollering. They’re hooting 
and hollering. Why didn’t that come out with the severance? 
Why didn’t that come out? Why didn’t the minister — and it 
was the Minister of Environment, the member from Regina 
Lakeview that had to answer those questions when they first 
announced the payment to Carriere — why didn’t he come on 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

and say . . . I mean, we know because we heard of that news 
scrum and our people were telling us he stuck to the lines. He 
did a very good job; he stuck to the three or four lines that he 
was given. But he sure didn’t branch out and talk about the 
whole case. He didn’t talk . . . No, I shouldn’t say the case, the 
whole cost to the government because there are certainly much 
more, many more costs to this provincial government that will 
be coming out over the next little while. 
 
Some of them . . . We just found out as of yesterday that the 
pensions will be paid for an extra three years. They keep saying 
he was a 32-year employee of the government and that is true, 
but his pension is going to be based on 35 years. And that is an 
agreement set out by this government and Mr. Carriere. And I 
am questioning why the government would have to have gone 
those extra three years, because it is an added cost to the 
government. They like to talk about only $275,000 cost, but we 
know the costs are far greater — far greater. In fact some 
people are saying as much as a half a million dollars this is 
going to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. That’s absolutely 
astonishing. 
 
And I can tell you, I don’t know many — and I, quite frankly, I 
would love to know —from that side of the House, how many 
of those members on the governing side got out and door 
knocked in the constituency of Martensville. And there is . . . 
One member has said that he has and I don’t doubt it. Two 
members have said they went out and door knocked in 
Martensville. And I just hope it wasn’t poll no. 4 because 
remember poll no. 4 was a big, fat zero. 
 
So that’s two, two out of a government of 30 members or 29 
members. Were there any other members on that side that went 
out and door knocked? Only two? Only two? The member from 
. . . The members from Saskatoon, none of them went out to 
speak and door knock in Martensville? I’m giving them a 
chance to stand up and say whether they door knocked in 
Martensville. 
 
Because if they did door knock in Martensville, which I did for 
two or three days — and I know every other one of my 
members, when we had time in the evenings, got out and door 
knocked in Martensville — and I do know that I could ask 
probably each and every one of those members if the Murdoch 
Carriere case was addressed on the doorstep, if the Murdoch 
Carriere case was addressed on the doorstep, and they’ll say it 
was. 
 
And I would like to know from the members opposite, for those 
of you that got out and actually started knocking on the door to 
find out what people in this province and in rural Saskatchewan 
are thinking of their government, are thinking of their 
government, did any of them get out and door knock and find 
out what people were thinking? Because if they did, they would 
stand in their place and they would say that they are thinking of 
Murdoch Carriere. They were thinking of Murdoch Carriere. 
 
I don’t . . . I can’t hear what they’re saying. 
 
I was out there for a couple of days — three days in fact — 
talking to people in the constituency of Martensville, and they 
had some distinct messages. 
 

Well the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is spouting from 
her seat. How many days did she go out and door knock? She 
didn’t go out and door knock. Well I did say that she might’ve 
door knocked in poll no. 4 or for the advance poll and Heppner . 
Did she door knock in those areas? No. Maybe she realized, 
maybe she realized it was going to be a Martensville massacre, 
is what it was. It was a Martensville massacre. 
 
And so she didn’t decide to take her time and go out and door 
knock. Is that the case? Is that the case? How many of these 
people, how many of these people who have so much 
confidence in their government went out and knocked on doors 
for their party? And I’m amazed that I’ve only see two hands 
raised, absolutely amazed. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Because if you would have gone out and door knocked in that 
constituency, the last opportunity to door knock in a 
by-election, you would have heard the same stories that we on 
this side of the House which . . . Each and every one of us were 
out there door knocking. And we heard about Murdoch Carriere 
and we heard about absolutely terrible highways, which the 
government tried to announce in a 10-year floating, balloon 
cloud plan that they’ve got which has absolutely no substance 
to it. They would have heard about property taxes. And the 
education portion of property taxes were huge. They would 
have heard the fact that this government is old, tired, and 
worn-out, that it’s time for a change. 
 
They would have heard that every announcement that this 
government seems to be making right now is absolutely no 
more about the betterment of this province than it is the 
betterment of their party. That’s the exact reason for any one of 
their announcements. Their announcements are no more than 
trying to buy votes in the next general election. And that’s 
exactly what this government has been announcing for the last 
number of months and probably a year or so. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I request leave of 
the House to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
asked request leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I appreciate the accommodation of the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone, and members, to allow me to 
introduce some important guests who are important not only 
just because they’re here today but . . . in an ongoing way, but 
particularly as related to an event which is on the cusp of being 
an historic event here in the province. 
 
As we all know, the Juno Awards are going to be held for the 
first time in our province at the end of this month in the city of 
Saskatoon. And from that the show will be shown literally to 
over 250 million households around the world. And I’m very, 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

very pleased to have in our galleries today some folks who are 
intimately involved in the process. 
 
I’d like to introduce them to you. They are also taking part in 
the Juno road show event which will occur in the gallery upon 
adjournment of the House today, and all members are invited to 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry, in the rotunda — thank 
you to the hon. member — that will be taking place in the 
rotunda today. And all hon. members are invited to join them. 
 
I’d ask them just to either wave or stand when I introduce them 
individually, and then when I’ve concluded for all of us to 
welcome them together. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you Hugh Vassos, who is the host 
committee director of marketing; to introduce to you the two 
Co-Chairs of the host committee, Todd Brandt and Diane 
Boyko. Also a member of the host committee is Ari Avivi. 
Jordan Cook, is a Saskatoon artist who is here. And an artist 
that those around Regina and around Saskatchewan and beyond 
will know is Jack Semple. I’m also pleased to welcome Dan 
White, and from CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] we 
have Rhonda O’Grady. CTV is a — as we will all know — is a 
major sponsor of course of the Juno show. We also have from 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Rhonda Spiess. And I 
conclude by introducing to you from magic 93 radio, who will 
be hosting the event today, Steve Chisholm. 
 
Hon. members, I would ask you all to welcome these folks who 
are either artists themselves or strongly invest their careers and 
their lives in the arts here in the province of Saskatchewan and 
intimately connected to what will be, I’m sure, the finest Juno 
event in the history of the Junos at the end of this month in 
Saskatoon. Welcome to you all. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. On 
behalf of the members on this side of the House, we’d like to 
join with the members on that side and welcome these 
individuals to their legislature and want to commend them for 
the work they’re doing for the Juno Awards. 
 
This is certainly going to be one of the keynote events in this 
city or in the province, not just this year but in this decade, and 
I think it’s going to be a wonderful event. And I know it’s going 
to be hugely time consuming for the people that are working, 
many of them on a volunteer and unpaid basis, and want to 
encourage them to keep up the good work and not be afraid to 
ask other volunteers for help. Saskatoon is a great city and filled 
with a wealth of good people that are wanting to get involved 
and work on this project. So I want to welcome them and wish 
them every success as they go forward through the next year. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and a welcome to the guests in the gallery as well. 
Where we’re at right now is normally at this . . . This is private 
members’ day and normally we would be debating a motion put 
forward by the opposition today and there’s response back and 
forth. 
 
But the government chose to move to a motion further on in the 
order paper, a confidence motion of the government which I’m 
very glad to speak on. I had the opportunity of speaking on this 
particular motion a couple of times in the fall session, in fact 
two different occasions. And I have the opportunity of speaking 
to this motion again for probably, until the Speaker calls the 
clock. I can sit down I guess before, but when you’re talking 
about the confidence of this government I have an awful lot to 
say. 
 
And there are no shortage of subject matters to cover when you 
talk about the confidence of a government, a government that’s 
been here for 16 years or I should say the lack of confidence of 
a government that has been here for 16 years. And you know 
we’ve talk about a couple of different things. We’ve talked 
about the Carriere case. We’ve talked about some of the 
by-elections that have taken place over the last couple of years 
in the province. 
 
One of the very telling stories I think of a confidence of a 
government is when you talk about population. And I know this 
government doesn’t want to talk about population. They like to 
talk about other things when they measure whether they’re 
successful or not. But I truly believe that most every person in 
this province looks at whether we’re gaining in population or 
losing population as to whether this province is progressing or 
regressing. 
 
And under the NDP government over the last five or six years 
under this NDP government if you use the category, if you use 
the measuring stick of population as to how well this 
government has done, there is absolutely no question, no 
question from people, whether they’re urban or rural, that if you 
measure the success of this government on population it has 
failed miserably. It has failed absolutely miserably because 
population in this province under this Premier — the Premier 
that was elected in ’03 as Premier but also took over from the 
former premier, Mr. Romanow — under his watch, under the 
current Premier’s watch we have seen the population of this 
province decline year after year after year after year. In fact 
there has not been one year in the six years I guess that this 
Premier has been in office that we have seen a population 
growth in this province. 
 
And I find that very telling. It tells a huge story as to whether 
people feel confidence in the province, if they feel confident in 
the government. And if they don’t, they tend to vote — not like 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

they did in Martensville or Weyburn-Big Muddy— but they 
tend to vote with their feet and they leave the province because 
they don’t feel that this government has provided the 
opportunities that they need to stay in the province. 
 
In fact I remember last year or the year before, the Premier even 
saying that we haven’t offered as many opportunities as what 
we should have — absolutely not. And you just have to look at 
the numbers. For example in 2001, shortly after the Premier 
took over, we had a net out-migration — and this is just from 
the category, the age category of 15 to 34. In the age category 
of 15 to 34 we lost 6,101 people out of our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And you compare that to other provinces such 
as the province to our west, to the west of us, Alberta. They 
increased their population by over 15,000. 
 
Now I know this government, this NDP government hates to be 
compared to the government beside it, the Conservative 
government beside it, whether it was a Ralph Klein government 
or now the new Premier. And I know they absolutely detest 
being compared to Alberta. So why don’t we compare it to 
Manitoba? Why don’t we compare it to another NDP 
government to our east, Manitoba? 
 
In 2001 Manitoba lost 1,600 people compared to the 6,100 
people that we lost. It’s absolutely astounding. We lost about 
5,000 more people in that one year to out-migration, in the 
categories of age 15 to 35. And I can go from year to year what 
the out-migration has been. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when you go through the six years that this NDP government 
has been in power, we’ll see that there has been over 18,000, 
almost 19,000 people leave this province. That’s a net 
out-migration of over almost 19,000 people. 
 
And you compare that . . . I know they don’t want to compare it 
to Alberta, but it’s only natural we compare it to the province to 
our west and the province to our east. And when you compare it 
to Alberta, over those six years they had a net in-migration over 
60,000 people. Sixty thousand people would be, if we had that 
many people moving to our province in those six years, it 
would be our third largest city in just six years. Our third largest 
city in just six years moving to the province. But instead what 
we have seen is we have seen about 19,000 people — that’s like 
an Estevan and Weyburn combined, that’s like, 18,000 would 
be like . . . I’m not even sure of the population of North 
Battleford, but in that ballpark, leaving the province under this 
NDP government. 
 
In Manitoba they experienced out-migration as well, and I’m 
certainly not saying that there aren’t some issues there because 
there were some issues. They experienced an out-migration of 
about 7,600 people — that’s 18,000 in Saskatchewan and 7,600 
in Manitoba. 
 
And you compare Manitoba to Saskatchewan. We both have 
had NDP governments. But you know, with all due respect to 
Manitoba, they have a fair amount going for them, but nothing 
like what we have going for us in our province if you ask me. 
And this is my own personal opinion and I believe the opinion 
of most everybody on this side of the House. 
 
The potential in the province is huge. The potential for this 
province to be a leader in Western Canada, to follow along and 

even beat Alberta at some point is there. I’m not saying that 
Manitoba does not have natural resources but they don’t have it 
anywhere close to what we have here in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s been something holding us back. And I believe the 
people in Martensville know what’s been holding us back. And 
I believe the people in Indian Head-Milestone know what’s 
holding us back. As well as the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
know exactly what is holding us back. 
 
And you know it was interesting again as I was door knocking, 
and not only in Martensville, but I know in the last month, I 
every year have . . . rent space in all the different communities, 
15 different communities in my constituency. I’ll rent space in a 
hall or the seniors’ centre or whatever it might be. I advertise it 
in all the papers and we put up posters in all the post offices and 
say we’re going to be coming to Indian Head for example, or 
Fort Qu’Appelle or Rouleau or Briercrest, if you have any 
concerns or you just want to come out and chat with the MLA, 
I’ll be there for two or three hours in every community. And we 
just finished going through that. 
 
And I’m amazed at the optimism everybody has for this 
province. It is just rampant throughout the province, and it was 
evident in Martensville. But everybody, people ask me at the 
end of the tour, after we’re done, what is the biggest question, 
what’s the question, what’s on everybody’s mind? And the 
question, bar none, that every community that I went to and the 
people that came out as we were sitting around, they would 
always get to, when is the next election? 
 
This province needs to see the potential. It needs to experience 
the potential that we have. And people just don’t feel that it has 
been anywhere close to, we haven’t gone anywhere close, to 
where we need to be. And they all are looking at the current 
government as the reason. 
 
The member from . . . the former minister of the Public Service 
Commission had something to say. Unfortunately I missed that. 
 
But regardless, they over and over again talk about when is the 
next general election. And you know, I think that most people 
are hoping as spring . . . Hope springs eternal. They’re hoping 
for the spring. But I don’t think this government will have the 
confidence because after Martensville . . . to call an election in 
the spring. I believe it’s probably going to be the fall before the 
current Premier screws up the courage to call an election. He 
certainly saw what happened in Martensville. He’s certainly 
seen what has happened in Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
I think if he is talking to people on the streets like we have been 
talking to people on the streets, whether it’s through the coffee 
parties that I hold or through door knocking in the constituency 
of Martensville, I think he’s probably getting the same message. 
It’s tired. It’s old. It’s a government that needs to be changed. 
And that’s exactly what I’m hearing over and over again. And 
that’s why people are continually asking me when the next 
general election is. 
 
[12:45] 
 
You know, well the member from . . . I just heard him mention 
about the performance this morning during question period and 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

after question period. I would say that the performance by some 
of the members on that side of the House today, they have been 
hearing the message. They have been hearing the message that 
this government is old, tired, and worn out, and people want a 
change. Because I don’t know any other reason why they’d be 
reacting the way they reacted to some of the questions that we 
were questioning the government on. 
 
People are wanting a change and they’re knowing people want a 
change, and they’re fighting back as hard as they possibly can. 
There’s a whole pile of emotion here today, and that’s fine. But 
I think it’s completely driven by the fact that they know what 
the polls are saying and what the people are saying throughout 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I do want to talk a little bit . . . they keep saying, well are you 
going to talk about transportation and highways? I would love 
to talk about transportation and highways. I have quite a bit of 
time left to talk about where we are in this province today and 
where we need to get to. 
 
I certainly was interested when the minister stood up the day 
after the Martensville trouncing, the Martensville massacre, 
whatever you want to call it, when we received 77 — did I say 
that before — 77.32 per cent of the vote, and the governing 
party received 10.5. 
 
I found it was extremely interesting that the day after . . . in fact 
I believe the news conference was at 10 o’clock in the morning, 
10:30. By 10 or 10:30 they had thrown together quite a flashy 
brochure which by the way too I just . . . for people that haven’t 
seen it, I was very glad to see the first brochure that I have seen 
come out with Saskatchewan, exclamation mark. That, you 
know, that was about. . . what was that? A hundred and ten . . . 
a million and a half dollars to put the exclamation mark on the 
end of Saskatchewan. But anyways, so this is the first 
publication that I’ve seen that’s going to draw so many people 
to the province. 
 
And you know I can’t quite see it yet why that is going to draw 
so many people, why they’re hanging they’re hats on that for 
drawing population to the province. But that is on this brochure 
talking about highways and what this government wants to do 
going forward as far as the highways in our province. 
 
And it was really interesting that . . . I listened to a little bit of 
the Minister of Highways when he was speaking in the debate 
earlier before they moved to the motion. And he was talking 
about the infrastructure and the highways and those, and how 
we need to throw a lot of money to improve them because, quite 
frankly, they’re in terrible, terrible condition and they have been 
neglected for 16 years. And why has that been? Who has 
neglected them? It certainly hasn’t been, you know, the poor 
transport guy driving up and down the highways paying his 
taxes every day. It’s this provincial government that has 
neglected the highways for 16 years and after the . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
member. Why is the member for Regina Dewdney on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 

Regina Dewdney has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I would invite the 
member for Regina Dewdney to proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly 25 wonderful children from Wilfrid Walker 
School in my constituency. They are among the brightest and 
best students in all of Saskatchewan and among the best in the 
city of Regina without doubt. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are accompanied today by two 
wonderful teachers, Joanna Sanders Bobiash who many of the 
members will know, and Ms. Sharon Solheim who is our music 
teacher. And these students are here today to participate in the 
Juno celebration we’re going to have just outside the doors of 
this Chamber once the House adjourns today. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to introduce all these 
wonderful children to all members in the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
government has talked about highways and certainly we’re glad 
to see our motion come forward and interested that the 
government wanted to move right away to a confidence motion 
that was on the paper and not continue on with the debate on 
highways and face the questions that they should have been 
facing; face the questions that they should have been facing on 
their issues around highways. Because when I look at 
transportation for economic advantage and I go through this 
brochure that they had done immediately after the Martensville 
election that . . . Did I mention before that we got 77.32 per cent 
of the vote and they were only at 10.5? I mentioned that? Okay, 
thank you. 
 
What I did want to mention though is in this brochure it talks 
about the time is now. In other words for the last 16 years it 
wasn’t the time. The time is now but for the last 16 years under 
this government, it wasn’t the time and that’s why we let things 
deteriorate as much as we have, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan. But the time is now because I think we’re 
months away from a general election. So I think you could read 
right into that the time is now because a general election is just 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

around the corner. That’s why the time is now. And we’ve had 
opportunity after opportunity to invest in our infrastructure and 
unfortunately this government hasn’t done it. 
 
I can tell you that in the constituency that I represent, Highway 
339 is a major link that feeds the town of Briercrest and around 
to Avonlea and Claybank where there is a national heritage site. 
The Claybank Brick Plant is on Highway 339 and this 
government has done nothing to fix that highway. It has 
deteriorated to the point that I believe that had the weather not 
changed as quickly as it did in the fall, that those people would 
be driving on a gravel road right now. 
 
They’ve taken that highway out of service and turned it back to 
gravel when what they should be doing is going the other way 
and at the very, very least restoring it to the thin membrane, but 
I would truly say restoring it to the full heavy-load surface that 
it needs to be because that is a huge agricultural area that needs 
to be serviced with fertilizer, with fuel, the amount of grain 
that’s being hauled out of there, and they need a road that is 
suitable for the businesses that are along that highway. Three 
thirty-nine needs to be addressed. 
 
Well the time is now because a general election is just around 
the corner. And we’ve seen that on announcement after 
announcement. People around this province . . . That was the 
other thing that I found really, really quite interesting. I’m 
surprised they didn’t do it four days before the general election 
because . . . or not the general election. I’m surprised they 
didn’t do it four or five days before the election in Martensville 
because I remember a situation in Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
I believe that they had Souris Valley, that they wanted to . . . 
They thought this was going to be the saviour for their NDP 
candidate. Let’s throw $4 million into saving Souris Valley 
because that would be the saviour for their poor NDP candidate 
which I know they were polling and seeing that he was trailing 
in the polls. So we’ll inject $4 million. That should buy enough 
votes to shore up that maybe we don’t finish third. At least we 
would finish second. But unfortunately $4 million didn’t get 
them up from third to second; it left them at third. 
 
And I was interested, maybe this $5 billion over 25 years is it or 
how many? I know it’s a long ways out. I mean it’s so far out 
you can’t even see it. Ten years I think it is, 10 or 20 years . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ten years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Ten years for $5 billion. It is so far out but 
if he could have announced that four or five days earlier, just 
before the vote in Martensville, it would have been interesting 
to see what it would have done to those numbers. I’m thinking 
instead of 10.5 we might have seen 8.5. We would have seen 
the Liberals bounce a little bit. So if they did learn anything, 
they learned in Weyburn-Big Muddy that we shouldn’t do it on 
the 11th hour. We’ll do it at 12:30 the day after the by-election 
and see if that will help them, and it hasn’t. 
 
But the whole point of this is that the government, this NDP 
government has not had a plan for highways over the last 16 
years. The Premier has said it. The Minister of Highways has 
said it. Well the Minister of Highways is reading his 
BlackBerry and saying that’s not true. Well we know it is true. 

The Premier said those very words at the news conference the 
day after the Martensville by-election. 
 
And he said, we didn’t have a plan. We’re up from project to 
project. It was on an ad hoc basis and no long-term plan, which 
I know from as long as I have been the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. And we have met with the highway 
construction association. They said one of the problems with 
this government is they have no long-term plan. 
 
So obviously the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote 
realized we better have a long-term plan. It’s so long — 10 
years, $5 billion. You know, the only thing that could have been 
better, the only thing that could have been better was 10 billion 
over 20 years. Why didn’t you try that? Or maybe it could have 
been 15 billion over 30 years. That would have got you more 
press perhaps. But it was 5 million over 10 . . . 5 billion over 10 
years with absolutely no plan on how they’re going to spend the 
money. 
 
But even more importantly, if you look at what we’re spending 
on highways right now — $410 million a year — and you 
extrapolate that out without inflation, if you extrapolate that out 
without inflation, you get $4.1 billion. So he’s really, you know 
. . . And that’s without inflation. You put inflation in there, and 
especially over the last year look at the increase in fuel costs. 
The increase in fuel costs which goes into construction costs . . . 
When you put into consideration the increase in pavement and 
all of that, because oil goes into pavement, and the increase in 
all of that, I don’t believe that at $5 billion you’ll see one extra 
cent that won’t be eaten up by the inflated costs . . . not inflated, 
but the increase in costs — not that they’re artificially inflated 
— but the increase in costs by construction companies that are 
building roads. It will eat up every cent that this government 
thinks that it is putting towards highways. 
 
Now I remember when I was first elected, the government had a 
long-term plan. They said they had a long-term plan for 
highways on what it was going to be. The first couple of years 
they were going to spend . . . You know I can’t remember the 
number, but like three . . . They were going to . . . Say they 
were going to spend 3.5 billion, I think, over 10 years. But the 
first 3 or 4 or 5 years they didn’t get anywhere close to the 
average that they would have to spend to catch up. And so in 
the last couple of years, because of inflation, they’re spending 
more. But they didn’t meet their target. They absolutely didn’t 
meet their target. 
 
This is just another classic example of the government. They’re 
thinking that in 10 years people won’t really remember the 
promise. Well they’re not going to have to worry because 
they’re not going to be in government after the next eight 
months, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that in 10 years, $5 
billion is going to be far short. In fact it will be because it 
doesn’t even come up, catch up with the true cost, the inflation 
cost that construction workers or road company . . . construction 
companies are going to be facing into the future. 
 
But I truly believe this is going to be a vote of confidence on 
this provincial government, a vote of confidence by members in 
this House on this provincial government. But I truly believe 
that people around this province, the less than 1 million people 
— unfortunately I have to say that — the less than 1 million 



March 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

people in this province, which was greater than 1 million when 
that Premier took over power, the less than 1 million people 
cannot wait for a general election. Because they will then tell 
this government whether they have confidence in it. And I can 
tell you, you’re going to be waiting. This government will wait 
as long as it possibly can. Because they know the province, the 
people of this province, no longer have confidence in this 
government and neither do the members on this side of the 
House have confidence in that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And it will be very interesting to see how 
each one of those members vote. Because I do know, I do know 
that there are members sitting on that side of the House, that if 
their true feelings were able to be expressed today, they would 
not vote for that provincial government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I do know, I do know that there are 
members on that side of the House that are sitting behind that 
Premier that absolutely do not have confidence of that Premier 
and if they were able to have a free vote, if they were able to 
have a free vote, that they would certainly vote against this 
provincial government. 
 
But I know why they don’t want to. Because they know that if 
they vote against this Premier right now and defeat the 
government, if they vote and defeat the government they will no 
longer have a job. Because after the general election, the next 
general election, half of them will not have a job after the next 
general election, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I guess, Mr. Speaker, I am asked to table the 
document that was used during question period today. So I table 
this document now. 
 
So regardless of what the results are today — and I think it’s 
going to be close; in fact we could possibly pull this one off, I 
think, especially if members on that side vote with their 
conscience and not by what they’re being whipped into — if 
they vote with their conscience I think we could be going to a 
general election, oh, just in a couple of hours if they truly 
believe and if they truly express their views as to whether they 
have confidence in this Premier and the government that he has 
run over the last 16 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It now being two minutes 
before the ordinary closing time, I will call a halt to this debate 
on this motion and we will dispose of this motion. The question 
before the Assembly is the motion moved by the member for 
Cypress Hills, seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone: 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 
Premier and his government. 
 

Those who favour the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 

The Speaker: — Oh, pardon me. Those opposed to the motion, 
say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe . . . Call in the members for a 
standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 13:01 until 13:02.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the member for Cypress Hills, seconded 
by the member for Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 
Premier and his government. 
 

Those who favour the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 25] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Hermanson Bjornerud Wakefield 
Chisholm Hart Harpauer 
Gantefoer Eagles Weekes 
Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Allchurch 
Kerpan Kirsch Brkich 
Morgan Merriman Heppner 
Duncan   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley  
 
The Speaker: — Order. We’ll continue. 
 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour, 25; those 
opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House should now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2007 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:03.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................749 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................750 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................750 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................751 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................751 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................751 
 Bill No. 12 — The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................751 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................752 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................753 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................753 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................753 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................754 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................754 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................772 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................773 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................775 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................754 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................754 
 Government’s Approach to Workplace Harassment of Women 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................755 
 Telemiracle 31 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................755 
 Community Fundraising for Breast Cancer Research 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................755 
 Business and Professional Women Celebrate International Women’s Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................756 
 Provincial High School Curling Championships 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................756 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consultation Regarding Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................756 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................756 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................757 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................757 
 Disposition of Murdoch Carriere’s Computer Hard Drive 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................757 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................758 
 



 

 Support for Women in the Workplace 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................759 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................760 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................762 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................762 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Legislative Page 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................762 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Saskatchewan’s Roads and Transportation Needs 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................763 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................765 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................767 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................768 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................769 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................769 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................769 
  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................769 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................777 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




