






















































Hansard: March 12, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 28A  MONDAY, MARCH 12, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 779 
 March 12, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Camera Malfunction 
 
The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, I regret to advise 
the Assembly that the robotics on our cameras have experienced 
a failure in that they are not able to automatically focus on any 
individual member while the member is speaking. 
 
The option that I wish to follow at this time, with leave of the 
Assembly, would be to establish a temporary guideline and that 
is that the cameras each have a broad focus: one camera on the 
total opposition so that the opposition member who is speaking 
can be seen, one camera fixed on the total government side so 
that the member who is speaking can be seen — of course all 
other members will also be seen — and the third camera will 
focus on the Clerk’s table and the Chair. I have leave of the 
Assembly for that? I thank the members. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I introduced a 
petition last week which I hope to carry on with today. The 
petitions, three pages of which contain signatures, are just a 
sample of the 619 individuals who have signed these petitions 
concerning the closure of the SaskPower office in Shaunavon. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As indicated, Mr. Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by 
individuals from the community of Shaunavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today again on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 

Margo, Wadena, and Lintlaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to maintain full service of the SaskPower office at 
Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, among the many concerns the 
petitioners have is that the banks cannot accept payment if the 
customer doesn’t have documentation — a service which the 
office supplies. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition come from the 
fine community of Rosetown and I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned with this 
government’s action in turning a portion of Highway No. 22 
into gravel. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signators to this petition come from the 
communities of Duval, Bulyea, Earl Grey, Strasbourg, and 
Raymore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
number of pages of petitions of citizens that are concerned with 
the access road to Bruno. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 

 
And the signatures come from a number of communities of 
people who tried to travel that highway to Bruno. And they are 
from Annaheim, Carrot River, Colonsay, Humboldt, St. Brieux, 
Muenster, Lake Lenore, St. Benedict, Carmel, and of course 
from the town of Bruno itself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are very concerned about the condition of 
Highway 18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Beaubier, Lake 
Alma, Minton, Tribune, Gladmar, Radville, Weyburn, and 
Estevan. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from citizens opposed to possible health care service 
cuts in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and Biggar and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition surrounding the truly tragic circumstances 
around the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of acceptance 
of responsibility by this NDP government. I will read the prayer 
for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of all cancer services for 
all cancer patients in Saskatchewan. 

 
The petitioners today live in the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Nutana, Saskatoon Riversdale, and Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise with a petition from citizens of rural Saskatchewan 
that are extremely concerned about the potential closure of their 
lab facility in the Lafleche and District Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by some very concerned citizens 
from the communities of Lafleche, Limerick, and Meyronne. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from the citizens in the area of Highway 368 that 
are concerned with the 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles 
south of St. Brieux and which has seriously declined over the 
last number of years. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Humboldt, Lake 
Lenore, and Watson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain its 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees that would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Simpson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway 5, a highway which travels through the width of my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. I will read the prayer for 
relief: 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today and present a petition signed by people in 
the Southeast of the province regarding the condition of 
Highway 18. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of Beaubier 
and Lake Alma, and I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order petitions tabled at the last sitting have been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

How many acute care beds are currently occupied by 
patients waiting for placement in long-term care facilities 
in the Cypress Health Region? 

 
I have the same question for the other 12 health regions in the 
province. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many registered nursing 
vacancies are currently in the Saskatoon Health Region, 
health authority, and is funding included for those vacant 
positions in the region’s current budget? 
 

I have the same question for the other 12 health authorities 
around the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As while I’m on my feet, I have a couple of more sets of 
questions. I give notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the 

government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: what is the cost for a 
physician residency spot at the College of Medicine? 
 

And on day no. 33 I give notice that I shall ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the cost for a physician 
training seat at the College of Medicine? 

 
Mr. Speaker, a couple more questions I have. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the total amount of 
money spent on recruitment and retention initiatives for all 
health care professionals combined for the fiscal year of 
2005-2006? 

 
I have the same question on retention issues for the year 
2006-2007. I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
quite a number of questions for the government opposite. 
 
The first question, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 33 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Premier: did the deputy minister to the Premier, the 
deputy minister of the Environment, and/or the Chair of 
the Public Service Commission brief the Premier or any 
member of the Premier’s staff regarding the Murdoch 
Carriere harassment allegations, the subsequent 
harassment investigation, the Gillies report, and the 
subsequent disciplinary action prior to April 1, 2003? And 
if so, on what dates? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a question to the Minister Responsible 
for the Public Service. On day 33 I’ll ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

Did the deputy minister to the Premier, the deputy minister 
of the Environment, and/or the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission brief the Minister Responsible for the Public 
Service Commission or any member of the minister’s staff 
regarding the Murdoch Carriere harassment allegations, 
the subsequent harassment investigation, the Gillies report, 
and subsequent disciplinary action prior to April 1, 2003? 
And if so, what dates? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 33 I’ll ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: prior to October 
2002, did Murdoch Carriere ever receive any form of 
disciplinary action as a result of any harassment 
allegations, and if so what disciplinary action did he 
receive and on what dates? 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

On day 33, Mr. Speaker, I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how many times and 
on what dates did the Minister of the Environment meet 
with Murdoch Carriere while he was in his position as 
director of fire management and forest protection? 

 
Mr. Speaker, on day 33 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: prior to the nine women which received a 
government settlement, how many complaints were filed 
against Murdoch Carriere, on what date were these 
complaints filed, and what actions were taken regarding 
these complaints? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of the 
Environment which I will ask on day 33: 
 

Who was the government-appointed lawyer assigned to 
the nine women in the settlement case with the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a series of questions that I will ask on day 
33: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what was the written 
policy on computer disposal for the fiscal year 2002-2003? 

 
I have similar questions with all the fiscal years, including the 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister Responsible for 
the Public Service Commission. I shall ask on day 33: 
 

Over the course of Carriere’s employment with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, how many complaints of 
harassment were filed against Carriere, how many of these 
complaints were founded, and of those founded what type 
of discipline was awarded in each instance? 
 

Mr. Speaker, also to the Minister Responsible for the Public 
Service Commission, on day 33 I shall ask the following 
question: 
 

Over the course of Murdoch Carriere’s career with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in what capacity, position, 
and location did Carriere work, and what were the yearly 
timelines in each new capacity, position, or location? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a series of questions dealing with a number 
of fiscal years. The question is this. I shall ask on day 33: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: for the fiscal year 
’92-93, were there any allegations of harassment against 
Murdoch Carriere by any Environment department 
employee and if so, how many and how was each one 
handled? 

 
I have the same questions, Mr. Speaker, for each fiscal year 
through to 2002-2003. 

Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister responsible to 
the public service. On day 33 I shall ask the following question: 
 

In which year would Murdoch Carriere have been eligible 
for full government pension? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, on day 33 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: will Murdoch 
Carriere be receiving a full government pension in the 
settlement made with the government? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I have one question. On day 33 I shall 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: were there flight logs 
kept on any government-paid trips taken by Murdoch 
Carriere during his career with the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and if so will these documents be tabled? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to present to you and through you to all members of 
the legislature, the large number of people in the galleries — 
both the public and your gallery and a few over here. I’d like to 
introduce each of them by name, but unfortunately my memory 
retention classes haven’t worked that good so I’m going to omit 
that particular item. But, Mr. Speaker, these individuals 
represent farmers and producers and business people from the 
southwest part of the province. They’ve come from 
communities and constituencies right from the Alberta border to 
just southwest of Regina. They’re here to plead their case for 
assistance as a result of drought that has impacted their 
operations recently. 
 
And I would like to salute particularly Doug Davidson, the 
gentleman who is heading up the southwest drought disaster 
committee who has coordinated this effort here today, and I 
would like us all to welcome this group of producers to their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome those who have 
travelled from a distance in the Southwest to be here in the 
legislature to put forward their case. I met with a group of them 
prior to the session and we talked about the solutions that we 
see in front of us and the timing on those, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that there has been a lot of commitment to working 
through this. And so I would ask others to join me in 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

welcoming them to their legislature and to thank them for their 
consistent work on this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to join 
my colleague and the minister in welcoming the southwest 
drought committee to their Legislative Assembly. A lot of these 
people are friends and neighbours and I do realize the hardships 
that people are going through. 
 
We are particularly pleased to see them here today because of 
the inaction of the NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
over the last number of months on this file. So in order to get a 
little bit of attention I’m very, very pleased to see you all 
coming to the Legislative Assembly today, to your legislature. 
So I would ask again that people welcome the southwest 
disaster drought committee to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 
guest in your gallery whom I’m sure you will recognize. This a 
long-time broadcaster in the Prince Albert area. For nearly 50 
years people in Prince Albert and district woke up to the sound 
of CKBI’s Wake Up Shake Up Show and the host, Jack Cennon. 
 
Jack is very well known in our province. He has been involved 
in many initiatives. He has been inducted as a Member of the 
Order of Canada. He has been the former president of the Prince 
Albert Chamber of Commerce. He is a pioneer in addictions 
treatment. He even one time slipped into politics and was a 
member . . . no, was actually a candidate for the Progressive 
Conservative Party in a national election. Jack as well has been 
a member of the National Parole Board. He is one of the 
Kinsmen who is responsible in no small way for launching 
Telemiracle. And most importantly he’s a favourite son of 
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. 
 
With Jack today is his wife Darlene and business associates 
Robert Condon and Susan Raymond. The group is currently 
visiting Regina meeting with First Nations leaders concerning 
promising new treatment options for children suffering from 
fetal alcohol syndrome. I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming Jack, Darlene Cennon, Robert Condon, and Susan 
Raymond. Welcome Jack. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Prince Albert Northcote in 
welcoming Jack Cennon to the Assembly. You know we didn’t 
live in Prince Albert but close enough that the Wake Up Shake 
Up Show woke up and shook up more than the people of Prince 
Albert. 

It certainly is an icon in the broadcasting business, and not only 
in his professional career but his volunteerism with Telemiracle. 
We certainly have seen the tremendous good work that is a 
result of those pioneers who had the foresight to provide this 
kind of service to our great province. So on behalf of the 
official opposition, welcome to your Assembly, Jack. It’s great 
to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
add my welcome to Jack Cennon, also my welcome to the 
farmers from the Southwest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the House two constituents from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. We don’t often get visitors down because 
it’s a long travel but I would like to introduce to you first of all 
Jaclyn St. Denis — if Jaclyn would give a wave. Jaclyn is 13 
years old. She’s in grade 8 at Rivier Academy. She has a 
number of special interests which includes dancing at the 
Performing Arts Warehouse in Prince Albert. 
 
She’s also a volunteer, puts in many hours of volunteer work at 
the safe shelter for women in Prince Albert, and Mr. Speaker, 
she has a very keen interest in politics. Her plan is to study law 
and at some point go into politics. She hasn’t decided yet 
whether that would be provincial or federal, but it has crossed 
her mind that she could some day be the first woman premier of 
the province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, she is chaperoning her mother 
Ann St. Denis who is here as well, and she is a national 
representative for the Canadian Union of Public Employees. I 
would like all members to welcome Jaclyn and Ann St. Denis to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s already been 
mentioned there’s a number of producers from the Southwest, 
but I noticed in your gallery, there’s one from the Southeast. 
And that would be my great uncle, Max White. And he’s 
joining us today in your gallery. And true to form, through my 
entire life he has been a great uncle, a wonderful man, and I’d 
like to ask all members to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

Team Saskatchewan Succeeds at 2007 
Canada Winter Games 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few weeks ago I 
had a great pleasure and a great privilege of bringing greetings 
to the members of Team Saskatchewan and wishing them good 
luck before their departure to Whitehorse to participate in the 
2007 Canada Winter Games. Well, Mr. Speaker, the winter 
games wrapped up on Saturday, and I’m pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today and congratulate each and every Team 
Saskatchewan member on a job well done. 
 
They were worthy ambassadors of their individual sports and 
worthy ambassadors of this great province. Mr. Speaker, Team 
Saskatchewan was 344 members strong: 259 athletes, 65 
coaches and managers, 16 mission staff and — because there is 
a big culture component to the games — four Saskatchewan 
artists, all under the leadership of Chef de Mission, Ross Lynd. 
Many of the team’s families made the trip north as well, both to 
support our athletes and to experience the spirit of the games for 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Team Saskatchewan’s final medal count was 9 
gold, 13 silver, and 15 bronze for a total of 37 medals. This is 
an excellent showing — as a matter of fact one of the best ever. 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Team 
Saskatchewan on a job well done representing their sports, their 
arts, and their province at the 2005 Canada Winter Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Merci, Monsieur le Président de 
l’Assemblée. Aujourd’hui est la première journée de la 
neuvième annuelle Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. Cette 
célébration continuera jusqu’à 25 mars. 
 
Ici dans le province de Saskatchewan, nous sommes fièrs de 
notre héritage culturel et la communauté francophone a joué un 
grand rôle dans l’histoire du province. 
 
Les prochaines 13 jours, les citoyens du Saskatchewan et du 
Canada viennent ensemble pour fêter les plusieurs contributions 
de la communauté francophone. Pendant la célébration de la 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie cette année, nous célébrons les 
plusieurs contributions du peuple des Premières Nations et les 
Métis. C’est un honneur aujourd’hui de la part de l’Opposition 
Officielle de participer aux célébrations de Rendez-vous. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first day of 
the ninth annual Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. This 
celebration will continue until March 25. Here in the province 
of Saskatchewan, we are proud of our cultural heritage, and the 
francophone community has played a large role in the history of 
this province. 
 
In the next 13 days, the citizens of Saskatchewan and of Canada 

will come together to celebrate the many contributions of the 
francophone community. During the celebration of the 
Rendez-vous de la Francophonie this year, we will be 
celebrating the many contributions of First Nations and Métis 
people. It is an honour today on behalf of the Official 
Opposition to participate in the Rendez-vous celebrations.] 
 
I would like to encourage citizens from across the province to 
join with the more than 20,000 Saskatchewan francophones in 
celebrating Rendez-vous. Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
weeks of March 9 to March 25 have officially been proclaimed 
les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie. 
 
Les Rendez-vous rendent hommage à la richesse de la langue 
française et de la culture francophone. Dans ce contexte, 
j’aimerais exprimer ma fièreté en reconnaissant le rôle de 
leadership que les organismes communautaires francophones 
ont joué en matière de diversité culturelle à l’échelle nationale. 
 
[Translation: The Rendez-vous pays homage to the richness of 
the French language and francophone culture. In this context, I 
would like to express my pride in recognizing the leadership 
role that francophone community organizations have played in 
matters of cultural diversity on the national scale.] 
 
Over the last couple of years, community representatives have 
travelled the province, meeting citizens and discussing the 
importance of diversity in their own francophone communities 
and in the community at large. These consultations led to a 
declaration of inclusiveness that invited French speakers, 
regardless of their origins, to actively participate in their 
communities as proud Fransaskois. 
 
Partout au pays, ces expressions claires de citoyenneté est citée 
comme un exemple à suivre. Ces actions, associés à notre 
collaboration continué avec les Fransaskois sur le plan de 
l’immigration, contribuent à consolider notre réputation comme 
province ouverte et accueillante pour les nouveaux citoyens 
provenants du Canada et du monde entier. 
 
[Translation: Across this country, these clear expressions of 
citizenship are cited as an example to follow. These actions, 
along with our continued collaboration with the Fransaskois on 
the level of immigration, contribute to the consolidation of our 
reputation as an open and welcoming province for new citizens 
coming from within Canada and around the world.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, March 20, International Francophonie Day, is the 
focal point for the two weeks of festivities celebrating the 
French language and culture. I encourage all my colleagues to 
take the opportunity to celebrate les Rendez-vous à la 
Francophonie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Saskatoon Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday morning, I 
had the privilege of attending the Saskatoon Mayor’s Prayer 
Breakfast, the largest of its kind ever to be held in Saskatoon, 
and we’re told the largest of its kind ever to be held in Canada 
with over 2,300 people in attendance. 
 
It was an honour to participate, to pay tribute to Saskatchewan 
soldiers and police officers who’ve lost their lives in the line of 
duty during the course of the last year. They include of course, 
Mr. Speaker, four soldiers who lost their lives in Afghanistan: 
Corporal Shane Keating of Dalmeny; Corporal David Braun of 
the Raymore area; Corporal Bryce Keller and Master Corporal 
Jeffrey Walsh of Regina; and RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] constables, Robin Cameron and Marc Bourdages who 
tragically lost their lives this summer after being shot near 
Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will note that Mrs. Keller has told me that it’s 
very important for her and the families that their sons, that their 
children’s sacrifice be honoured and not forgotten, and that’s 
exactly what happened on Saturday morning. 
 
I’d like to thank Mayor Don Atchison for his leadership in 
reinstating the Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast in that city, and the 
amazing team of volunteers led in no small way by a gentleman 
by the name of Don Funk for putting it together. 
 
I’d also like to thank the hard work of representatives of the 
Canadian Forces base Dundurn and Canadian Tire who donated 
hundreds of hockey sticks and pucks to Saskatoon’s Kinsmen 
Inner City Hockey League as part of the event. 
 
I would invite all members of this Assembly to join with the 
opposition in congratulating and thanking all of those who were 
involved in putting on a very successful Mayor’s Prayer 
Breakfast in Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Scott Collegiate’s Basketball Successes 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Scott 
Collegiate has earned itself quite a reputation in junior 
basketball. Though it’s a small high school compared to others 
in Regina, Scott’s boys’ and girls’ junior basketball teams have 
enjoyed a lot of success. 
 
Both teams, Mr. Speaker, recently competed in the city finals of 
their respective categories. The boys found themselves pitted 
against the Balgonie Greenall Griffins at the University of 
Regina Centre for Kinesiology, Health and Sport for the 
coveted Regina Intercollegiate Basketball League junior title. 
 
The girls, Mr. Speaker, took on the Luther Lions in the RIBL’s 
[Regina Intercollegiate Basketball League] junior small schools 

final. The success of Scott’s girls’ team was particularly 
remarkable considering that the program was only established 
two short years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate coaches, Corey 
Matthews and Bill Nagel, and captain, Brandon Ironchild, with 
the junior boys’ team, and coaches, Jennie Davies and Keely 
Skrypnyk, and captain, Ashton Knipfel, of the girls’ teams for 
their dedication to their respective teams and for their great 
success. The Scott Collegiate Blues have made the entire 
Regina north central community very proud. Great work, Scott 
Blues. Next year, all the way. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Highway 368 Fundraising Dinner 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had the 
honour of attending the Highway 368 supper in Lake Lenore. 
Nearly 150 people packed into the Lake Lenore community 
centre for supper and to hear local committee reports on efforts 
to have work done on Highway 368. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the charge per couple for the dinner was 
$36.80, while refreshments were $3.68. Much to everyone’s 
disappointment though, the committee reported that they had 
gotten nowhere with the current NDP government. Those at the 
dinner and residents of the area are concerned that if something 
isn’t done soon, Highway 368 could be closed this spring due to 
impassable conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 368 is the lifeline of the communities of 
Lake Lenore and St. Brieux and all the small outlying towns 
along the way. St. Brieux is a pocket of manufacturing, and it is 
home to Bourgault Industries, Tillage Tools, Dry Air, Free 
Form Plastics, and other companies. 
 
Many families who are employed in St. Brieux by these 
companies rely on the highway for their livelihood, and many 
of their kids attend the new St. Brieux daycare. The companies 
themselves rely on Highway 368 to bring raw materials in and 
to ship out all the finished product. Damage to product while in 
transit has become all too regular an occurrence. 
 
I would like to thank organizers and all those who attended the 
dinner, demonstrating the amount of concern in the area for the 
dangerous conditions of Highway 368. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Don Allen Saskaloppet in La Ronge 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend the Don Allen 
Saskaloppet celebrated its 24th annual gathering in La Ronge, 
with more than 300 skiers participating from across the 
province. This event is for all ages, making it challenging and 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

fun. This year the Saskaloppet organizing committee was 
chaired by Susan Folkerson with Vice-Chair, Russell Merasty, 
and it also included more than 200 volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year 70 skiers came from southern 
Saskatchewan; 73 came from the North, with the largest group 
of students coming from Pinehouse. Indeed perhaps the most 
exciting part of the event was seeing the involvement of the 
young people and children. There were four skiers under the 
age of five. By the way, the oldest participant was 77 years old. 
The committee is happy to announce that again this year no one 
was lost, and no one was left behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that the Assembly joins me in congratulating 
the organizing committee and their volunteers that helped to 
make the event so successful. Without the dedicated work of 
these individuals, events like this could not take place. 
 
I want to close by saying that I invite all members of this 
legislature to volunteer or perhaps challenge the course next 
year when the Don Allen Saskaloppet celebrates its 25th annual 
ski event in La Ronge. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Disaster Assistance for the Southwest 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we mentioned 
earlier, the galleries are nearly full today with producers from 
the southwest part of the province — farmers and ranchers and 
business people and others who support them. And as you know 
too, Mr. Speaker, that NDP government across the way knows 
that this isn’t their first visit here. First, they had five people. 
Then they had 50. Today we might have 200. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been here two times previously at their 
own expense. These farmers and ranchers have better things to 
do than to come to Regina pleading to be treated fairly. 
 
For two years now, these farmers and ranchers from the 
Southwest have been facing a severe drought. Mr. Speaker, can 
the Minister of Agriculture tell us today what he has done since 
the last time these producers were in this House? Has he done 
anything to bring fairness to their desperate situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I appreciate the reality that the people in the Southwest — and 
not exclusively the Southwest — are facing in dealing with a 
drought. 
 
And we have been in discussions with the federal government. 

We have now got in place the parameters, framework for 
disaster program, but we do not have yet agreement on how that 
program will actually work out. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, in Quebec, where they had a 
disaster with golden nematode attacking potatoes, the federal 
government fully funded the disaster program there. We expect 
the same kind of treatment for our farmers in Saskatchewan that 
farmers in Quebec would get from the federal government. And 
to that end, we have been pressing for a federally funded 
program, as members opposite also in statements that they have 
made have said, that it should be fully funded, Mr. Speaker. 
And I do have quotes from members opposite saying so. 
 
So clearly we are on the same page in terms of where the 
funding should come from. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the only time 
this minister meets with the producers from the Southwest is 
when they actually come here, having come at their own 
expense, having dug deep into their own pockets, taking their 
own time to come to this legislature to plead for fairness. 
 
What kind of leadership is that, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t sound 
like leadership. It sounds like a minister trying to save face 
rather than doing what is right. Mr. Speaker, I have a word for 
the minister that I’d like to pass on in front of the producers in 
the House today. That kind of leadership is simply not good 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will that minister stand and admit that the only 
time he meets with farmers and ranchers is when they’re so 
desperate that they need to protest here at the legislature? Will 
he admit that his government needs to show some leadership on 
this file? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly we 
have been engaged in leading this struggle around disaster 
support and putting a disaster program in place. One of the 
things that the leadership of the Southwest group has said — 
which clearly I agree with — is that farmers need to know what 
kind of programs are in place, so they can make adequate 
decisions about whether they can go ahead, whether they need 
to change what they’re doing in their lives. 
 
And so what we’re looking for, broadly, are programs that are 
predictable, programs that they know what they will be getting 
given certain circumstances. And yes, I have been engaged in 
many discussions with our federal government and with our 
provincial counterparts to try and develop that kind of a 
program that will provide long-term understanding of the 
payments for disaster. 
 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

In the short term, Mr. Speaker, we are committed, despite the 
fact that members opposite and many others are asking for full 
funding from the feds, we will do 90/10. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is not the first time the province has experienced a 
weather-related disaster. Last year there was extensive flooding 
in the Northeast. Those farmers faced the same sort of hardship 
that these farmers and ranchers are facing now, yet — yet — 
the NDP had no problem treating those producers in the 
Northeast fairly. However we’ve seen no willingness from this 
NDP government to even talk specifically to the federal 
government about the southwest drought conditions. 
 
Will the minister show some leadership and pick up the phone 
and talk specifically about the southwest disaster that is similar 
to the northeast disaster of last year? The farmers and ranchers 
here, that are here today, are getting tired of the runaround. 
They’ve had enough. 
 
Will the minister today promise these farmers and ranchers in 
the gallery that he will lead the cause on their behalf with the 
federal government specific to the southwest drought disaster? 
Will he, after waiting three months, finally try and get 
something done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
important to note that there has been no waiting of three 
months. We have been working since we first became aware of 
the situation in the Southwest to try and get a solution, and that 
has been the tone of our discussions with the leadership of that 
southwest drought disaster committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in the previous answer, this government 
is committed to paying 10 per cent of whatever program we’re 
able to put together with the federal government — and that, 
Mr. Speaker, despite members opposite saying that it is a 100 
per cent federal responsibility. We will put 10 per cent forward, 
Mr. Speaker, which could be significant. 
 
As recently as Friday, Mr. Speaker, I was speaking with the 
federal minister about the southwest drought situation and 
saying to that federal minister we must have a solution 
immediately because these people are in trouble. Mr. Speaker, I 
am committed to getting a solution as quickly as possible. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

[14:15] 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 
that if the minister has done all of this good work that he’s 
talking about, why was that not communicated to the people of 
the Southwest? Why are they in here today? If he had done 
some work, why wouldn’t he tell the producers and ranchers 
from the Southwest what is transpiring? 
 
Also 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, he’s talking 10 per cent. Let’s 
see now, $25 an acre Northeast, $10 an acre . . . What 
percentage is that? All these producers here are looking for is 
some fairness. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers and 
ranchers that are here today are forced to become activists. 
They have to come here to get the attention of this NDP 
government. All they’re asking for, all they’re here today for is 
to ask to be treated fairly. Because of the minister’s inaction, 
this problem will continue. 
 
These people are going to face a potentially worse situation. 
Snowfall has been light in the Southwest. Some producers are 
facing back-to-back droughts. Others are facing 
back-to-back-to-back droughts. Will the minister stand here 
today and admit that he was wrong for not doing anything 
specific to this? And what does he plan to do immediately to 
help these southwest ranchers and farmers, and will he deal 
with it in a fair and equitable manner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
question that we will deal with this in an equitable manner, and 
we’ll do our utmost to be fair. Mr. Speaker, these circumstances 
are different from the circumstances in the Northeast. 
 
We will, Mr. Speaker, have to note very clearly that there was 
no federal disaster framework in place and this government did 
make an ad hoc payment — which I’ve also been very clear 
with the southwest drought disaster committee about — that it 
wasn’t a precedent, it was an ad hoc payment at that time where 
there was no federal-provincial program in place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to just note that the members opposite 
clearly, and I will quote the member of Melville-Saltcoats, 
clearly says that the federal government should pick up 100 per 
cent of emergency aid. 
 
The Sask Party, including the member from Melville, presented 
a petition for emergency farm aid to the federal government 
placing onus directly on the federal government. Gerry Ritz, 
Member of Parliament for the Conservative Party in 
Saskatchewan, he said, 100 per cent that’s what we’re going to 
do; the federal government, I commit to you, will do 100 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

Disposition of Murdoch Carriere’s Computer Hard Drive 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, last week it came to light that a 
senior official in SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management] had ordered Murdoch Carriere’s hard 
drive to be erased. The minister responded that she would be 
looking into this over the weekend and would have an answer 
for us today. My question is simple: who ordered Jim Pattison 
to erase Murdoch Carriere’s hard drive? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we have now had time to review the events. And 
what I can tell the member opposite is that at approximately 
1:46 p.m. on the afternoon in question, a Ms. Kellsey sent an 
email to Mr. Pattison and others involved directing that Mr. 
Carriere’s hard drive, and I quote, “. . . should be removed . . . 
not erased . . . and sent to my attention.” 
 
And Mr. Pattison sent a return email at 2:35 saying that he had, 
and I quote, “. . . just now [sent the hard drive to Ms. Kellsey] 
via traceable mail,” appropriately packaged to preserve and 
protect. 

 
And Ms. Kellsey put the hard drive in the vault. The hard drive 
was never erased. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: —Order please. Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the RCMP were investigating 
the Murdoch Carriere case. So my question is, was this 
information on the hard drive handed over to the RCMP? And if 
not, why not? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
members opposite is that the hard drive was never erased. 
Today it’s preserved in the possession of the Department of the 
Environment. So what I can also tell the members opposite is 
that there was nothing on the hard drive, Mr. Speaker, that was 
erased. It’s now in the hands . . . As I said earlier, the disk is in 
the hands of Justice and, Mr. Speaker, the evidence is 
preserved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Complainants in the 
Carriere Case 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere gets a 

payment of $275,000, and the women that he harassed receive 
$15,000. We’ve been told that the $15,000 offer made to 
Murdoch Carriere’s victims was made to all nine women at the 
same time. The victims were brought together and told that the 
offer for $15,000 was the only money that would be offered to 
them. They were told if they didn’t sign the agreement right 
away and if all of them didn’t sign, none of them would get any 
money. 
 
After all that these women have been through, why were they 
put under such pressure to sign this agreement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that there are two issues here. The first issue 
is harassment in the workplace, and the second issue involves 
how the public service is to be hired and fired. 
 
Mr. Carriere received no compensation — no compensation for 
his actions while he was employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And to suggest that he was paid for harassment 
is totally insensitive and outrageous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, what I can say is that Mr. Carriere was fired for 
cause. But the way he was fired was wrong, Mr. Speaker, and 
the Justice officials advised us that we were going to lose the 
case because of employment law and we settled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, these women were pressured 
into signing this agreement and apparently that agreement came 
with conditions, including a gag order. Why did the NDP put a 
gag order on all of these nine women? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, once again the new 
member from Martensville does not have the facts. What I can 
report to the member from Martensville is that there was no gag 
order ever, ever issued for the complainants in this case. And I 
could also tell the member opposite that the complainants had 
the benefit of legal counsel, and legal counsel and the 
complainants are aware that there was no gag order ever made 
as a part of this agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they are of the belief that 
there is a gag order, but they wouldn’t know for sure because 
the women that were involved in this weren’t allowed to keep a 
copy of the agreement that they signed. There’s only two copies 
in existence; the government has one and the other one is to 
stay at the lawyer’s office. 
 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

What’s the point? What’s the secrecy all about? Why were 
these women forced to sign this order and then were not given a 
copy of the agreement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the women had benefit of 
legal counsel. I’m sure that the legal counsel can give the . . . 
They can have a benefit of the order that’s in legal counsel’s 
possession. But I will say again to the member opposite, there is 
no gag order. There is no gag order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — If the NDP is confident that this agreement 
was signed and it was fair to all nine women, will they table this 
agreement today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, is the member opposite 
implying that the complainants’ own legal counsel won’t share 
the agreement with them? I can’t imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will say this, Mr. Speaker. On the weekend — Thursday, 
Friday, Saturday — I was out and about the city of Saskatoon. 
And what were the people of Saskatoon talking about, 
particularly around International Women’s Day, which I 
observed none of them bothered to attend. What I can tell the 
members opposite, they are talking about what the federal 
government has done to the Status of Women offices all across 
the country. They can laugh, Mr. Speaker, but that’s the women 
of Saskatoon and area. That’s what they’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants to have a 
discussion about equality, perhaps she could explain to women 
in Saskatchewan how Murdoch Carriere got $275,000 and his 
victims got $15,000. How does that constitute equality? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When the member opposite was the 
communications adviser to Bev Oda, who is the minister in 
Canada responsible for the Status of Women, what happened? 
They took the equality provision out of the Status of Women’s 
mandate. What do they do? They close Status of Women’s 
offices all across the country, Mr. Speaker . And guess what, 
Mr. Speaker? On International Women’s Day that’s what 
women were talking about — not Murdoch Carriere, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, these women do not have a 
copy of the agreement that they signed, but they do have a bill. 
And the bill says that the settlement deal, and I quote, are for 
“services rendered in connection with potential claims against 
Murdoch Carriere and the Government of Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand why the government would want to 
protect itself from being sued, but this suggests that the 
government is also protecting Murdoch Carriere from being 
sued. Why is the government protecting Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
the other thing that women of Saskatchewan, during 
International Women’s Day, were talking about was the $5 
billion deal that the provinces signed with the previous federal 
government for over 250,000 new child care spaces all across 
the country. And what did it mean for the province of 
Saskatchewan? It meant $150 million to create child daycare 
spaces for women with small children, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Harper government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that was a pretty easy 
question, so I’ll ask it again. The Bill seems to indicate that in 
return for a $15,000 payment the women take no further legal 
action against the government, but it also appears that they take 
no further legal action against Murdoch Carriere. Does the 
government settlement with the nine women prevent the victims 
from suing Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the women, the 
complainants, had the benefit of legal counsel. The women had 
the benefit of legal counsel, Mr. Speaker. The women, based on 
the advice of their legal counsel, chose to settle, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no gag order. These women are free, are free to 
comment on the events that have taken place in the last several 
days, Mr. Speaker. Well I can say to the member is there is no 
gag order, and that’s all I can say. What else can I say, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The members opposite are trying to confuse the two issues. 
Murdoch Carriere was never, was never compensated for sexual 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

harassment. He was compensated because we fired him 
inappropriately, and we would have lost the court case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has not answered the 
question. Maybe the Premier would like to answer the question. 
The question was direct, and it was blunt. It’s one thing for the 
government in their settlement to try to protect itself from being 
sued, but why were they interested in protecting Murdoch 
Carriere from being sued, Mr. Speaker? Answer the question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a set 
of legal principles. And as I understand it, the government 
would have to pay if we and the employees who are in the 
employment of the government were found liable, Mr. Speaker. 
But I can say to the members opposite — and this is an 
important point because it has been reported in the media and 
it’s been reported by the members opposite — that there is no 
gag order. There is no such order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for those who might have been 
listening to the radio this morning, they would have heard a 
victim who came forward to talk about this, and was so 
concerned about whether or not she is free to speak about it that 
they had to mask her voice and hold her identity anonymous, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s how the victims are feeling, 
notwithstanding the claims by this minister. And who would 
blame the nine women for not trusting a word that government 
has to say about this file? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question again is to the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan. Does he think it’s fair? Does 
he think it’s reasonable that the one who did the harassing, 
someone fired for harassment and then convicted of common 
assault would get $275,000, Mr. Speaker, and the women, the 
victims, would get $15,000? There’s something wrong when 
the NDP treats the bad guy a hundred times better than the 
people who were affected. Can the Premier explain this 
appalling decision he’s made in his government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can certainly understand 

why the members opposite are trying to make political hay, but 
they really are, Mr. Speaker, not representing the facts. The 
facts are that there is no gag order. The facts are that senior 
people did not issue an order to erase the hard drive. And the 
third item is, Mr. Speaker . . . there are two different issues 
here. One issue has to do with harassment, and the second issue 
has to do with the way in which Mr. Murdoch was fired. And 
the way in which Mr. Murdoch was fired was simply wrong, 
Mr. Speaker. We were advised by the Department of Justice 
officials to settle because we would lose the case. Employment 
law was on the side of Mr. Murdoch, and we settled, Mr. 
Speaker — two different issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in a letter that is directed to 
someone we don’t know — it’s blotted out, but we’d be happy 
to table the document — a letter from the lawyer for the 
victims, it’s signed to the victims. There’s a paragraph that says 
and I quote: 
 

At this point in time the releases [referring to the 
document signed by the victims] have all been signed by 
the parties and pursuant to the trust conditions imposed by 
the Government of Saskatchewan, there are only to be two 
releases. One has been returned to the Government and the 
other one remains on my file. 
 

What are the other conditions related to the trust conditions? 
Will the minister commit to table all of those conditions that 
would have bound the victims on this particular settlement, Mr. 
Speaker? Will she do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I understand is that 
money is always put in trust before it’s released to the clients of 
the lawyer. But what I can say to the public — and this is 
important — that we made it very clear when it came to our 
attention of the circumstances surrounding Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere’s discipline, that we wanted to put in place a 
harassment policy that in the future would mean that the most 
serious cases of harassment, once they are substantiated, 
dismissal will be the employer’s response in the absence of 
significant factors that dictate otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entire anti-harassment policy was reviewed, 
and it is now in place. This happened four years ago. We have 
an anti-harassment policy in place that’s very clear what the 
permanent head has to do. There is zero tolerance to any cases 
of harassment, Mr. Speaker. And I can table that harassment 
policy for the benefit of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the nine women do not believe this 
government has a zero tolerance policy. People listening to the 
story across this province don’t believe it because they see the 
government effectively rewarding the person that did the 
harassing to the tune of a quarter of a million dollars plus a 
pension top-up while the women get $15,000. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has said — he’s on the record as saying — that he 
would rather settle this. He’d rather use the taxpayers’ money to 
pay off the person who did the harassing just to make it go 
away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s asked the people on this side of the House and people of 
the province, what would you rather be done, that we take this 
to court to try to fight to ensure that Mr. Carriere receives not a 
thin dime of taxpayers’ money? And the answer is, that’s 
exactly what should happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — In the meantime, these women feel victimized 
again. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier had 
said from his seat a couple of days ago that the women were 
told. They were consulted before this settlement was reached on 
so many accounts. He owes an apology to these nine women. 
Will he do that, Mr. Speaker? Will he apologize to these 
victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister . . . Order 
please. Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister 
for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the members 
opposite — and it’s obvious from the way they have framed 
their questions and their observations in this case — that if the 
members opposite had been the government of the day, what 
they would have done, Mr. Speaker, was taken this to court. 
That’s what they would have done, even, even, Mr. Speaker, 
when their legal counsel and their own Justice critic was saying 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The members will come to order. Order 
please. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious from the way 
the members have responded that they would’ve taken this to 
court. That’s what they would’ve done, even in the face of legal 
advice from the Justice officials, even in the face of advice from 
their own Justice critic that said you don’t draw out losing cases 
that you can’t possibly win, Mr. Speaker. It is clear what these 
members opposite . . . They would simply have done the 
political thing. They would’ve had a fight for the sake of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. I 
would invite the minister to complete her statement. The 
minister of . . . Order. Order please. The minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what they would have 
done is done the politically easy thing. They would’ve had a 
fight just for the sake of having a fight. They wouldn’t have 

listened to the Justice minister. They wouldn’t listened to the 
Justice officials. They would’ve drawn this out just to have a 
fight and lose, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they would’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, 
The Payday Loans Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to sessional 
order adopted by the Assembly in October 30, 2006, I hereby 
designate Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act as a specified Bill 
subject to rules 31 to 33. 
 
The Speaker: — At request of the minister and pursuant to a 
sessional order adopted by this Assembly, Bill No. 43, The 
Payday Loans Act is hereby designated as a specified Bill 
subject to rules 31 to 33. 
 
Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 44, 
The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 44, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member from Melfort 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
raise a question of members’ privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his position please. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this 
morning I wrote a letter to your office indicating our concern 
under rule 7(1) of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly to raise a question of privilege. On March 7 the 
Minister of the Public Service made the following statement 
during question period with regard to the recent out-of-court 
settlement with Murdoch Carriere, and I quote: 
 

. . . I want to make this point: . . . what this settlement does 
is that it . . . All members of the legislature, they’re not 
held liable for anything that we said in the past, including 
the opposition. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it clearly implies there is an agreement put into 
place by the government that binds all members of this 
Legislative Assembly to that agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that under the rules of privilege that any 
omission or information that’s withheld or constructs or 
impedes any member to discharge their duties is considered a 
breach of privilege. And, Mr. Speaker, because this agreement 
implies or has been implied by the minister that this binds all of 
the members of this Assembly, I believe that it’s incumbent on 
the government to table this legislation for the benefit of all 
members to consider it. And on that basis, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that I would propose to move a motion of privilege 
asking for this information to be tabled with the House on 
behalf of all members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think it may bring clarity to 
the matter to simply quote the relevant paragraph addressed by 
the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission to 
the hon. member for Canora in reference to this matter and 
having to do with the freedom from being pursued by the legal 
system for comments made by hon. members on both sides of 
the House in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission said, and I 
quote: 
 

In settling the lawsuit, the government obtained from Mr. 
Carriere a full release of all possible claims that he might 

have against the government, its employees, and all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, past and present. 
The unusual scope of the release was based on the 
government’s concern that certain individuals, including 
members of the Opposition, had made statements in April 
of 2003 that, although not the subject of the lawsuit 
brought by Mr. Carriere, were arguably defamatory. For 
the reasons outlined below, we believed that it was in the 
public interest to conclude all matters related to the 
dismissal of Mr. Carriere in April of 2003. 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the action taken was to ensure that all 
members, all members on both sides of the House were . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate that. 
 
Clearly the procedure taken, Mr. Speaker, was to ensure that all 
members, both sides of the House, would have the protection 
that is ascribed to hon. members when they become members of 
this Assembly. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is 
not a point of privilege that’s in place. And I am confident that, 
on review, that you will review that and find it the same way. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for the information 
provided. The job of the Speaker is, when a request of this type 
is made, is to determine whether or not a prima facie case has 
been established. 
 
Earlier today the Opposition House Leader gave notice of a 
question of privilege. The notice concerned a statement made 
by the Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
regarding a settlement agreement and its impact on members of 
this Assembly. Before making my ruling I wish to remind 
members that questions of privilege should be raised at the 
earliest opportunity. The statement at issue was made on 
Wednesday, March 7 and raised with my office only this 
morning. Nevertheless the Speaker has the discretion to waive 
this requirement, and I do so in this instance. 
 
The crux of the case is whether the government’s recent 
out-of-court settlement with Murdoch Carriere in any way 
impedes the ability of members to carry out their duties. It is the 
Opposition Leader’s contention that the government’s decision 
to withhold the details of the settlement agreement constitutes a 
breach of members’ privileges. He then cites in support of this 
view the minister’s statement that the agreement affects, quote, 
“All members of the legislature . . . including the opposition” 
and page 193 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in Canada, 
Second Edition. 
 
I find that the citation from Maingot is not relevant to the 
circumstances at hand. The context of the citation refers to 
situations where the Assembly has issued an order that has not 
been abided by. For example, if the Assembly had issued an 
order for the production of a document, and the custodian of 
that document refused to produce it, then a contempt of the 
Assembly’s privileges might have occurred. In the current case, 
the Assembly has not issued an order for the production of the 
settlement agreement, nor has a minister refused to comply. 
 
In addressing the circumstances at hand, I find that the refusal 
to provide details of the settlement agreement do not obstruct 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

members in performing their parliamentary duties. Members 
continue to be protected by privilege while participating in 
parliamentary proceedings. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The ability of members to speak, debate, or ask questions in this 
Chamber or the legislative committees is in no way impeded by 
virtue of the settlement agreement having been reached. Indeed 
it is not uncommon for ministers to decline to divulge details of 
matters on the ground of sub judice, commercial sensitivity, or 
which are of confidential nature such as personnel matters. 
 
I therefore find that the prima facie case of privilege has not 
been established. 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I wish to 
advise members that today is Commonwealth Day and I do 
have a message from the Head of the Commonwealth, Her 
Majesty the Queen. I would ask all members to rise while I read 
the message. 
 
A message from Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the 
Commonwealth: 
 

Today’s Commonwealth is home to nearly a third of the 
world’s population. Its almost two billion citizens come 
from so many faiths, races, cultures and traditions. 
 
I think that one of the reasons for the success of this 
organisation is that it draws not only on certain shared 
values, but also from the principles and practices of 
everyday life, which can be observed day after day in the 
cities, towns and villages of our 53 member countries. 
 
Over thousands of years, the very basis of community life 
has been the pooling together by individuals of their 
resources and skills. Rather than having to be good at 
everything, people were able to practise their own skill or 
craft. The lesson of community life is that to flourish we 
must help each other. To do this, there has to be a sense of 
fairness, a real understanding of others’ needs and 
aspirations, and a willingness to contribute. 
 
Despite its size and scale, the Commonwealth to me is still 
at heart a collection of villages. In close-knit communities 
like these, there are beliefs and values we share and 
cherish. We know that helping others will lead to greater 
security and prosperity for ourselves. 
 
Because we feel this way, our governments and peoples 
aim to work even more closely together. And as 
individuals, we find that taking part in Commonwealth 
activities can be inspirational and personally rewarding. 
 
In today’s difficult and sometimes divided world, I believe 
that it is more important than ever to keep trying to respect 
and understand each other better. Each and every one of us 
has hopes, needs, and priorities. Each of us is an 
individual, with ties of emotion and bonds of obligation — 

to culture, religion, community, country and beyond. In 
short, each of us is special. 
 
The more we see others in this way, the more we can 
understand them and their points of view. In what we think 
and say and do, let us as individuals actively seek out the 
views of others; let us make the best use of what our 
beliefs and history teach us; let us have open minds and 
hearts; and let us, like the Commonwealth, find our 
diversity a cause for celebration and a source of strength 
and unity. 
 
This is a thought worth bearing in mind as we gather on 
Commonwealth Day: we are a thriving community; we 
value our past; we make the most of our present; and we 
are working together to build our future. By respecting 
differences and promoting understanding, that future will 
be a better one for us all. 
 

Thank you, members. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 23 — The 
Securities Transfer Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the transfer 
of securities. It is part of what we hope ultimately will become a 
comprehensive, multi-jurisdictional approach to the transfer of 
securities. And it will recognize the electronic age in which we 
live in, and deals also specifically with the fact that in most 
cases share certificates are not issued in specie any longer, but 
in fact are just a notation on a record-keeping method. 
 
It is our hope . . . And we will be looking as we go through the 
consultative processes this Bill goes through, through the 
committee process, how the money judgment Act — which is 
not yet introduced, but we expect to be introduced later in the 
session — how it will affect seizure and sale of shares. Mr. 
Speaker, we have no objection to this Bill being forwarded to 
committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion made by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 23, The 
Securities Transfer Act be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 23, The Securities 
Transfer Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 23, The Securities Transfer Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 8 — The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to rise on behalf of people across the province who will 
be affected by Bill No. 8, The Paramedics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to meet with a number of 
people right across this province, from North Battleford to 
Canora, to discuss the provisions of The Paramedics Act and 
how it will affect them. And, Mr. Speaker, as outlined initially 
when the Bill was introduced . . . Of course, this is a Bill that 
has been in the works for many, many years. I understand, you 
know, eight to ten years have been spent to try to reach the 
stage where a professional organization will have a 
self-regulating Act. And I believe that the intent of this Bill is to 
achieve that goal and become a self-regulating body. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve talked to people who are in the EMS 
industry, the Emergency Medical Services business, my 
understanding is that there are about 1,400 individuals who fit 
into that work sector. And currently, Mr. Speaker, there are 
about 100 members who belong to the Saskatchewan College of 
Paramedics. 
 
I raised the concern with a person who is a paramedic, and I 
was fortunate to receive a phone call from Mr. Dale Backlin, 
who acts as the chairperson for the college, to discuss some of 
the concerns that I was expressing on behalf of individuals who 
had contacted me. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns. And I don’t know 
that these are concerns that should cause the Minister of Health 
to amend some of the clauses. I don’t know that they’re at that 
stage. But I do know, Mr. Speaker, that there should be a far 
greater amount of education. There should be a far greater 
amount of communication. 
 
And as I spoke with Mr. Backlin, as I indicated, when you look 
at 1,400 members, 1,400 individuals who work in that 
emergency medical sector and only 100 of them currently 
belong to the college — and it’s my understanding that a lot of 
the work and a lot of the communication and a lot of the 
consultation occurred with members of the college — well that 
would mean, Mr. Speaker, then that there are 1,300 people 
approximately who maybe feel that they haven’t been consulted 
with enough. 
 
And I can tell you honestly that that is the feeling of a number 
of people in the Canora-Pelly constituency. They have some 
questions. They want some explanation. 
 
And as I look through the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and clearly it says 
that as soon as this Bill comes into force, that the membership 
of the college consists of, and I’m quoting directly from the 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, under the membership section, section 5, it 
says: 
 

The membership of the college consists of: 
 

(a) those persons who, on the day before section 1 of 
this Act comes into force, hold a licence issued pursuant 
to section 22 of The Ambulance Act . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that means then that the 1,400 workers, excluding 
the emergency response workers at the local level who will still 
remain under Saskatchewan Health’s jurisdiction, that those 
people will automatically become members of the college. 
 
It’s probably a good thing, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to 
determine a self-regulating body, that it’s now going to put in 
place standards for education, standards for termination, 
standards for discipline, standards for fees. Those are things that 
should involve everyone. But, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that 
have been expressed by many individuals is that a lot of their 
questions have not been answered. 
 
There is reference in the Bill to the bylaws, the bylaws that will 
be drafted by the Saskatchewan College of Paramedics, and I 
understand that that is in the works. There are draft copies, but 
many of those 1,300 workers don’t have those draft copies at 
the moment. So they make reference to questions that they’ve 
asked about whether or not the bylaws will refer to the amount 
of fees that they will be required to pay. Is the fee going to 
change? Who will be responsible for making that payment? 
 
It talks about the discipline procedures that are identified in the 
bylaws. It talks about education programs. What are these 
programs? And if you are currently working in Saskatchewan 
and your education does not fall within the Saskatchewan 
College of Paramedics that the College of Paramedics 
prescribes, what then? Those are valid questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And just prior to the legislative session beginning for the day, I 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

had the opportunity to talk to a person who represents the group 
in Canora to tell her that Mr. Backlin has, and again through, I 
think, a very good initiative on his part, he has agreed to meet 
with these people. He’s agreed to meet with anyone who has 
questions regarding what some of the clauses of the Bill mean 
and what effect it will have on these individuals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those meetings I hope are going to take place 
in the very short time. I haven’t been able to establish an exact 
meeting day that will accommodate Mr. Backlin’s calendar, but 
I will be getting in touch with him and the people in Canora, 
and that first meeting is planned to take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Paramedics Act was developed in its draft 
stage, and there were focus groups. There were focus groups 
that were held across the province to try to identify concerns, 
but a lot of the people who are not currently members did not 
attend. And as a result, there is a lack of communication. 
 
I don’t know that the communication is such that it will prevent 
the complete understanding and support by individuals, 
because, as in any Act, in the end I’m sure if the Act goes 
forward, and the College of Paramedics becomes the regulatory 
body, there will be some people that will be not supportive, and 
they will not be happy. 
 
But on the whole, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is a possibility 
for this Act to be developed further, to be communicated, all 
clauses to be communicated to individuals who are not 
members today but will be members of this group as soon as 
this Act passes. And there is a commitment on behalf of those 
individuals and Mr. Backlin to meet, to discuss, and to arrive at 
some explanation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, until those kinds of things have been cleared 
up, until I feel comfortable that the people in my constituency 
have had the opportunity to be heard, I would move that this 
Bill be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that debate on Bill No. 8, The Paramedics Act, 
second reading, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Asking leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
to the opposition. I’d like to take a moment to introduce Karen 
Pozniak. She’s the executive director of the Canadian Parents 
for French, and she’s up here in the east gallery. She was here 
this morning as we raised the Fransaskois flag in recognition of 
the special two weeks as we celebrate the French culture here in 
this province. So I’d ask all members here to give a warm 
welcome to Karen and to recognize the good work that she does 
and her organization does for the French community here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Canora-Pelly on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
requesting leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Canora-Pelly has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
great pleasure to join with the minister in recognizing Karen 
Pozniak. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, this may then date me just a 
little bit . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well as the member 
opposite says, if it dates her, then there is a bit of a situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of teaching Karen back in her 
school days, back in the school at Invermay when I was a 
teacher there from 1972 to 1983 — 1983. I gave her a lot of 
leeway there. Karen was a great student and was a joy to have 
in my classes and I knew that Karen was going to do well. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the members on this side of the House in 
joining with me in welcoming Karen Pozniak to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 25 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 sur l’Assemblée legislative et le Conseil executif be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to rise and 
speak briefly on this Bill and on Bill No. 26, the consequential 
amendments. 
 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

This Bill is largely a translation of the changes that have been 
made to the Legislative Assembly’s working process. It’s part 
of the modernization process that we’ve been working very 
diligently on over the last number of years and months. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of the work that both the 
government and the opposition played in modernizing these 
procedures. And certainly to have them fully translated into 
French is a good move and a part of the requirements of 
changing the Legislative Assembly legislation. 
 
And I think that at this time, it would be appropriate that both 
this Bill and the next Bill, No. 26, be referred to committee for 
consideration. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Government House Leader that Bill No. 
25, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 be now 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 25, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2006 be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 26 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that the 
motion moved by the Hon. House Leader for the government 
that Bill No. 26, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, once again I move that Bill 
No. 26, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 be also referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 26 be also referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 26 is referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 19 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is titled The Securities 
Amendment Act (No. 2), indicating that it’s the second in a 
series of amendments trying to update this legislation. 
 
While we’re somewhat troubled that we’re into doctoring our 
Bills and trying to cobble things together and not having any 
kind of comprehensive plan to keep things in one cause or 
direction, we recognize the need to support the passport 
memorandum and some of the other changes that are in this 
legislation, and want to see this Bill forwarded to committee so 
that it can get some further scrutiny and further discussion. We 
have no objection to this Bill going to committee at this time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 19, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Which committee shall this Bill be referred? 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 19, The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 11 — The 
International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment 
Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des 
matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You caught me 
by surprise. I wasn’t ready to deal with Bill 11 but pleased for 
this opportunity. It’s an interesting Bill. It’s regarding an 
international treaty which gives the power to amend . . . which 
gives up the power to amend actually, Mr. Speaker, which is of 
some concern. For this reason the official opposition has 
continued to allow this Bill to sit on the order paper because we 
wanted any interested parties, any stakeholders to be able to 
respond regarding that concern. This Bill also gives up some 
provincial control over these matters and cedes them to the 
federal government. 
 
Now on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill does not pass, 
it is possible that some lenders might not finance the airlines, 
and that obviously is a concern because we want to have good 
air service in the province of Saskatchewan. Goodness knows, 
under an NDP government we have seen commerce and 
business decline. We’ve seen particularly decline in relationship 
to other provinces, and that has impacted negatively air services 
in Saskatchewan. So we certainly do not want legislation or 
lack of legislation in this province that would further erode air 
service to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also understand that this Bill might help 
maintain international or cross-jurisdictional flights. And we 
understand that perhaps the passing of this Bill will assist the 
airlines — any Saskatchewan airlines in particular — procure 
the financing they need to maintain their business, perhaps 

expand their operations, particularly as it regards to purchase of 
aircraft. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, the reasons I’ve detailed to you, 
the fact that this legislation could be beneficial to the industry in 
Saskatchewan, the fact that we have allowed time for the 
stakeholders to come forward with any concerns that they might 
have whether they be positive or negative, and the fact that 
many other jurisdictions have in fact agreed with this legislation 
— a legislation that was initiated many years ago and which has 
been signed on to by many countries around the world — and 
now is being signed on to by provinces and states, including the 
province of Saskatchewan, if in fact we pass this legislation. 
 
With that as the background, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
appropriate thing now is for this Bill to advance to committee, 
and that is what the official opposition would like to see. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 11, The 
International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly read for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, The 
International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act be 
now referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 11 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill No. 11 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 18 — The 
Court Security Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill allows for airports’ 
metal detectors to be used in courthouses. It also allows for the 
searching of individuals as they pass into our courthouse, or our 
court facilities. Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit of a sad state of affairs 
that now in a post-9/11 era we have to have this kind of 
security, but unfortunately it’s a reality in which society now 
finds itself. 
 
In addition to the international terrorism and that type of 
problem, we also have numbers of individuals in our own 
society and in our own province that pose a significant risk. It’s 
imperative that we as legislators and we as a province ensure 
that the people and staff that work in our court system and work 
in our courthouses and other individuals that are attending for 
other business in our court system are given adequate safety and 
security. And it would be appropriate at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
to move this Bill to committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 18, The 
Court Security Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I will move that Bill No. 18, 
The Court Security Act, be now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 18, The Court Security Act, be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 10 — The 
Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is unfortunately yet another 
example of a Bill that has to be amended. This Bill was initially 
passed in the 2004 session and is now being caught up with and 
re-reviewed and changes being proposed. 
 
This Bill changes The Limitations Act in that it provides an 
ultimate limitation period of 15 years to prevent limitation 
periods from running indefinitely on the discoverability of some 
torts. Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to allow this Bill to go 
forward, so we can have some consultation and some further 
discussion as this Bill goes through committee. 
 
This Bill would have been a good example when it went 
through committee in the first time to have had public hearings 
and to allow more input from insurers or people that were 
affected by it. And perhaps this is one we would want to have 
some public hearings on as this Bill goes forward at this time. 
It’s troubling that a Bill that we barely passed, the ink is barely 
dry, that we’re having to look at it again. Mr. Speaker, we have 
no objection to this Bill going forward to committee at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 10, The 
Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, The 
Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 10 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill No. 10, The 
Limitations Amendment Act, is now referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
[15:15] 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 21 — The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la 
Loi sur la preuve be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that probably 
should be entitled the, I’m sorry Act. What this Bill does in 
summary is it prevents legal liability for a declaration that an 
apology is an admission of guilt. 
 
I sort of thought of this piece of legislation in the context of the 
Murdoch Carriere situation, and I thought of the members 
opposite and thought, if they had this Bill in place before and 
they stood up and said they were sorry, perhaps they wouldn’t 
have been sued for it. The reality, Mr. Speaker, is they may 
have avoided some litigation on it, but they would never have 
avoided the outrage of the voters because, Mr. Speaker, that 
outrage is not going to go away and will not go away past the 
next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill can go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 21, The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall Bill 21 be referred? 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 21, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill No. 21 stands 
referred. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 27 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill 27, An Act 
to amend The Film Employment Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many provinces have introduced film tax credits 
over the years as incentives for a very lucrative industry. Films 
produced here are an opportunity for us to showcase our 
province and the people of our province. And I think you’ll 
agree with me that we have a great story to tell in this province 
with the people and the places often that are captured in films 
and videos across the province. 
 
More so from an economic point of view, the film industry 
works well in creating jobs and spinoffs. Credit has to be given 
to the tax credit which goes back to 1998. I would suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s in a better way to invest in the 
industry than picking winners and losers to take . . . Members 
on this side of the House do not support government taking 
equity positions in companies. Rather, something that benefits 
the entire industry such as the film tax credit would be better 
use of taxpayers’ dollar. 
 
I don’t know how many films have benefited from the tax credit 
over the years, but I do know that there are some. And certainly 
Corner Gas is one, the most high-profile of them all. Recently I 
had a chance to watch the Père Murray story from the Notre 
Dame Hounds. That was done here in Saskatchewan, and I 
would suggest that that was a good film. We’ve had many good 
films. 
 
We’ve had some unfortunate circumstances, you know, around 
the Tommy Douglas movie. That’s one that should have been 
something for everyone in Saskatchewan to celebrate. I was 
disappointed to see that there was a political twist, if you like, 
or some revisionist history that took place in that movie, and 
that caused a debate that really didn’t need to take place. And 
there’s some contention on whether that movie should be shown 
in schools in our province or certainly as part of the curriculum. 
So the industry, the film industry has benefited Saskatchewan, 
but we have to be careful that political involvement doesn’t 
creep its way into certain films. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a chance to review the notes, and I’ve 
found that since the inception of the rural bonus program, the 
total production costs for the eligible film that is incurred in 
Saskatchewan has been interpreted to exclude the salaries paid 
to non-resident personnel who have been deemed to be 
Saskatchewan residents for the purpose of the tax credit. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, in 2006 a production company appealed 
this interpretation, arguing that because these personnel were 
paid in Saskatchewan, they should be considered to be included 
in the definition of total production costs for the eligible films 
that occurred in Saskatchewan. The government legal counsel 
agreed that the argument had merit, and the appeal was 
supported by the government at that time. 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2007 

The government says that it wasn’t the intent of the program to 
provide the rural bonus on salaries paid to personnel who are 
not Saskatchewan residents. This indeed was a loophole that 
needs to be fixed, and the proposed amendments are designed to 
exclude salaries paid to non-Saskatchewan residents, whether or 
not they have been deemed to be Saskatchewan residents for the 
purpose of the tax credit program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is one area where we will take the 
government at their word on it. We will hope that this will not 
create a barrier to growth in the industry. In consultations that 
we’ve had, the industry people that we’ve talked to said that 
they don’t think that it will, and we’re agreeable to that and 
hopeful that it won’t. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that we would allow and suggest that this 
Bill now go to committee at this time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation that Bill No. 27, The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall Bill 27 be referred? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 27, The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 27 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill No. 27 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the Standing Committees on Human Services as 
well as Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:20.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Camera Malfunction 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................779 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................780 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................781 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................781 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................781 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................781 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................782 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................783 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................795 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................795 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Team Saskatchewan Succeeds at 2007 Canada Winter Games 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................784 
 Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................784 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................784 
 Saskatoon Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Scott Collegiate’s Basketball Successes 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Highway 368 Fundraising Dinner 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................785 
 Don Allen Saskaloppet in La Ronge 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................785 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Drought Disaster Assistance for the Southwest 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................786 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................786 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................787 
 Disposition of Murdoch Carriere’s Computer Hard Drive 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
 Government’s Settlement with Complainants in the Carriere Case 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................790 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................791 
 



 

 Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................791 
PRIVILEGE 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................792 
MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................793 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................793 
  Quennell (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................794 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................794 
 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée legislative et le Conseil executif 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................795 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................796 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................796 
 Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................796 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................797 
 Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act 
 Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................797 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................798 
 Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................798 
 Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................799 
 Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................799 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................800 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


