


















































Hansard: December 13, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 4A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 69 
 December 13, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to the members of the Assembly a group of 
students who come from a school that had visited here before, 
and we’re always delighted to see them. This is a group of 29 
grade 8 students who are seated in the main in the east gallery, 
and I think two on the floor behind the bar. 
 
They come from the Regina Christian School. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Geoff Glasspell, and by Mrs. 
Tanya Foster. I look forward to meeting with this group after 
question period. I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join me in extending a very warm welcome to this 
group of students and their teacher and chaperones. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

United Way Recognizes Saskatoon Citizens 
 
Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak of two very 
special people who are members of my constituency, Wally and 
Colleen Mah. On November 22, the United Way of Saskatoon 
honoured Wally and Colleen for their citizenship, their 
philanthropy, and their community spirit. The Dinner Date is 
the premier event for the United Way of Saskatoon and is 
designed to recognize outstanding leadership in our community. 
 
The Mahs have contributed to the Saskatoon community 
through their involvement on numerous boards and charities 
such as the United Way, Saskatoon city foundation, Children’s 
Wish Foundation, Tamara’s House, the Royal University 
Hospital, and the Saskatoon Community Foundation. On a 
personal note, Mr. Speaker, without his assistance on a 24-bed 
expansion to Teen Challenge Saskatchewan as a project 
manager, many young men might be in prison or dead today 
from their addictions. 
 
The community of Saskatoon indeed showed their appreciation 
of this remarkable couple with more than 600 people in 
attendance at the Dinner Date, and the event raised over 
$120,000 for the United Way. This is the largest-attended 
dinner in the United Way history and raised more money than 
ever before. Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all of the 
members to join me in congratulating Wally and Colleen Mah 
for their role in making Saskatoon a stronger community. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Tribute to Late Senator Miles Venne 
 
Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the North and 
Saskatchewan lost a great First Nations leader, an elder, in the 
passing of Senator Myles Venne of La Ronge. 
 
Senator Venne was born in a log cabin on the trapline and 
educated at the All Saints Residential School. Later he, along 
with his two brothers Edgar and George, worked as hunting 
guides in the North. Mr. Speaker, Senator Venne served as the 
chief of the La Ronge Indian Band for 14 years. He was then 
appointed as a senator of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, serving 18 years until his recent illness and passing. 
 
He spent his early years advocating, organizing, and negotiating 
with provincial and federal governments, constantly pushing for 
access to education and employment for his people. Senator 
Venne was often quoted as saying, “I don’t want to see my 
people go hungry any more.” He worked diligently, developing 
the foundations for the many successful business ventures the 
Lac La Ronge Indian Band now owns and operates today. 
Senator Venne understood the way out of poverty for his people 
was through education, training, employment, and economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Senator Venne may be gone, but he will never be 
forgotten. I ask my colleagues in the House today to join me in 
extending our condolences to his wife, Mary, and the family. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Recognizing Saskatchewan Rivers Constituents 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge Mike 
Doyle of Garrick who had his 90th birthday this past 
November. Mike is one of 13 children born to Matt and 
Elizabeth Doyle of White Fox. Mike and his wife, Evelyn, now 
have 8 grandchildren and 19 great-grandchildren. 
 
This past month Hugh and Audrey King from the Smeaton area 
were also honoured by friends and family as they marked their 
60th wedding anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to recognize these outstanding 
Saskatchewan citizens of Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Support for Abused Women and Children 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight 
an individual in a program striving to effect positive change for 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

mothers and children who are afflicted by environments of 
domestic violence and abuse. 
 
Maggie Blondeau is the program manager of Riel House, a new 
11-suite housing program and administered through Gabriel 
Housing, serving the needs of women and children fleeing 
violence. Mr. Speaker, both Ms. Blondeau and Riel House are 
committed to meeting the needs of families fleeing violence 
through providing a rich environment of supportive 
relationships and care. The program offers access to a family 
support worker, liaison and links to programs that support 
within the community, therapeutic treatment and support 
groups, and many fun, healthy family events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Blondeau takes pride in her work and notes 
that no one can ever be free if contained within a context of 
violence. She offers a wealth of personal and professional 
experience. She says that her philosophy is one of working 
with, not for, and believes that firm but fair structures and rules 
are essential to foster empowerment and long-lasting change. 
 
I ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in 
commending Gabriel Housing and Maggie Blondeau for their 
community leadership. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 
 

Saskatchewan Joins The Energy Council 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform my 
colleagues that Saskatchewan is now an official member of The 
Energy Council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Saskatchewan will join several other oil- and 
gas-producing provinces in membership. In opposition the 
Saskatchewan Party lobbied the former government to have our 
great province represented at this important forum, but the 
NDP, being the NDP, were like the cheap neighbours on the 
block who wanted to go to the meetings for free and get all the 
benefits of membership. It is now in government that the 
Saskatchewan Party proudly announces that Saskatchewan has 
been welcomed into this association. 
 
The Minister of Energy and Resources will be attending The 
Energy Council quarterly conference for the next few days. 
Saskatchewan is an energy powerhouse and our full 
membership into this group reinforces our province as a secure 
and reliable energy supplier to the United States. 
 
Last week Saskatchewan had a record land sale for oil and gas 
exploration and development. A whopping $250 million worth 
of land was sold, shattering the old record. Saskatchewan has an 
exciting future ahead of it as a major international energy 
producer, and involvement in The Energy Council will be part 
of that future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 
 

Arts Training Program for Saskatoon Youth 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 7 I had 
the honour of attending the graduation ceremony and final 
exhibit of Urban Canvas VII. Urban Canvas is one of the many 
quality programs offered by Saskatoon Community Arts 
Programming Inc., more commonly known as SCYAP 
[Saskatoon Community Youth Arts Programming Inc.]. Urban 
Canvas is a 34-week intensive program of arts training for 
youth aged 16 to 30 facing multiple barriers to employment. 
Training in arts skills is accompanied by sessions on personal 
and professional development, job skills, health, and literacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was truly impressed by the variety of works and 
the artistic skill evident through the students’ art. I was equally 
impressed to hear from the youth about how they have 
benefited through completing the Urban Canvas program. It 
was exciting to hear of their post-graduation plans. 
 
I ask all member to join me in congratulating Alexander 
Mann-Kuefler, Ashley Morin, Charlene Mususkapoe, Crystal 
Bendig, David Shingoose, Kimberley Peequaquat, and Thora 
Gudmundson. We wish them all the best and look forward to 
how they will contribute to our province in the years to come. 
 
I think it is also appropriate to highlight the good, ongoing work 
done by SCYAP president, Darrell Lechman, and Urban 
Canvas co-ordinators, Jessie Zoerb, Tammy Krueckl, and 
Stacey Schmidt. Well done and keep up the good work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

A Great Lady’s Strength and Determination 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This will be my first 
member’s statement of this new term, and I can’t think of a 
better way to start my new term than to honour one of my oldest 
constituents. On September 17 Mrs. Mary Heintz of Semans, 
Saskatchewan led the local Terry Fox run in that community. 
She walked the entire course and personally raised 1,100 of the 
1,600 total in pledges, all at the age of 95. And she says next 
year she plans to be back there again leading that again. 
 
As we all know, each year thousands of volunteers organize 
Terry Fox run events across Canada and around the world. To 
date more than 400 million have been raised worldwide for 
cancer research in Terry’s name. The run is a non-competitive 
event where people can get together to raise money for cancer 
research. It is also a day of celebrating Terry’s legacy and 
keeping his dream, a cure for cancer, alive. And it’s one of the 
main reasons that Mary participated in the run. She wants to 
keep that legacy going forever. 
 
The Terry Fox participants, led by Mary, had a very successful 
day, enjoyed a delicious lunch after the walk. Sharee Blixrud, 
Anna Runolfson were on the special lunch committee. Marj 
Marshall organized the walk with assistance from her 
committee of Josephine Richardson, Edith Sorenson, and 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

Bertha Paproski. On behalf of the constituents of Arm 
River-Watrous I would like to personally thank Mrs. Mary 
Heintz for her efforts, and all the other volunteers in Semans. I 
know her inspiration in this year’s Terry Fox run . . . We should 
all be inspired by the strength and the determination of this 
great lady. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Enterprise Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many 
words could be used to describe Enterprise Saskatchewan — 
spectral, ethereal, insubstantial, hypothetical, and certainly, at 
least to date, secretive. It seems to be just one of many plans the 
Sask Party has announced, spoken of many times, and now just 
can’t find or at least can’t seem to lay their hands on the details. 
 
But what does the Sask Party platform say, Mr. Speaker? Under 
the heading in the platform, “Week One,” I quote, “There will 
be terms of reference for Enterprise Saskatchewan.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, actions do speak louder than words. To the 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation: given the government is 
now in week six, will they deliver on their week one promise 
and tell us what the terms are for Enterprise Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the hon. member for his question. The details about Enterprise 
Saskatchewan and this exciting new approach to economic 
development in our province were provided in an economic 
paper that I actually released at the University of Saskatchewan 
in September 2004, and we’ve been wanting to talk about it 
ever since. Interestingly the model is not unlike what the 
previous NDP [New Democratic Party] government did with 
respect to Tourism Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership. Enterprise Saskatchewan is going to 
give this province the chance once and for all to get the NDP 
politics out of economic development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It is the absolute best chance that we have 
to ensure that our economy remains the most competitive that it 
can be, the most competitive in the country so that we can 
attract investment, bring families home to the province of 
Saskatchewan, all the while engaging the stakeholders in the 
economy, not just the tired, old, NDP former government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier 
wishes to brief his minister on Enterprise Saskatchewan in the 
Legislative Assembly, that might be helpful, if he actually 
answers the questions. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s Promise to 
Saskatchewan document specifies that Enterprise Saskatchewan 
board will draw from, and I quote, “. . . provincial [government] 
and local government, industry, First Nations, labour, post 
secondary institutions, and other economic stakeholders . . .” 
 
As the people of Saskatchewan have come to expect from Sask 
Party statements on policy, many details remain unclear. The 
Sask Party’s been talking about its group of appointed decision 
makers since before the last provincial election as the Premier 
says. Surely they must have selected the members of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan by now. But only yesterday the Premier let slip 
that there will be 15 Enterprise Saskatchewans, one for each 15 
economic sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who is on the entity of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan? How are these people being selected, or how 
were they selected? How much are they going to be paid? Or 
should I ask, who is on each one of these 15 entities, and how 
are they selected; how are they to be paid — if the minister 
knows who these sectors are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for his question. The member outlined basically who 
will be on the board of Enterprise Saskatchewan, and many 
more details will be forthcoming when our legislation is tabled. 
And I urge patience to the member. Just a few more sleeps and 
he’ll have all the details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, is the minister saying that in a 
few sleeps we’ll have the names? Because that’s what I asked 
for — not the categories from which they will select these 
people. I asked for who the individuals were. Is that what the 
minister is saying? 
 
Enterprise Saskatchewan represents the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s intention to absolve itself from its 
responsibility in governing as it relates to the economy of this 
province. Instead they will leave this to a group of unelected, 
appointed Sask Party appointees. 
 
During the course of the election, even leading up to the 
election, the Premier said that Enterprise Saskatchewan will be 
up and running within a week, should they win government. 
That meant the board had to be already picked and ready to go. 
Yet here we are more than a month from the election and still 
little sign of Enterprise Saskatchewan. Yet another case of say 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

one thing and do another. They must have determined the 
composition of the board. Who is on it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
appreciate the question from the member as well, but the 
member seems to have his facts somewhat confused. No one 
has said that the Enterprise Saskatchewan board would be 
appointed in a week. That didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, and I 
don’t know where that information came from, but 
unfortunately it’s not correct. 
 
The Enterprise Saskatchewan model will be very much like the 
NDP’s model in Tourism Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, Mr. Speaker. I think the NDP 
will be very pleased to know that there will be a nomination 
process. The letters are being drafted right now to the 
stakeholders of the economy, and we will be accepting 
nominations, Mr. Speaker, from those stakeholders, and choices 
will be made based upon those nominations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — So, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, 
Enterprise Saskatchewan is up and running. We just don’t know 
who’s running it. Mr. Speaker, either that, Mr. Speaker, or the 
promise was not kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it started with the election campaign. On October 
25 the member from Swift Current said a review of oil and gas 
royalties rates would be done immediately if elected, upon 
election, but done by Enterprise Saskatchewan. Then they got 
elected, and the newly sworn in Minister of Energy and 
Resources, who apparently is on winter vacation, agreed that a 
review would be quite prudent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Members know 
that they’re not to refer to presence or absence of members. 
Remind the member. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. Then they got 
elected, and the newly sworn-in Minister of Energy and 
Resources agreed that a review would be quite prudent and that 
they were looking to do it in a very short period of time. But the 
Minister of Energy and Resources said that he could not answer 
the questions or any questions about royalty rates until he heard 
from Enterprise Saskatchewan. My question, Minister of 
Enterprise and Innovations: when will the real Government of 
Saskatchewan be announced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

answer that question as well. We have a process every four 
years in which a government is chosen. And the people of 
Saskatchewan spoke loudly and very clearly and forcefully in a 
substantial voter turnout. The voters have chosen the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the new Government of 
Saskatchewan, and the party that will be the Government of 
Saskatchewan for a very long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan voted for a responsible government, for 
government that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Quennell: — They voted for responsible government, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s not what they’re getting. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re getting a government that abdicates its responsibility, 
Mr. Speaker, that can’t ask . . . ministers who can’t answer 
questions until they hear from an appointed group of people 
who have not yet been appointed, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the original 2003 version of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan was meant to, quote, “. . . manage the 
government’s existing portfolio of more than 80 business 
investments.” The 2004 version admitted that it would, quote, 
“. . . cede significant control over . . . economic development 
. . .” Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about an unelected group of 
friends of the Sask Party which will now have significant 
control . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the member to place the question. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — . . . control of the province’s economy. Can 
the minister at least indicate whether the Provincial Auditor will 
have access to Enterprise Saskatchewan’s books? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate that question. I appreciate that question from the 
member because we want to make this crystal clear. Yes is the 
answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the minister for the first direct answer given in this sitting of the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, can the minister, who is 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

technically responsible for this entity called Enterprise 
Saskatchewan, provide us any information about the numbers of 
members, whether the provincial government is a majority or 
minority on this board, and who these individuals are going to 
be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be giving 
another clear answer to that member, Mr. Speaker. The answer 
is you’ll find it in the legislation before Christmas — just a few 
more sleeps. I urge, I urge the member to be less angry and a 
little more patient. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — I’m very happy, Mr. Speaker, to hear that the 
legislation is drafted and it has the answers to the questions. I 
assume the minister has seen the legislation; therefore he knows 
the answer to the questions. Who are these individuals? When 
were they selected, and how were they selected? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most prominent features of the Sask 
Party’s election platform is Enterprise Saskatchewan. They 
cannot give any details about the number of board members or 
what sectors the companies the members represent. And 
although they will not give details about the First Nations or 
other economic stakeholders represented and although they will 
not give details about how much these people will be paid or 
how they were selected, they have assured us that Enterprise 
Saskatchewan will benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But if, Mr. Speaker, if Enterprise Saskatchewan was as 
necessary to our province as the Saskatchewan Party says, why 
did the decisions on essential legislation and the cancelling of 
the Domtar deal not wait until they heard directions from 
Enterprise Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was no 
Domtar deal is the answer to that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — The document that that member refers to 
as a deal was a MOU [memorandum of understanding] that I 
had the privilege to read, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t bind anybody 
to do anything. And that’s the direct answer to that question, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if decisions are going to be 
made of the magnitude that the government is willing to make 
without consulting anybody, why would the people of 
Saskatchewan be paying this group of unelected people 
appointees of the Sask Party government? What is going to be 
the budget? What is going to be the cost of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan to give advice that may or may not be disclosed 
to the legislature because it’s not being done by ministers, and 
may or may not be acted upon depending on what the 
government’s real agenda is, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I urge 
patience to that member. There’s nothing sinister here, Mr. 
Minister, and that member knows it full well. They’re trying to 
make something out of nothing, Mr. Speaker, and I urge 
patience. The legislation will be tabled in this Hon. Assembly 
before we break for Christmas, and that member’s questions 
will all be answered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

The Ministry of Health 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as a prominent political columnist 
said recently, you couldn’t swing a dead cat in the rotunda after 
Monday’s Throne Speech without hitting old Tories. It appears 
the same can be said about recent appointments made by the 
member from Swift Current. Gren Smith-Windsor served as 
Grant Devine’s clerk of Executive Council in the mid-’80s. 
Today he’s the acting deputy minister of Health. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Health: was the appointment 
of Gren Smith-Windsor based on political loyalty or 
competence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
welcome the question. I want to tell this Assembly as well as 
the people of the province that we have full confidence in Gren 
Smith-Windsor. He has been involved in the health care 
industry and system for more than 30 years and has served the 
public very, very well. 
 
And when you see a new government come into place, you 
want to review the people that you have in charge. We decided, 
as far as the Ministry of Health, that we would make some 
changes. We’ve brought in somebody that is an interim position 
while we do a nationwide search that started yesterday, Mr. 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

Speaker. We look forward to that search bringing in very 
qualified people. But in the meantime, Gren Smith-Windsor has 
our confidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gren Smith-Windsor 
has had a variety of jobs in the health care system. In 2002 he 
was hired as CEO [chief executive officer] of the Prince Albert 
Parkland Health Region. He was terminated from that position 
in 2005. As the P.A. Herald put it on Tuesday, Dec. 11, and I 
quote: 
 

The CEO fired from the local health region in 2005 has 
found a new — and more high-profile — position. 
 
In November, about two years after the Prince Albert 
Parkland Health Region terminated Gren Smith-Windsor’s 
contract as CEO, the Saskatchewan Party appointed him as 
acting deputy minister of health. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people have serious questions about this 
appointment. As CUPE Local 4777 president Carol McKnight 
put it when questioning the appointment to the P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Herald, and I quote, “I’m shocked that the government 
would appoint a CEO of a health region who has just been 
fired.” She went on to say, quote, “People don’t get fired for 
fulfilling their duties.” 
 
[10:30] 
 
My question is for the Minister of Health: will the minister put 
the minds of the people of Saskatchewan at ease and say why 
Mr. Smith-Windsor was fired and why he believes that to be 
separate from his ability to act as the deputy minister? And are 
there any other issues within Gren Smith-Windsor’s 
employment history that the public should be aware of? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous answer that Gren 
Smith-Windsor has the confidence of this government. He is 
serving in an interim position until a permanent deputy minister 
is found. 
 
But I find it very curious that the second first question coming 
to this government, this new government, regarding health care 
would be dealing with the personnel, the staffings . For years 
we heard how terrible it was when we were in opposition, that if 
we would attack any of the civil service. The second question in 
health care is attacking people that are sitting in an interim 
position, that was qualified to serve in the health care system 
for over 30 years, Mr. Speaker. I find it very curious from that 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health 
can rest assured there’ll be lots of questions coming to him from 
this side of the House over the next little while. But my 
question today is again about Mr. Gren Smith-Windsor. He’s 
the Premier’s replacement for John Wright. 
 
Mr. Wright served as deputy minister of Health since 2004. He 
began his distinguished career of public service in 1977. John 
Wright was the consummate civil servant having worked 
through various administrations diligently and capably. His 
passion and integrity made him the type of deputy minister that 
others within the public service could look up to and seek 
advice from. He provided strong leadership and sound advice to 
all he served. 
 
Mr. Wright’s dismissal has left a large hole in one of the most 
important portfolios of this province — a hole that cannot be 
filled by a partisan appointment. Mr. Speaker, will the Minister 
of Health state on the record today, why Mr. Wright was 
dismissed without cause? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
absolutely acknowledge the contribution that John Wright made 
to this province. He served the province very well in many 
different areas and most recently in Health. He was under a 
secondment from SaskPower which was going to be finished by 
this summer. So, Mr. Speaker, we have decided to move and 
look for a permanent head, a deputy minister of the Health 
ministry, and in the interim we have Gren Smith-Windsor. 
 
But I also find it more than curious; this government hasn’t 
learned the lesson because priority number one to people in this 
province is nurses and doctors on the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I look forward when the critic stands 
in this House and starts asking questions regarding recruitment 
and retention, something that that government, when it was in 
government, that opposition failed to do miserably over the last 
16 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the minister 
can rest assured that there will be many questions along that 
line, and I’m looking forward to his answers. 
 
The new acting deputy minister will be responsible for some 
pretty important tasks. Instead of waiting for a permanent 
deputy minister to be in place, the Saskatchewan Party have 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

their friend, Mr. Smith-Windsor, undertaking their so-called 
patient-first review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has spent 10 years 
relentlessly complaining about the Saskatchewan health care 
system, and now that they are in charge they don’t have a clue 
what to do. They have to audit the system to find out. Who will 
perform this audit? They don’t know. What will the terms of 
reference or mandate be? To be determined. When will they 
start or complete their work? Soonish. How much spending are 
they targeting to save? Not too sure. 
 
Will the Minister of Health today let the people of 
Saskatchewan in on the details of the patient-first review? 
Specifically, when will the review get under way? Who will 
conduct it? And what is the budget for the review? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that question 
was asked. The health care system is a $3.4 billion operation, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that a review of the system is more than 
required. I’m interested to hear from that opposition then. Do 
they feel that $3.4 million, every one of those dollars is being 
spent — billion dollars — every one of those dollars is being 
spent appropriately, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I understand that they’re a little reluctant when we start talking 
about reviews. Every four years a government is reviewed, and 
the last review of that government didn’t turn out very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, they’re worried about 
layoffs. Well I’ll tell you, after the last review on November 7, 
there’s the same amount of people working in this room. 
There’s just a whole lot different focus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Sask Party 
platform, the review will look for ways to direct dollars away 
from bureaucracy to front-line care. According to the Canadian 
Institute of Health Information, CIHI, Saskatchewan’s admin 
costs in the health care system are 4 per cent of the total budget 
— one of the lowest in Canada. 
 
And what did the current deputy leader have to say about the 
review or the audit two years ago? When confronted by 
reporters about whether the review would include privatization 
of health care services, the member from Canora-Pelly said, 
quote, “I guess it’s being ruled out right now.” But, quote, “It 
could or couldn’t be in the future.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister state unequivocally that the health 

audit will not even consider privatization? And can he state 
categorically that if the audit recommends privatization or user 
fees, the government will reject those recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number of 
years, we’ve talked about a patient-first review. It’s met with 
great expectation from the public, but not only the general 
public. People within the system are saying day in and day out, 
there are efficiencies to be found within the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked to SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses], and we’ll continue to talk to SUN. We’ve talked to the 
SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association]. We’ll 
talk to SALPN [Saskatchewan Association of Licensed 
Practical Nurses]. We’ll talk to the SEEU. We’ll talk to SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union]. 
We’ll talk to CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] 
because they all want to have input in this review. And that’s 
exactly what this review will look like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s important for the 
public to know that they can trust deputy ministers and the 
service they will provide. Reporters recently asked the Premier 
how the public can trust the new acting deputy minister given 
his dismissal from the P.A. Health Region. The Premier’s 
answer was, and I quote, “Well he’s not alone.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, talk about damning with faint praise. The Premier 
went on to say the deputy minister would be working with 
others including assistant or associate deputy ministers and the 
health regions. Mr. Smith-Windsor was the only acting deputy 
minister appointed by the Premier who came from outside of a 
department. There are qualified and proven ADMs [assistant 
deputy minister] in the Department of Health who could’ve 
stepped into the role. So one has to wonder why the Premier 
chose to appoint Mr. Smith-Windsor in spite of his inexperience 
in the department and the questions that remain about his past 
employment. 
 
Will the Minister of Health please explain why his government 
needed to bring Gren Smith-Windsor in. What task or tasks 
could they not trust the current qualified professional civil 
servants to undertake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s interesting because the people of the province on 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

November 7 called for change. They voted for change, Mr. 
Speaker. We have made a few changes, and one happened to be 
the deputy minister for the Ministry of Health. I have answered 
the question that Gren Smith-Windsor has our confidence. He 
will be in that position on an acting role until a national search 
is found. 
 
I find it very curious that the critic would suggest that we 
should only, only hire from within and not take a look at what’s 
available around the province as well as the country when it 
comes to dealing with a system that is using $3.4 billion a year, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that’s unrealistic. I think there are 
very qualified people within the province. But I also know that 
there are people outside the province — now that there’s a Sask 
Party government — are looking forward to coming into this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is just one more 
opportunity that if a qualified person is found in the province, 
they’ll definitely be hired. But if we find somebody outside the 
province, we know they’ll be glad to take residence here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I call the members to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 1, The Growth and Financial Security Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved Bill No. 
1, The Growth and Financial Security Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 
orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to submit 
supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from His 

Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — I call the members to order. Would you please 
rise for the message from the Lieutenant Governor. The 
message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2008 and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
[Signed] Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 
Ottenbreit, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Calvert.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to start today by congratulating you for taking on the 
huge responsibility of Speaker of the legislature in this great 
province. I know that you are more than capable of carrying out 
the duties. And sometimes there may be challenges, and I know 
that your gracious wife will be beside you, as we’ve seen over 
the years, to help you carry on that responsibility and while 
welcoming guests into our province and into the Assembly. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker for putting his 
name forward. Our legislature will be in very good hands 
during this twenty-sixth sitting of the legislature. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the members on both sides of the 
House for their success, especially the new members, on the 
election on November 7. This job or career or lifestyle — 
whatever we’d like to call it — is unlike any other experience 
you’ll ever have. I’m so very proud of the new members on the 
Saskatchewan Party side of the House. Their knowledge and 
their experience and the depth of their wisdom is already noted. 
And we really trust them, and I know that they’ll be a great part 
of our team. And I’m telling you, we are just hugely grateful for 
them putting their names forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was humbled and honoured when the people 
from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency chose me to be their 
representative for the fourth consecutive time. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to thank them for their ongoing support. During 
the past 12 years I have been welcomed and shown a lot of 
hospitality at every event I have been invited to. And I haven’t 
always gotten the positive results they’ve asked when they’ve 
asked me for help, but I’ve always tried. 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

I’ve had the privilege of speaking to students who visit the 
Assembly and I remind them of the honour it is of hearing the 
words, “member from Kelvington-Wadena,” whenever I’m 
addressed from the Speaker’s Chair. That’s the democratic 
process and it’s an honour that too many times we take for 
granted. 
 
I’d like to thank my family for their support for the past 12 
years. When I decided to run for the first time in 1995 I had one 
grandchild. Today I have six. So there’s been a lot of progress 
in my life as well. My family has been there for me during the 
good times and the hard times in our journey to becoming 
government, and I couldn’t have done it without their 
unconditional support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, often you’ve heard me state that my constituents 
are the best in the province, and I continue to believe so. They 
are caring and they are hard-working people who show the 
attributes of homesteaders. It takes tough, resilient people 
working together to create communities that we call home. I’m 
immensely proud of the people from Kelvington-Wadena and 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t tell you some of their stories. 
 
[10:45] 
 
This summer the whole community of Porcupine Plain mourned 
the loss of seven-year-old Pacen Logan, who drowned on the 
family farm. Their family was having a very difficult time 
dealing with the loss of the little boy who loved playing hockey. 
 
About two weeks ago a team of ex-NHLers, led by hometown 
boy Kelly Chase, put together an unbelievable hockey game 
playing the local Porcupine Plain Blues before a 
standing-room-only crowd of 700 people at Chase Place Arena 
in Porcupine Plain. During the intermission, there were auctions 
and raffles and draws. Many of the NHLers donated their 
hockey jerseys, and those playing in the game donated sweaters, 
and the sweater auction alone brought in $36,000. The total 
evening raised $55,000. So from this tragedy, an evening of joy 
and laughter was enjoyed and the community of Porcupine 
Plain will build a playground in the memory of Pacen Logan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day in the legislature members had the 
privilege of meeting another one of my constituents, Trevor 
Lowey. I know many have heard the story of Kelly Schermann, 
a teacher from Strasbourg, and Trevor Lowey, a paramedic 
from Kelvington, who in their Rider fever thought of others and 
banded together to find a flight, seats, hotel rooms, and tickets 
for Grey Cup for 10 individuals with cancer and their families. 
Not only did they give these families a memory of a lifetime, 
the money that was left over will go to create a Chris Knox 
legacy foundation with money being used to provide supporting 
tickets for all children battling health issues in future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in another part of my constituency, a group of 10 
women from Foam Lake, now known as the Breast of Friends, 
staged their first fundraising gourmet dinner for Prairie Women 
on Snowmobiles approximately four years ago to raise money 
to fight breast cancer. After several more dinners, this led to 
publishing a cookbook in the honour of family and friends who 
died from breast cancer. Later, Kelvin Cooper in 2005 died, and 
they produced another cookbook for Kelvin. They are now 
getting ready to publish a third book, this one for survivors. To 

date they have raised over $600,000 which they have donated to 
cancer agencies and patients that need help right across Canada. 
 
Foam Lake can also boast the perogy ladies who have raised 
over $118,000 to pay for their community hall just by making 
and selling perogies. 
 
Not only does my constituency have a number of caring 
individuals within their town as well as the town themselves . . . 
One of the individuals is Dan Blatchford, who will be retiring 
after 30 years of coaching the Kelvington Golden Hawk 4A 
Boys’ Volleyball. On the same weekend that the Riders brought 
home the Grey Cup, the Hawks brought home the gold medal 
from the provincial championships held in Oxbow. Since 1978 
the Kelvington Golden Hawk Boys’ Volleyball Team, coached 
by Dan Blatchford, have won six gold, six silver, and five 
bronze medals at provincial championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Kelvington-Wadena continue to 
open their hearts and their pockets to individuals and to projects 
even though they’ve faced a lot of hardships within industries 
of farming in the last number of years. 
 
After years of drought and frost and flooding, they did see a 
glimmer of hope with an increase in grain prices this year. And 
although a lot of them didn’t get all their seeding completed due 
to excess moisture, what they did seed did give them higher 
prices. Unfortunately, on the other side, the higher prices and 
the rising loonie hurt the livestock industry. And even through 
this hardship, there’s still another glimmer of hope. 
 
Fishing Lake First Nation, situated in Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency, is part of the Saskatchewan slaughter plant 
initiative which is working towards the construction by the year 
2008 of a new hog slaughtering plant to replace the one Maple 
Leaf closed in Saskatoon. The current plan calls for the creation 
of an urban reserve in Saskatoon on which the plant would be 
located. 
 
An investment group called Anishnabe Foods Ltd., a 
partnership investment group for First Nations government, will 
be the source of the funds. Fishing Lake First Nations is the 
founding member and 15 other bands in Saskatchewan and 
Alberta have expressed an interest in participating in this plant. 
The proposed slaughter plant is expected to create 3 to 400 jobs. 
 
Many of the towns and RMs [rural municipality] within my 
constituency continue to deal with the increased maintenance of 
infrastructure due to excessive moisture in the last couple of 
years in our constituency. The flooding at Fishing Lake has 
absolutely devastated the tourism industry in that area. Cabin 
owners are frustrated with the lack of progress in cleaning up 
the mess and flood proofing, and many of them are still waiting 
for compensation for the disaster. And then they worry about 
next spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the election I was deeply honoured when the 
Premier gave me the responsibility for First Nations and Métis 
Relations, and Northern Affairs. The Aboriginal file in 
Saskatchewan is extremely complex and has never been given 
the priority it deserves by federal or provincial governments. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan is blessed with natural resources that 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

are now making us the envy not only of the nation, but of the 
world. Combining the two does not dilute the importance of 
either; it gives strength to both. It provides an opportunity to 
show the vision of a new government not content with the status 
quo for the people or for resources. 
 
It’s been said that success is not a destination, it’s a journey. 
This government, the Saskatchewan Party government, looks 
forward to the successes that will be achieved when we journey 
together with First Nations and Métis people to grow the 
economy and to provide a secure future for all the children in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The day before yesterday I listened in disbelief as the NDP had 
the audacity to talk about consultation. One would think that in 
government they would have learned a whole lot about 
consultation with the jurisdictional issue on smoking. But no, 
just a few years later on the same, on the issue that is absolutely 
critical to ensuring growth in our economy — that being the 
duty to consult — the people that sat in the chairs on this side of 
the House last session failed to consult with the First Nation and 
Métis people on the guideline that was prepared. How can a 
government write an entire book entitled the guidelines for 
consultation and accommodation without consulting? The very 
act is an insult, and it’s disrespectful and probably the very best 
example of how arrogant and out of touch government can 
become. 
 
Mr. Speaker, treaties are more than a contract. They are the 
founding document between nations. They’re the origins of our 
country, the paper every land title in Canada is based upon. As 
Saskatchewan people, we must understand the treaty 
relationship. Treaties are enshrined in the constitution. They are 
part of the makeup of Canada. They cannot be ignored, 
removed, or forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this Throne Speech 
recognizes the importance of our First Nations people and Métis 
people and the need for better understanding of our treaty 
through the implementation of the treaty education system in 
our school system in a mandatory manner. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are feeling new hope after the 
provincial election. They are feeling renewed pride in being a 
Saskatchewanian. They are excited about the new way to look 
at the economic potential in our province, Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. They’re excited about the opportunities for our 
youth through the post-secondary tax credits and tax break for 
young business owners. They’re excited about keeping some of 
the education property tax money in their own pockets. They’re 
excited about the plans for safer streets and the hope for people 
with addictions. They’re excited that this great province will be 
marketed to other provinces and countries throughout the world 
by the doubling of tourism funding. 
 
As I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, Saskatchewan 
people are caring and they believe in helping families and 
individuals in need. Supporting community-based organizations 
to give them a hand up rather than a handover will guarantee the 
quality of life will improve. We know that the culture and 
physical activities are essential components of daily living and 
they’re excited that this government has recognized the 
importance with our active families benefit. 

We have a wonderful province but we must ensure that it 
remains that way by taking responsibility for the stewardship of 
our environment. Saskatchewan people are excited about the 
programs that have been introduced to facilitate solutions to 
environmental problems facing our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are excited about the future 
of our province. They feel the energy and they’re renewed with 
a sense of hope they can provide a better and more secure life 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to support the 
motion put forward by my friend and colleague from Estevan 
and seconded by my new friend and colleague from Yorkton. I 
will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’d like to 
congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker as you take on your 
new roles within this distinguished Chamber. It’s an honour to 
speak in support of our Premier, our government, and for the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
And while I’ll return to the significance of my family, 
especially my wife, Martha, professor of history at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and my dear daughter, Jacqueline, 
who’s in grade 3 at the Saskatoon French School — without 
their support I wouldn’t be here today. 
 
Quite simply, what we have is a great opportunity before us 
here. And so as we focus on the Throne Speech, we can see that 
our government is committed to ensuring growth and 
opportunity, security and community, and is focused on keeping 
its word. It outlines a clear, fresh, and prudent vision for our 
province as we move forward in the 21st century. But it does 
not stop at vision. It reinforces the significance of acting on that 
vision, working to articulate and realize the promise of our 
province and its peoples. 
 
The significance of the synergy between vision and action in 
public life is not new. Vaclav Havel, the first president of the 
Czech Republic, once said: 
 

Vision is not enough, it must be combined with venture. It 
is not enough to stare up the steps, we must step up the 
stairs. 

 
As I first approached the steps of this magnificent building, 
those words had a very deep and personal resonance. Havel’s 
statement emphasized the importance of citizenship and 
community, leadership and discipline, honour and humility, as 
we carry out our tasks as elected members. I believe that these 
values provide a solid and enduring foundation for positive 
change in our province and across our country. 
 
Again as we look at our shared future, it is worth recalling our 
common past. To paraphrase Walter Scott, our first premier, as 
he met the first president of the University of Saskatchewan, 
Walter Murray, he welcomed him and said, Saskatchewan is a 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

big land for big people with big ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statement is as true today as it was then. Like 
our first government, Brad Wall’s government, Premier Wall’s 
government believes in the potential and the promise of this 
province and its peoples. My apologies. A glance will do. The 
people of Saskatchewan know this. The Government of 
Saskatchewan knows this. We’ve come to a point in our history 
where we can no longer settle for being anything less than what 
we should be. Our obligation to our neighbours and to future 
generations is to realize and maximize our potential within a 
framework of fiscal prudence and sound stewardship. 
 
We’re already getting a sense of what our promise is — a leader 
in the new West in Canada and around the world in areas of 
resource development and key niches of the knowledge 
economy. And we must work tirelessly and in focused fashion 
to secure our place as a renewed contributor to Confederation. 
Mr. Speaker, during the Speech from the Throne we were able 
to outline a new growth and security agenda for Saskatchewan, 
and today I’m proud to speak to some of these key themes. 
 
The stakeholders, with particular interest in the new Ministry of 
Advanced Education, Employment and Labour — including 
those working for improved post-secondary education most 
especially in the First Nation-Métis communities, immigrant 
communities, and more broadly across our province looking at 
enhanced immigration, a fair labour environment, and greater 
attention to gender equality — these are vital stakeholders as 
we move forward to helping transform our communities. 
 
Our challenge, indeed our opportunity, is to bring together the 
resources available to government and across our community to 
help provide creative, effective solutions to some of the market 
challenges that we face, as well as the community challenges, 
so that everyone is included and has the opportunity to realize 
their full potential. By creating that kind of sustained growth for 
communities and opportunities for individuals, this ministry and 
our partners will be contributing to an ultimate goal of a safer, 
better, and more secure life for the people of this province. 
 
Sustained growth will also help us to further enhance our 
human capital and to nurture, attract, and keep at home more 
highly skilled people. We’ll work to raise education levels to 
further fuel the knowledge economy, and we will establish a 
fair labour milieu that will help further sustain this growth. 
Doing this will require the collaboration of various partners 
across our community, and our new government will work to 
foster innovative and creative solutions, collaboratively, that are 
responsive to the needs of this new economy and to our 
changing communities. 
 
Together we will set a new direction that meets the needs of all 
Saskatchewan people across every region of the province, urban 
and rural, central and remote, from the farm gates to First 
Nations, from backyard enterprises to mature companies, from 
labour, and of course into the learning communities. With a 
prudent fiscal framework, this ministry and our partners will 
focus on some key five priorities that will help to achieve 
excellence and ultimately move Saskatchewan forward. 
 
First we’ll work with our advanced education and skills training 
partners to achieve excellence in our post-secondary system and 

to help our young people meet the demands of an increasingly 
knowledge-based economy. Addressing Saskatchewan’s current 
labour shortage is key to securing the future. Forecasts 
approximate that Saskatchewan will be between 9 and 13,000 
workers short over the next three to five years. Clearly we must 
act to keep more people in Saskatchewan, to bring more people 
to our province, and to encourage communities and individuals 
to meet their individual and our combined potential. 
 
[11:00] 
 
We need to become more strategic, disciplined, and focused in 
our approach. While post-secondary education is a priority for 
this government, we’ll encourage that new innovations occur 
across the system to increase our responsiveness to the 
economy and to changing learners. Each of our institutions 
brings distinctive strengths to bear and will encourage these 
stakeholders and institutions to bolster those strengths. 
 
Our province’s regional colleges will provide a critical link 
between students and the need for respective local economies 
that they’ll be playing a role in. We must work much more 
closely with stakeholders in those communities to build 
partnerships that better serve local and provincial needs. We can 
look to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology], that provides an impressive level and scope of 
skills training and opportunities. And it is in SIAST that we 
have already seen some examples of public-private partnerships 
at the programming level that have helped to enhance facilities 
and training opportunities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Through its recently announced alliance with Alliance Pipeline, 
instrumentation engineering students at SIAST will have the 
benefit of a new lab and state-of-the-art equipment as they learn 
their trade. It’s these kind of program-based, public-private 
partnerships that will help to meet the dynamic needs of our 
knowledge-based economy, and we’re delighted to see those 
examples. 
 
Our universities of course are a wellspring of knowledge, 
innovation, excellence, and inclusion for our students and 
scholars across Saskatchewan and around the world. An 
excellent example of this type of innovation and its success, we 
can turn to the field of biotechnology where after three decades 
of work we are considered a world leader. A project such as the 
Canadian Light Source synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre, the Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization, the international vaccine centre, to name but a 
few, they point to a challenge for us — what will be the new 
areas of leadership in the knowledge economy? 
 
To further enhance this science- and technology-based research, 
Saskatchewan’s government looks forward to establishing the 
global institute for energy, the environment, and natural 
resources in partnerships with our post-secondary institutions 
and with industry. And that way we can begin to position 
ourselves as a leader in research and development in this 
dynamic aspect of our economy. To bring this and other 
initiatives to fruition we’ll continue to look at our institutions to 
generate even more innovative ideas and build more 
collaborative partnerships across our economy and community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the individual strengths of our institutions 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

are critical in allowing our ability to build and take a leadership 
role in the knowledge economy, Saskatchewan’s new 
government places a high priority on collaboration and 
inter-institutional co-operation. Each of our institutions is part 
of a constellation of elements that create a robust system 
premised on excellence, affordability, and accessibility. 
 
We also place a priority on credit transfer and institutional 
articulation — an area that we are woefully behind in. And 
we’ll work with our post-secondary institutions to recognize 
learning gained in other institutions, both inside and beyond our 
boundaries. Eliminating the gaps that exist in these areas will, I 
believe, maximize our post-secondary system and ultimately 
create a more engaged citizenry — citizens that have greater 
career and life opportunities. 
 
I bring to this portfolio a keen interest in measuring outcomes 
and ensuring that evaluations are part of our progress and will 
ensure that Saskatchewan expands its leadership role in 
interprovincial and especially Western Canadian partnerships 
based on the post-secondary sector and other areas of labour 
market development. 
 
Our experience in the bioscience sector demonstrates that where 
we have played a leadership role in the past points us to new 
leadership roles in the future. We can think simply of the 
Western College of Veterinary Medicine where decades ago our 
province decided to take a leadership role in co-operating with 
other provinces. And today as a result of that, not only through 
the Western College of Veterinary Medicine but to the Vaccine 
and Infectious Disease Organization and now through the 
international vaccine centre, we are playing a leading role 
worldwide. 
 
A second opportunity to achieve excellence is through working 
to keep our skilled young people where they belong, right here 
in Saskatchewan. Retaining our young people is absolutely 
critical to the long-term growth and prosperity of our province, 
and Saskatchewan’s new government is acting aggressively to 
ensure that this happens. Within a framework of fiscal 
prudence, we’ll provide valuable long-term incentives for 
post-secondary graduates to remain at home. 
 
During the campaign we promised that we would have up to 
$20,000 rebate for tuition costs for post-secondary graduates. In 
this program a maximum tuition rebate that is dependable, 
where students can actually know before they enter a program 
— whether it’s a certificate program where they’ll be eligible 
for $3,000; graduates of two-year diplomas, $6,400; graduates 
of three-year programs, $15,000; or graduates of four-year 
university programs, $20,000 — that as they start their program 
they are appreciated, their efforts are appreciated. And we’re 
anticipating that they help us grow Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re also going to be contributing $125 million over the next 
four years — that’s a 28 per cent increase to the post-secondary 
sector — to ensure that that base funding is going towards 
increased excellence, innovation, accessibility, and inclusion. 
 
We will also of course be promoting youth entrepreneurship, 
especially for those self-employed entrepreneurs under 30. Our 
remarkable potential as a province is tied to the promise of our 
young people and we’re going to demonstrate that through 

action, sir. The people of Saskatchewan have voted in favour of 
a government committed to building the knowledge economy 
and to retaining skills and talents within our young people as 
they are the very foundation of our communities. 
 
Third, our government will work to create a fair and balanced 
labour environment that respects the rights of workers and 
employers and is competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions. 
This focuses on ensuring that Saskatchewan people have access 
to essential services such as health care and clean roads in the 
event of job action. Furthermore this legislation will help to 
balance the rights of workers who are going to be striking with 
the public need for public security and safety, and we look 
forward to moving back and receiving feedback from across the 
policy community as we move forward in the coming days. 
 
Fourth, and this is very important, we’ll be working to ensure 
that First Nation and Métis peoples participate more fully in our 
social and economic future and that where gaps exist in 
education and employee levels, that we’ll be focusing and 
working in those areas. Our new government consistently has 
stressed the need to work hard on this commitment. We have a 
historical legacy to overcome and we have an opportunity 
through the labour market shortage where we can actually move 
forward to close this gap. As First Nations and Métis peoples 
prosper, so too will our entire province. 
 
Finally we will achieve excellence beyond our borders by 
demonstrating to the world that Saskatchewan offers a world of 
opportunity and a secure, prosperous future. We will spread the 
word across Canada that Saskatchewan offers a combination of 
professional lifestyle and social opportunities that are 
unparalleled in our country. 
 
We’ll also aggressively market Saskatchewan to immigrants 
and potential newcomers from other countries and around the 
world. We’ll work hard to ensure that Saskatchewan is a 
welcoming and an exciting place for newcomers. And how do 
we do this? We can look to Richard Florida’s The Rise of the 
Creative Class, and focus on three T’s: what we’ve referred to 
already, investments in technology and institutions; the focus on 
talent; and most importantly, stressing tolerance, so that 
everyone feels at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
As we move forward I would like to take this opportunity most 
especially to thank the people of Saskatoon Greystone for their 
confidence and their trust in this mandate that I’ve been given. 
In particular I’d like to thank these fine people, hard-working 
people in Saskatoon Greystone for the opportunity to serve our 
community. I’m humbled by the responsibility placed on my 
shoulders as we move forward. 
 
I’d like to spend a few minutes just thanking some people, and 
most appropriately I’d like to thank the previous MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Greystone 
for his commitment to our community and public service. I’d 
like to thank Andrew Mason who ran for the NDP, Zeba 
Ahmad who ran for the Liberal Party, and Robert Cram who ran 
for the Green Party during the previous election. 
 
What I’d also like to do is speak to the significance of my 
family. My father, my mother became very committed to this. 
My sister helped out tremendously. Probably the highlight of 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

the campaign for me was on a particularly long day, Mr. 
Speaker, and I was called into my office expecting the very 
worst of news, and there sitting before me by surprise were my 
grandparents. They’d travelled a fair distance across Canada to 
come and lend their support, and I was absolutely delighted to 
have them in our campaign office. 
 
Not far from my thoughts, my other grandmother, Blanche 
Coté, was watching from afar. And watching from perhaps a 
different vantage point, a more optimistic vantage point, my 
grandfather Paul Coté. 
 
Most especially I’d like to offer my sincere thanks to our 
Premier for his trust, to my colleagues who are supporting me 
during these early days, to all those on our Greystone team that 
worked so hard, tirelessly, to ensure that we had this 
opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just reiterate my 
support for the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 
to take my opportunity to respond to the Speech from the 
Throne and to first of all, of course, congratulate you and the 
Deputy Chair, Deputy Speaker, on your selection as Chair, as a 
Speaker, and of course, Deputy Speaker. And you’ve heard all 
the great praises of some of your work so I won’t go into detail. 
I’ll save some of the opportunity that I have to certainly respond 
to what I think is some of the weaknesses and some of the lack 
of vision that this particular government has espoused through 
their Speech from the Throne. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the kind people of the 
constituency of Athabasca have seen fit to return me to office. It 
was certainly, certainly always a tough go when you go back to 
the people and ask for their support. So I want to particularly 
thank all the folks that worked hard on the campaign and all the 
people from the various communities that certainly did work 
hard to get me re-elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what the people of Athabasca have said is 
that we want you to continue working hard. We want you to 
continue representing us. And we want to make sure that you go 
forward and fight for economic and social justice for us. And 
it’s something that the people of Athabasca have certainly 
bestowed upon me as my duty, and I intend to work very hard 
to accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listened to several members from across the 
way speak about some of the issues that they face when it 
comes to the Speech from the Throne and how they have 
glossied over some of the issues that they don’t want to talk 
about, I want to take the opportunity to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all I took a special interest at what the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest had to say. And again, the people of the 
northwest part of Saskatoon are probably very decent people, 
very good people. But what I want to point out is that the 
statement that I was quite struck by, Mr. Speaker, was in 
Hansard, and I quote, “ . . . the reason why I came to this 
province — to correct what is wrong with this province . . .” 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member to look around him, look 
around him, and look at the people that he’s sitting with and see 
what they have done for the past number of years. Absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, but have become a problem for us to 
make sure that we drove the agenda forward. It was that party, 
Mr. Speaker, that that individual sits amongst, that supported, 
Mr. Speaker, a $50 million cut to social services, Mr. Speaker. 
Remember that. He seems to forget that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, every time we had opportunity to help the 
poor people, to do something specific for the underprivileged 
people, they voted against every budget, Mr. Speaker. Every bit 
of money that we spent to help the poor people, they voted 
against. So as that individual preaches from his chair I say to 
him, look around him and look at the people around him, and 
then he can appreciate the battle that we had to undertake to 
make sure that the people that live in this Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I call the Assembly to order. I call the 
members to order and allow the member from Athabasca to 
have his say. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that’s really 
important to point out; to allow the member from Athabasca to 
respond to the charges made from that party and in particular 
that member from Saskatoon Northwest. I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that party that he sits amongst did propose a $50 
million cut to social services not more than two or three years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. Shame. And he’s sitting there and 
pontificating about how the NDP have forgotten the people in 
poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say this, let me say this. There are certain 
parts of our province — northern Saskatchewan and the inner 
cities — that have struggled throughout the years, Mr. Speaker. 
No question about that. They have struggled throughout the 
years. And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue working 
with them. And the problem is when you have people that come 
along and judge these people and judge these regions, I say to 
him, you, sir, have no right to judge anybody or any region . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I want to remind 
members that they’re not to bring other members into the 
debate. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I say to that 
individual and that party, you have no right, you have no right 
to judge any region or any person, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve 
listened to that individual heap abuse the few days that he’s 
been here. And I say to him that that is enough, sir — that is 
enough. Because this party, this party took the effort, Mr. 
Speaker, under a mountain of debt, under a mountain of debt. 
When we assumed government in 1991 I was not here but many 
people that are sitting in these chairs were, and many others 
have gone on. We have worked hard under a mountain of debt, 
Mr. Speaker, to help those in poverty. So as he pontificates and 
preaches and scolds people, I say to him, enough, because he 
wasn’t even here when the battles were fought on this floor and 
in the inner cities and with the labour movements and the 
different people that were trying to help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

[11:15] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And then he comes along and he says, oh, 
“. . . the reason why I came to this province — to correct what 
is wrong with this province . . .” 
 
How about all the other groups, all the anti-poverty groups that 
worked for many, many years, Mr. Speaker? All the groups out 
there that have lobbied and have fought for some of the gains 
that they got, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t acknowledge them. It’s 
all about me, and it’s all about this new government. That’s an 
old government wearing new clothes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will say one thing. I will say this: actions speak better 
than words. And what did we do, Mr. Speaker, as a 
government? We increased minimum wage — how many 
times? They fought against that, Mr. Speaker. We moved to 
protect vulnerable workers. They fought against that. We 
supported rental subsidies to help with rents. They fought 
against that, Mr. Speaker. Day care subsidies, we put them in 
place. They fought against it, Mr. Speaker. The $15 bus pass, 
the good food box — every bit helps. They fought against that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had the community schools concept, built and developed, 
Mr. Speaker. They fought against that. We are going to make 
sure that we embrace the First Nations and Métis people and 
making sure we have solutions driven by them to help our 
people, these Saskatchewan people. They fought against that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made sure that we guaranteed the lowest costs for power, 
for telephone, for insurance. And that helps the poor people, 
Mr. Speaker, those that live in poverty. They fought against 
that. They’re going to scrap that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also embraced the new role of the food banks 
in which we said it is not about giving away free food. This is 
also about tuition, about daycare, and offering other supports, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important that that individual looks around him and 
sees the people that have fought against some of the progress 
and some of the programs that we put in place, Mr. Speaker; 
that we put in place despite the mountain of debt that we had at 
this time, Mr. Speaker. So don’t come along, don’t come along 
and tell us you’re going to do all these great things because 
there’s been many groups before them and many groups after 
them that have done a great amount of things and have done a 
lot more than they preach about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think what’s also very 
important that people should point out — and I’m going to 
point it out as well — these guys are sitting along thinking, oh, 
look at this great oil and gas sector we’ve got going. The 
Saskatchewan Roughriders won the Grey Cup. They’ve never 
won under the NDP government. Well, Mr. Speaker, that was a 
couple weeks ago. The Saskatchewan Party like to take credit 
for absolutely everything. They didn’t see the tough years that 
the Roughriders had to rebuild. They didn’t see all the 
challenges they had to go through, and then they win the Grey 

Cup, oh, because we’re in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this party took over governing from that 
party in 1991, we started under a mountain of debt, Mr. 
Speaker, a mountain of debt — fifteen and a half billion dollars. 
And what could any party or any government do fifteen and a 
half billion dollars in the hole? We could not do very much, Mr. 
Speaker. We had to rebuild. We had to say no so many times 
that it hurt, Mr. Speaker. But we rebuilt. We rebuilt and we 
worked very hard. So when I hear some of those members 
preach and go after certain colleagues of mine, I will point out 
to them one thing, is that it was the NDP and the people of 
Saskatchewan that rebuilt this province from the wreck left by 
those guys across the way. That’s what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And I’m going to point out as well, I’m 
going to point out to that member from Saskatoon Northwest 
that espouses the great virtue that he brings to this province: 
first of all your party, sir, inherited almost $2 billion from this 
government and the people of Saskatchewan. Not fifteen and a 
half billion dollars in debt — 2 billion in the black, Mr. 
Speaker. You have had the debt slashed. The economy is 
banging on all cylinders, Mr. Speaker. There’s many, many 
people working, and you have record oil and gas revenues, Mr. 
Speaker, and all the resources, all the resources that are 
certainly putting record money into the provincial coffers. 
 
And I will state to them today, I will state to them today that it 
was not the poor people that put this province $15 billion into 
debt, Mr. Speaker, in the ’80s. And it’s not going to be the poor 
people that are going to get money from this mountain of cash 
that these guys inherited from this government and the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So as you pontificate from this 
mountain of money, this mountain of money, I want to say to 
you the poor people will not get any of that money. The 
disability community will not get any of that money. The North, 
the cities, the towns, and the East and the West and the South 
will not get that money, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to make sure 
where that money goes is where it’s needed. And they can 
preach all they want, but guess what? Actions speak better than 
words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the disabled people need more 
money. The nurses need more money. Farmers need more 
money. The poor people need more money. Educators need 
more money. The poor people need more money. The cities 
need more money. Workers need more money. The poor people 
need more money. Highways need more money. Mr. Speaker, 
health needs more money. Poor people need more money. 
Students need more money. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 
demand out there. There’s a lot of need, a lot of choices. 
 
And I predict today that despite the pontification from that 
mountain of cash that that member and that party sits on, which 
the people of Saskatchewan alongside the NDP have put in 
place for them, that the poor people will be the last group to get 
any money off this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to him, shame. Shame. As you get up and you expose 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

all your values, shame on you for trying to use the poor people 
for political purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was born from a Cree mother as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I lost 
my mother when I was five years old. And we worked very 
hard to rebuild our family. So absolutely everybody has 
challenges coming to this job or living in this world. It does not 
mean you come along and you preach down at the people. It 
means you respect people. Because if you’re going to preach 
down to them and scold them, that’s not respect. That is not 
respect. And if you’re doing it and disregard all the groups and 
all the organizations, all the organizations that worked hard for 
years, that’s disrespect, Mr. Speaker. That is disrespect. 
 
And I point out today that we will not — we’ll not — we will 
not turn ourselves into that type of politician because it sounds 
good on TV. Actions speak better than words. Actions speak 
better and louder than words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the worse thing that . . . I sit back here and I listen. He 
talks about what the NDP have morphed into. What I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, is one thing, is they have morphed into a party that 
pretends to care, Mr. Speaker. They have morphed to a party 
that pretends to care and that is the worst thing that the people 
of Saskatchewan could ever, ever hope for, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the worst thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, I go back to the quote, “. . . the reason why 
I came to this province — to correct what is wrong with this 
province . . .” Mr. Speaker, that is absolute silly . . . a absolute 
silly statement, Mr. Speaker. All these people, all of these 
people that worked very hard over the years. Over the years 
they worked hard to rebuild. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? 
All that is for naught because the great saviour’s here now. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing is that people 
need to realize actions speak better than words. So from atop 
your mountain of money, let’s see what you guys can do. And I 
encourage the member from the Northwest to take a count over 
there. There’s 38 members on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And there’s 20 over here, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s 20 over here. And, Mr. Speaker, that makes that 
member of Saskatoon Northwest, who’s out preaching, that 
makes him government. The responsibility is theirs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Your guys are the government. This is an update for you. You 
guys are government. So why don’t you stop blaming the NDP. 
Why don’t you stop talking about the NDP and let’s see what 
you can do. Let’s see what you can do. Let’s see what they can 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — You know in the past few weeks, Mr. 
Speaker, I will point out, I will point out that we’ve lost some 
great people on this side — talented people like Eric Cline, like 
Eldon Lautermilch, Andrew Thomson, and Clay Serby. Mr. 
Speaker, they chose not to participate in this last election for a 
variety of reasons. But they’re great and intelligent people. We 

lost some very good people as well, Mr. Speaker. People like 
Maynard Sonntag, like Glenn Hagel, and Chad Nilson, and 
Mark Wartman. 
 
But let me say this to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 
people out there that yes, we have lost. And our leader — and 
he’ll always be my premier — has told us we’re going to 
embrace the new role that the people of Saskatchewan have 
given to us. And I accept that role and we all accept that role. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we talk about being gracious 
losers and making sure that we continue fighting forward for 
the people of Saskatchewan, and we intend to do that. 
 
And what I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan and that 
opposition, we’re not going to try and convince you guys. You 
guys are gone forever in our books. We’re not even going to 
listen to you guys on that side of the House. We’re going to talk 
to the people on the streets. We’re going to talk to them in the 
farmyards. We’re going to talk to them in northern 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to talk to them in the cities. We’re 
going to talk to them in the community centres, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to tell them what is wrong with the Saskatchewan 
Party and we’re going to tell them that we have not lost hope. 
 
We have faith, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all . . . All that is going 
to stop us from governing again and all that stopped us this last 
time was 6,000 votes in 10 seats. Had we got those 6,000 votes, 
Mr. Speaker, we would have been government today. So 6,000 
votes, Mr. Speaker, 6,000 votes is all that’s separating the NDP 
from the Saskatchewan Party from forming government. Do 
your math. That’s all that stopped us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I tell the people of Saskatchewan, all of our supporters and 
those that have . . . certainly trying to find their way. Don’t lose 
faith, because we’re here to fight. We’re here to fight and we’re 
not going to be preached to, we’re not going to be scolded, 
we’re not going to listen to the pontification. And everything 
that has been happening so well in Saskatchewan, all the great 
things that happened so well in Saskatchewan is because of this 
leader and this party and the people of Saskatchewan, not over 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, again . . . Again, Mr. 
Speaker, again I’ll point out which party won a national award 
to fight against child poverty. It was the New Democrats under 
our former Premier Roy Romanow. He gave us this province 
back from the debt created by that party opposite. So as that 
individual from Saskatoon Northwest pontificates and says 
we’re going to save you all, look around. Look around. Look 
around you and be very careful. 
 
And I predict one thing, Mr. Speaker, D-Day for these guys is 
election day and we’re going to see, we’re going to see if 
they’ve done anything innovative, anything exciting, and any 
kind of commitment to the poor people, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to see what the Aboriginal and the Métis and the First 
Nations people have under this . . . [inaudible] . . . The devil’s 
in the details. Let’s see what they do, Mr. Speaker. And I 
predict today the first thing these guys are going to do, they’re 
going to continue blaming us. They’re going to continue 
blaming us. No, no, you’re the government. You want to be 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

government. You accept the responsibility for your decisions 
and that will be your future doom, Mr. Speaker. They refuse to 
do that. 
 
So again I will point out we’re going to stand here; we’re going 
to fight. We’ve got 47 months to go, 47 months and counting, 
and there’s 6,000 votes that’s separating us from government 
from that party opposite, Mr. Speaker. And they can preach all 
they want. They can preach all they want but they ain’t going to 
convince many organizations in this province. And I predict 
that their so-called honeymoon, their so-called honeymoon, it 
ain’t going to last a long time, Mr. Speaker. It ain’t going to last 
a long time. Why? Because they ripped up the Domtar deal. 
They said no to the people of P.A. That’s gone. 
 
They are now putting essential services legislation, taking away 
our right to strike from many workers, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
know what their Enterprise Saskatchewan is going to be about. 
They don’t have a clue what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re firing people left and right and the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to say, well we experimented with you, 
but enough of that. Mr. Speaker, my final word — 47 months 
and counting, we’re coming back. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you first of all 
for taking that job. I don’t know if you realized that you were 
going to be yelled at by the member from Athabasca for the last 
25 minutes. And it is interesting that it was 25 minutes, and if 
that’s the time allotment we have, I’ll be glad to use my 25 
minutes as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, he said many, many 
times that actions speak louder than words. And before he . . . 
as he’s still in the room I would like him to maybe go up into 
the gallery and look down and see that there are 38 seats . . . 37 
seats on this side and 20 seats on that side. Actions have spoke 
louder than words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The people of the province spoke 
loud and clear on November 7. But unfortunately from the way 
we’ve been seeing the debate in the House over the last three or 
four days, there are a few members on that side of the House 
that are having an extremely hard time accepting what the 
people have told them. The people have told them that they 
weren’t happy with their record for the last four years or the last 
eight years. 
 
You know, it was interesting that the member was saying that if 
we only would have had 6,000 more votes. If we only would 

have had 6,000 more votes. But he wouldn’t answer the 
question of what happened in 1999 when the Saskatchewan 
Party garnered more votes than they did, and they still hung on 
by buying a few Liberals over, hung on to power for four more 
years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . And I don’t think they’d 
want to be saying too much about the 2003 election where they 
just squeaked through as well. But finally the people of 
Saskatchewan had had enough. They spoke. Their actions of 37 
seats in the Sask Party side speak far louder than any words that 
we just heard from that member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I have 
a number of thank yous and congratulations to go through and 
then I look forward to getting into more of the debate on the 
Speech from the Throne. But first of all as I said I want to thank 
you. You fit the role the very, very well. 
 
I can say that when I was first elected in 1999, I was always 
amazed at . . . We’re kind of learning the system and we were 
going through legislation, and there was one person that always 
stood up after the second reading of a Bill, and it could have 
been a Bill on almost anything and that person from Moosomin, 
that member from Moosomin would always stand up. He was 
the designate and always made sense. I don’t know how he 
knew so much about every piece of legislation the government 
was putting forward but he did a great job. And I’m certainly 
glad to see him in the seat of Speaker and I know he’ll do an 
absolutely wonderful job over the next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next four years and longer, if he so 
chooses. I also want to congratulate the newly elected members. 
I met three of the members from the opposition side last night 
and have been impressed with their early entrance into the fray, 
asking questions on the second day. But I also want to thank 
and welcome and congratulate the numerous, numerous 
members on this side of the House that won from all over the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — You know it was really gratifying on 
election night. For the longest time a lot of people looked at us 
as a rural party, but we won seats in Moose Jaw. We won seats 
in Prince Albert. We won seats in Regina — three of them. We 
won Meadow Lake. It took a little bit longer than that night, but 
we won Meadow Lake. We won a number in Saskatoon. And I 
want to congratulate the members from all of those 
constituencies. 
 
But I also want to congratulate the two or the three members 
that were elected in 2003 in Saskatoon that started the 
beachhead for the party. Two of them are here now, but all three 
did great work. The two members that are here now did an 
absolutely wonderful job, and the results showed in Saskatoon. 
The results have shown in Regina, Moose Jaw, and various 
communities around the province. So the Saskatchewan Party 
truly is a provincial party that represents all of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I also want to . . . I’m going to term it 
a little bit different than what I heard yesterday from the 
opposition, when somebody said they wanted to congratulate 
the old members that were elected. And I didn’t know if that 
meant re-elected or just old members that were elected. But I 
would like to congratulate all the members that were re-elected. 
For many of us on this side it will be our third term. For some 
others it’s been a lot longer than that. But I do want to 
congratulate all the members for their re-election, and in 
particularly the members on this side. I don’t believe there was 
one incumbent that went down in votes. Every incumbent 
significantly increased their votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — And I think that speaks volumes 
about the work that they have done over the last four years in 
their constituencies. So . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twelve. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Or twelve years or however long 
they’ve been here, some as long as, I guess, five terms. So 
congratulations to them. 
 
The other thing I want to congratulate and recognize are the 
leaders. And I will say to the Leader of the Opposition now, the 
former premier, I want to thank him for the service. I don’t 
know how much longer he’s going to be in this House. By the 
volume of that last speech there could be leadership charges 
starting already, mounting already. But I do want to 
congratulate the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
You know, I can tell you that for as long as I’ve been in this 
House — its dating back to 1999 when then Premier Roy 
Romanow was in the Chair — I know the sacrifices that leaders 
have to make. I mean, I think I know what the sacrifices are. 
 
I remember sitting very closely with our then leader, Elwin 
Hermanson, and realizing the hours and the time that he put in, 
the sacrifices that he put in, the tough decisions he had to make, 
and it was just absolutely amazing. And I don’t know if any of 
us that are elected members realize the commitment that a 
leader has to put forward. 
 
I want to congratulate the former premier for that, because I 
know it hasn’t been easy. The last four years haven’t been easy. 
People expected a change in government and that isn’t easy 
leading through that period. And so I’ll congratulate him for 
that. I certainly didn’t agree with a lot of things that he said, or 
some of the mechanisms that they used, such as advertising 
before the last election — government advertising. I don’t agree 
with a lot of things that that former premier did, but I will 
recognize the commitment and the contribution that he made to 
the province. And I’m not sure that I’ll be able to say the same 
after the next Throne Speech because I’m quite sure that it’ll be 
a different person sitting in that chair a year from now. 
 
I also want to thank our Premier, the member from Swift 
Current, for the great work that he’s done over the last eight 
years, but in particularly the last three years as leader of our 

party. I’ve never felt prouder going into an election and more 
confident going into an election as I did this 2003 election . . . 
2007 election, under the leadership of — I was going to say his 
name, Mr. Speaker, but I have been heard enough times in this 
House in the last few days; I’d better not say his name — the 
member from Swift Current, the now Premier. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — And I think I also want to thank him 
. . . I think I want to thank him for entrusting in me the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Health. It is a huge 
responsibility, but I look forward to — and not to coin a phrase 
that I heard far too often from a former minister of Health — 
but I do look forward to the challenges that I will be seeing in 
the future. 
 
I also want to talk a little bit about the campaign team that 
helped me get to this seat. And, you know, I think all of us . . . 
the one thing that I learned really early in politics and was 
amazed at, when I first ran in 1999, is that you sure don’t do it 
by yourself. For most of us, and whether it’s a police officer or 
whether it’s working at the university, you chose to get into 
those professions on your own. You did the work. And from my 
perspective, I farmed. I mean what I did on my farm would 
produce the results — if it was not enough work or whatever — 
but it was my own self that was controlling my destiny. 
 
But when you put your name on a ballot for the first time in a 
nomination, you don’t realize how much help and how many 
people have to get behind you to make it successful. I’ve been 
very fortunate over the last three elections to have a great 
campaign team, and this year was certainly no different. I want 
to thank my campaign, and I’m going to name . . . I think I have 
them all here. I’m pretty sure I do, but I want to thank my 
campaign manager, Donna Strudwick, who is from Balgonie, 
who just recently retired from an administrative position with 
the RM of Edenwold, and she just did an absolutely wonderful 
job, excellent job. Very organized and always upbeat, and it 
was a pleasure to have her as my campaign manager. 
 
Dwaine Entner, my business manager, who was there three 
years ago, and I was surprised that he actually came back and 
took on the role the second time. But I want to thank him very 
much — also from Balgonie. Jim Williams — that looked after 
our signs — from Fort Qu’Appelle, did an absolutely excellent 
job. I was amazed at how, when I travelled out of my 
constituency into other constituencies, how well our party was 
organized as far as getting the signs up early. 
 
I was amazed though at a government at that time — the NDP 
party who had been in government — how it took literally 
weeks, three weeks, sometimes two weeks before any signs 
went up. And I found that was absolutely amazing. Well I guess 
you can’t get signs up when you don’t have a name on the 
ballots. So a candidate was, I guess, their first task. But yes, I 
guess I was amazed. 
 
And so anyway back to my campaign team, before I go off on 
that tangent too long, is that I wanted to thank Jim Williams. 
Ron Saal who did a great job in fundraising . . . certainly it’s 
always again a little humbling when you see the money roll in 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

to go behind your name to get you elected. It’s just . . . it’s 
simply, simply humbling. 
 
Don Schmeling was our IT [information technology] guy that 
looked after all the voter identification and did a great job 
keeping that straight; Bill Missal who looked after election day 
for me. Jamie Gibson who did our communications, and that 
name will be very familiar to the Speaker. He did a great job in 
communications in our campaign. And last but not least Vonni 
Widdis who looked after my office during the campaign, she 
has been my constituency assistant for the last eight years and 
looked after our campaign office. 
 
And you know we saw our votes, as I said earlier, we saw all of 
our votes increase significantly. In 1999 I think I ended up with 
about 3,850 votes. In 2003 I just snuck over the 4,000 mark to 
about 4,100; and this election, I believe, we’re well over 5,000, 
about 5,500 votes. But it was absolutely amazing at 65 per cent 
of the vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — And I would like to say that, yes, 
thank you very much. But I think what you have to do is when 
you look at or talk to any of our campaign team or especially 
my constituency assistant, who is the first contact into our 
constituency, most of the credit would have to go to them 
because they have done an absolutely wonderful job. 
 
In our constituency it was amazing, again humbling, because 
there was always pockets. I’m from the southern part of the 
constituency. I grew up around Milestone and Lang area, and I 
lived in the small town of Lewvan, which nobody lives in that 
town any more. So the northern part was always kind of a 
struggle. Fort Qu’Appelle and Indian Head, now Balgonie, was 
always . . . maybe leaned a little bit more to the NDP. But I was 
gratified when I saw the results after that night that we won 
every poll but three. Forty-six out of 49 polls we won. So it is 
. . . not that I ever felt uncomfortable going to those 
communities, but it sure is gratifying when you go to those 
communities and you know that the majority of the people 
supported the Saskatchewan Party. So that was very nice. 
 
I guess I’m 10 minutes in, so I’ve got another 25 or . . . 
[inaudible] . . . yes, something like that. I do want to talk about 
the Speech from the Throne which really mirrored the election 
campaign and the platform that we put in front of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The platform that we put in front of the people 
of Saskatchewan garnered 52 per cent of the vote. Fifty-two per 
cent of the vote is a very rare number, Mr. Speaker. To have 
that many . . . In fact I’m not a historian and maybe some of the 
members on this side are. The NDP are the so-called governing 
party of this province. How many times has the NDP received 
52 per cent of the vote? 
 
Well my colleague who has been around for longer than I have 
says five times that they received over 50 per cent of the . . . It’s 
that many times? Since 1944. That’s a higher number than I 
thought. Because I know the last number of years they had 
received . . . well the last election a majority and the election 
before a minority, and well under, well under 50 per cent — 
probably around the 38, 39, 40 per cent range. This time they 
were down to 35 per cent. As a lot of people say, a lot of the 

political pundits will say they’ve hit their core bottom. 
Thirty-five per cent is where they can expect to be; that’s their 
core support. And I think they’ll be at that 35 per cent for a 
very, very long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because I think, you know, listening to the last speaker and him 
railing on, he obviously didn’t get it. I don’t think he got it. And 
when I received questions from the now Health critic, I’m not 
so sure she got it either. She was asking questions. The first 
questions that came from that opposition is about one 
individual, the deputy minister, the acting deputy minister of 
Health. You know the election wasn’t fought on who the deputy 
ministers are in this government or in their government. The 
election was fought on who was on the floor of our health care 
facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — And they didn’t get it. And they 
haven’t got it. And I’m not sure they’ll get it in the next four 
years because it doesn’t necessarily . . . I’m not saying it 
doesn’t matter. It matters greatly who’s in the deputy chairs. 
But what is more important is, is that there’s enough RN nurses, 
registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, nurse practitioners, 
specialists to give the care that people of Saskatchewan wanted, 
Mr. Speaker. And this government has failed . . . that 
government, that opposition failed to do it over the last 16 
years. 
 
For as long as I have been in this House, the opposition then — 
now the government — has raised the issue around human 
resources. The former Health critic from Melfort started the 
charge back in ’99, saying the most important issue facing 
health care today — and that was 8 years ago — is human 
resources. And he carried that message for five years. And I 
continued on with that message. 
 
And it resonates with the people of Saskatchewan because 
under the NDP government, they put us in a position to have the 
longest waiting lists in Canada. They put us in a position where, 
quite frankly, at times our health care system is fragile because 
they didn’t address the most important issue. They didn’t 
address the most issue, and that’s nurses and doctors on the 
floor, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . In the early 
’90s . . . that’s right; they sure did fire a bunch. In the early 
’90s, this government had the nerve to close 52 hospitals and 
lay off hundreds and hundreds of nurses. 
 
At that time, not only did they do that, they decided they were 
going to reduce the number of training seats so that we only had 
— at one point through the mid-’90s — 115 nurses graduating 
while the retirement rate of nurses are around 3 to 400 a year. 
And they thought they were going to fill it . . . first of all, after 
letting a number of nurses go who went to other provinces but 
reducing the number of training seats down to 115. 
 
We have a nurse shortage crisis right now in Saskatchewan, and 
it’s because of one reason. It’s because of 16 years of NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
plan which was laid out during the election — during those 28 
days — I have here in front of me. And I just want to reiterate 
so many of those points because it’s really our action plan. 
 
The Speech from the Throne talked about it, but I’m going to go 
maybe further into depth as to what the Speech from the Throne 
had to say. I’m going to talk about our plan for health care. 
 
And, you know, I certainly heard one comment about the 
patient-first review, and I found that curious as well. You know, 
they went through — when they were in government — they 
had Ken Fyke do a review of the system, and that was perfectly 
fine. But we say that we’re going to do a patient-first review 
and to them you’d swear that the sky was falling. 
 
You know, it’s a three point billion dollar industry, and that’s 
only the public side of health care. It’s said that at least 40 per 
cent of the total health care spending is private, so 3.4 billion 
which is the public side of health care and they’re saying it 
shouldn’t be looked at. It shouldn’t be reviewed. We shouldn’t 
see that all the money is going to where it was initially 
intended. Mr. Speaker, I find that amazing. 
 
And I know that they’re really into trying to scare people and 
create fear. They’ve done it over the last, I don’t know, however 
many years, for as long as I’ve been in here. In fact every 
election they would always bring out, they dust off the old 
mediscare campaign — the old mediscare platform because 
that’s what’s going to allow them to be elected. Well I am very, 
very proud to say that in 2007 the people of Saskatchewan 
didn’t buy mediscare . They bought better health care here in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — That’s what they voted for. And they 
voted for better health care in Saskatchewan. And better health 
care in Saskatchewan comes by recruiting, retaining, and 
training more nurses; by training more doctors and retaining 
them; by dealing with the number of issues that health care 
professionals face. We set a target for a goal, and now they’re 
trying to play with that — is it a target, is it a goal? 
 
But it’s interesting that they would play with the term — is it a 
target or is it a goal? — when that government for years were 
asked how many nurses do we need. And what did the then 
Health minister, the member from North Battleford, say? He 
said, wow man, I’d hate to set a target because we probably 
won’t need it. Isn’t that amazing? I don’t want to set a target 
because I probably won’t need it. Like, I don’t know if he ever 
played a game of football that they didn’t want to put an end 
zone there because he wouldn’t get there. I don’t understand 
that train of thought. You don’t want to set a target because you 
may not get there. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Party, under the leadership of our 
Premier, are not afraid of targets. We’re not afraid of being 
measured against our record. We’re setting a target of 800 
nurses, new nurses. Six hundred to fill the vacancies and 200 
more to increase the complement so that we’re not relying on 
overtime, so we’re not burning out our most precious resource. 
We’re going to ensure that we have 800. 

But more than that, when I talk about having 800 more nurses 
on the floor, let’s look to the flip side. Let’s look at if that 
doesn’t happen, what the health care system will look like in 
four years if we do not accomplish our goal or our target or 
whatever you want to call it, but if we do not accomplish it. I 
don’t think the health care system can survive. 
 
We have seen the workers’ compensation rate of back injury 
from people working on the floor almost double over the last 
number of years because of the demands that are being put on 
them. There just simply isn’t enough staff. We’re seeing nurses 
that are working overtime that eventually get so burnt-out that 
they say I’ve had enough of it; I’m quitting. I’m able to retire. 
I’m eligible to retire, and I am retiring. We need those nurses to 
stay and work, but they’ll only stay and work if there’s a proper 
complement of nurses on the floor. 
 
If they’re not getting . . . You know, I know of households that 
have a nurse living in that household that will be away for five 
days, seven days. They’re away for seven days — five working 
days and a weekend — and when they came home there was 17 
phone calls. Three of them were for the husband. Fourteen of 
them were for the nurse to come to work. In five working days, 
there were 14 calls to come to work. That’s how desperate they 
are to get people to the floor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, for years, for years we pounded on that NDP 
government to recognize it and do something about it, and they 
didn’t. They sat on their hands. And what we hear today is 
they’re more interested in attacking a temporary deputy 
minister than dealing with the real issues of recruitment and 
retention. Shameful, that’s absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So our goal and our target is 800 more nurses. And they’ve 
asked, how are we going to get there? We’re going to get there 
by working with the professionals. We’re going to get there by 
working with SUN — something that government could not do. 
We’re going to get there working with SALPN. We’re going to 
get there working with the SRNA. We’re going to get there by 
having a team approach, not unlike what they did in Manitoba. 
 
Manitoba is not facing near the shortage as what we are because 
their government and their unions and professional 
organizations have worked together, step-in-step, to address the 
problem. You only address a problem if you have the nerve to 
realize that you have a problem, and that’s why this government 
never did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting and I’m really going to enjoy, well, the four days 
next week, but the session going forward, with the critic, the 
Health critic who was a member, who is a registered nurse 
herself and was a member of SUN, was the president of SUN, 
and seeing how she is going to square the argument about 
asking questions — Are you going to get more nurses? When 
are you going to get more nurses? — when they never 
addressed the issue. 
 
And you know how offside she was or out of step she was with 
her own organization. SUN has led the charge, quite frankly, 
about the proper complement of nurses. And they have said 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

over and over again that they just couldn’t get through to the 
old government. They just wouldn’t listen. For years and years 
they tried to get through and the government wouldn’t listen. 
Well there’s a former Health minister in the chair right now. 
They just simply wouldn’t listen to the . . . not demands, the 
pleas, quite frankly, of putting a proper complement of staff on 
the floor. And they wouldn’t listen to those calls. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and the rest of the 
province, as well as the health organizations, we are here to 
listen and we are here to work with you to make sure that that 
never happens again because quite frankly . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Our health care system is too 
valuable. 
 
You know they wanted to, during the election, talk an awful lot 
about oh, you’re going to privatize this, you’re going to 
privatize that. No, we’re not. No, we’re not. What we’re going 
to do is make sure that the proper complement of nurses and 
doctors are on the floor so people don’t have to look outside our 
province to get health care. They look inside our province to get 
health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about 
increasing the number of training seats, both in nursing . . . 
We’ve also talked about increasing the number of training seats 
as far as the College of Medicine is concerned. It’s an absolute 
must. Do you realize for the last number of years we have had 
60 training seats in the College of Medicine? It is the smallest 
college of medicine in Canada. 
 
I guess it maybe fits along with the former premier’s 
description of our province as a wee province. We’re going to 
have a wee college of medicine. And that’s unacceptable, 
because our province deserves better than that. 
 
And we are going to move towards increasing the number of 
training seats for doctors to 100, because it’s not fair enough, 
it’s not fair to go and poach doctors from South Africa, a Third 
World country. 
 
We have got the highest reliance of foreign trained grads of any 
province in Saskatchewan. Until we take seriously our 
responsibility and start looking at a homegrown solution, by 
training our own students and who will stay easier to retain and 
work in the province, will we start addressing the real problem. 
We need to increase the number of training seats, and under a 
Saskatchewan Party government that’s what’s going to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, there are many more 
aspects of our health care policy that I look forward to 
discussing and debating in this House as they come forward. I 
look forward to many more questions. I was answering 
questions from the now critic from the opposition. She was 
saying, don’t worry, you’re going to have more questions. We 
look forward to it because we have a solution. We have a plan 

that goes forward. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan . . . It was interesting — in a 
polling that was done just before the general election where 
they talked about showing and the Saskatchewan Party at 
50-some per cent and the NDP certainly nowhere close to that, 
but they also talked about health care. They talked about health 
care, and I think for the first time — as long as I can remember 
seeing the polls — that we, the Saskatchewan Party, were at 45 
per cent and so was the NDP. It was the first time that I can 
remember that. It used to be the sacred cow for the NDP. It was 
their baby. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you now, and I’m 
going to tell you into the future, it is no longer your baby. It’s 
our baby. We’re going to be dealing with the system. We’re 
going to be improving the system, because people in 
Saskatchewan voted for better health care, not mediscare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to stand 
in the House and be supporting the Speech from the Throne. I 
will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To start 
off with, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that it’s my pleasure to 
speak for the first time from the government side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s taken some few years to reach 
this point, but I think the training ground on the opposition 
bench has been well worth while. And I hope that the members 
opposite in the former government and the new members get an 
equal opportunity for training that I had, Mr. Speaker, and that 
for those that find it a little more difficult, that they get an even 
longer time period of training than I did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate 
you on your position as Speaker. You come from the 
neighbouring constituency to me, and I have known you for a 
good many years, Mr. Speaker. And I have always known you 
to be very fair. In fact is, if I had any concerns it’s that you 
might be too fair because I am somewhat of a partisan person, 
Mr. Speaker, and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m obviously 
not doing my job well enough because the members opposite 
are not agreeing with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
But I know that you will be exceedingly fair in your role as 
Speaker and that you will be doing your utmost to ensure that 
the tenor of the House is maintained in a proper manner 
befitting the Saskatchewan legislature, which is known to be 
rather raucous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to take the opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Arm River-Watrous. They keep changing these names and 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

making them longer. I would prefer they make them shorter, 
Mr. Speaker, because I’m starting to get grey hair and the long 
names become more difficult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the member from Last 
Mountain-Watrous . . . no, Arm River-Watrous, is looking 
forward to this role and I know that his rulings, Mr. Speaker, 
when he gets the opportunity to be in the Chair and make a 
ruling, will be very interesting rulings, Mr. Speaker, and I look 
forward to those. 
 
I’ve mentioned the new members in the House on the 
opposition side. I would like to welcome all of the new 
members and congratulate them on their election to this 
legislature. This is a very unique body that we are all a part of. 
We reflect the democratic process going back to Magna Carta in 
Great Britain, and it’s amazing how it’s . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I was almost there; I have spoke to those that 
were. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing how we have all branched out across 
the Commonwealth and chosen slightly different roles and 
procedures in each and every House. And I’m glad to see that 
our procedures in this Assembly are evolving over time and that 
we have new rules coming in again for this session. 
 
It’s probably not proper for any Assembly or any House to 
remain stagnant and tied hidebound to the past. If that was the 
case, then governments would never change. And obviously the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that there was a need for a 
change of government and so that happened. And we also see 
the opportunity as well for changes within the operations of this 
Assembly. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my colleagues, the new cabinet of the 
new government, Mr. Speaker. I know that they are looking 
forward to the challenge that they all will face. It’s a steep 
learning curve, especially for those members who are also new 
to the Assembly. They have certainly a struggle to not only 
learn their portfolios, but to learn the procedures of the House 
as well. So they will, I know. I have full confidence that they 
will be able to handle those roles very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to thank the Premier for his confidence in me in 
appointing me to his first cabinet as the Minister Responsible 
for Government Services, the Liquor Board, Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming, and ITO [Information Technology Office], 
which a lot of people don’t even know what ITO stands for. So 
I’ll let them have the opportunity to do their research, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Cannington constituency, Mr. Speaker, is in the very southeast 
corner of the province, and I would like to thank the people of 
that area, Mr. Speaker, for their confidence in me. The first time 
I ran, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, I received 45 per cent of the vote. 
And virtually every election since then, those numbers have 
increased to this past election, Mr. Speaker, to 78 per cent. And 
I would like to thank them for that overwhelming vote of 
confidence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as my colleague, the member from Indian Head-Milestone, 
was saying, that it takes a large group of supporters to help get 
you elected. And in every election, I have had two people that 

have done exceptional and beyond-the-call-of-duty work, and 
that’s Garnet and Jean Ball. They have been there from day one 
for me, Mr. Speaker, and have worked very hard in every 
election. Also, Mr. Speaker, Marcia, Bonnie, and Don were 
very instrumental in this election as well and I would like to 
thank them for their efforts. 
 
It seems — at least in my campaigns; I can’t speak for others — 
that if you want to get the job done, Mr. Speaker, you get a 
woman to do it, and that certainly works well in my 
constituency. So I would like to thank and congratulate the 
women who do get involved in politics, Mr. Speaker, and it 
would be nice, Mr. Speaker, if more of them would get 
involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with bated breath I guess perhaps, or 
astonishment, to the speech given by the member from 
Athabasca. I note though, Mr. Speaker, that in the election in 
1991 in which I first ran, the NDP numbers were . . . I believe it 
was 56 members were elected. And in every election since then, 
those numbers have decreased until in this last election they are 
down to 20 members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact is, in the campaign in Cannington, the NDP first 
sign that went up — which was I think in the second week of 
the campaign — was actually a sign from the previous election 
campaign. They were so disorganized that they didn’t even 
have their signs ready for the election, when the only person 
who knew when the election was actually being called was the 
premier, the leader of the NDP Party of the time, Mr. Speaker, 
and obviously he hadn’t communicated the message to the rest 
of his colleagues and across the province so that they could 
even be prepared, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Liberal Party in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, was 
non-existent. They had a candidate. They had no signs and to 
the best of my knowledge and everyone that I have talked to, 
the Liberal candidate was not even in the constituency once. 
And I note in the neighbouring . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And I only got 78 per cent. There are still those diehard Liberals 
that as long as they see the L, they have to put the check mark 
there. But, Mr. Speaker, those numbers are diminishing every 
election. I note that in the neighbouring constituency of 
Moosomin, the Moosomin World-Spectator even had a contest 
looking for who had spotted the Liberal candidate. And I don’t 
believe anybody won that competition, as the Liberal candidate 
was never visible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in listening to the member from Athabasca’s 
commentary, he wanted to move on and forget the past, and yet 
he started his speech out trying to relive the 1991 election. And 
I understand why the NDP Party wants to do that because in 
every election since 1991, their percentages of the vote have 
continuously declined. They want to fight the only election in 
the last 20 years that they’ve actually won. They want to refight 
that one every time. Mr. Speaker, while the NDP party may not 
have moved out of the last century, the people of Saskatchewan 
have, Mr. Speaker, and because of that they chose a new 
government in 2007 to move this province forward for the next 
century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Athabasca talked about this government is 
now responsible, and I understand that that is a new concept for 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

the NDP. For in the 16 years that they were government, they 
never accepted responsibility for anything, Mr. Speaker. 
Whenever they talked about responsibility, it was always Grant 
Devine’s responsibility, not the NDP for their decisions, Mr. 
Speaker. So this government, Mr. Speaker, is prepared to accept 
the responsibility of its decisions — unlike the previous 
administration, the NDP, that could never accept responsibility 
for themselves and their actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Talking about the new government, Mr. Speaker, this new 
government is about growth and opportunity, and I know the 
member for Moose Jaw Wakamow wants to know this. She is 
waiting with bated breath for the opportunity to gain some 
knowledge on how this government is going to proceed and the 
benefit that the people of Saskatchewan are going to accrue 
from this government, unlike the administration she was a part 
of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is going to be . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You see, Mr. Speaker, she mumbles from her 
seat, no, no, no, don’t go back to the past. And yet the whole 
time she was in government, it was all about Grant Devine and 
the 1980s. As I said earlier, they were incapable of accepting 
the responsibility of their own actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is about growth and opportunity. 
It’s about security and compassion in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it is about keeping your word. The promises 
that we made in the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, are those 
things that are going to happen within this province. 
 
And we have already seen that action start, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier, immediately after the election, announced the date of 
the next election as had been promised in the election 
campaign. Everybody in the province, including the members 
of the official opposition, knew that the election, the next 
election would be occurring on November 7, 2011. It’s no 
surprise to anyone. Unlike the previous premier, there would be 
no games playing as to when the election would be called, Mr. 
Speaker. The opposition NDP knows when that’ll be 
happening. The media knows when it’ll be happening. The 
people of Saskatchewan know when the next election will be, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is as the people of Saskatchewan wanted 
it to be, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they voted on November 7. 
 
As my colleague said previously, 52 per cent of the people 
chose the Saskatchewan Party. Less than 40 per cent — the fact 
is mid-30s — voted for the previous administration, decreasing 
their numbers by 50 per cent. Mr. Speaker, one of the issues 
that was raised in the Speech from the Throne was . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . 50 per cent — yes, 10 members of 
20 is 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “Securing the Future” was one of the titles of this 
Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, safe highways is a 
critical part of this government. Whenever I was going around 
knocking doors in my constituency, the number one issue that 
was raised on the doorstep was the condition and the unsafe 
condition of the highways of this province — the unsafe 
condition. 
 
In my particular constituency, in southeast Saskatchewan in 
general, there is a huge volume of traffic, Mr. Speaker, directly 

related to the oil industry — an oil industry that was in place 
prior to the previous administration, that continued to invest in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and will continue to invest in this 
province in the future understanding that they are a benefit to 
the entire economy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that comes with a price. That price in our 
area of the province has meant a severe toll on the highways — 
the highways and byways, the municipal roads of southeast 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The previous administration, their idea of highway maintenance 
and highway construction was to turn the highways back into 
gravel. They didn’t want to invest in rural Saskatchewan. They 
wanted to ignore rural Saskatchewan because politically they 
were not getting the support of rural people. So their attitude 
was, if you aren’t going to vote for us, we’re going to ignore 
you. And they certainly did their best, Mr. Speaker, to ignore 
southeast Saskatchewan — except, Mr. Speaker, when it came 
time to tax. There they knew where southeast Saskatchewan 
was, and they taxed heavily, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just take a look at the education property taxes, which are the 
highest in Canada, in Saskatchewan. This administration knew 
how to extract taxes, Mr. Speaker, but they did not recognize 
the cost to those communities, to those areas and those 
highways, those roads in the generation of those tax revenues? 
They completely ignored that. 
 
The consequence of which, Mr. Speaker, is the roads in 
southeast Saskatchewan are in terrible shape and need 
significant new revenues to renew them and to return them to a 
passable condition. 
 
I had a constituent call me this week with a concern about 
highways, that his windshield is cracked because he lives on a 
highway that is full of potholes. His daughter needs to go in and 
get her driver’s licence, but they can’t use their vehicle because 
the windshield is cracked, and there’s no point in fixing it 
because the highway is still covered in rocks, Mr. Speaker, and 
it would only be a matter of days after replacing a windshield it 
would be back to the condition it was in before. That’s the 
legacy left by the NDP government. 
 
That gentleman lives on a highway that has a significant 
amount of oil traffic on it, and yet the previous administration, 
the NDP of the day, refused to repair that road and to renew it. 
Mr. Speaker, I have full confidence that the current Minister of 
Highways recognizes that duty and will do his best to secure the 
necessary funding to deal with the highways in southeast 
Saskatchewan to return them to a usable condition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the promises, the campaign promises that 
this party put forward during the election campaign and will be 
moving forward on, is the tuition rebate for post-secondary 
education. I know that for many people that is a particular 
interest. And education costs are high especially if you’re 
coming from rural Saskatchewan and taking your 
post-secondary education in one of our major urban centres. 
Not only do you have the cost of the tuition fees, the books, but 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

now you also have to pay for additional accommodation costs. 
So those are significant costs to be borne either by the students 
themselves, if they’re in that position, or by the parents of that 
particular student. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you from personal experience, with three 
children presently in post-secondary education, that those costs 
can be extremely high. Therefore I think that the promise made 
by the Saskatchewan Party to provide up to a $20,000 rebate, 
tax rebate, to post-secondary students is one that will encourage 
students to remain in school, to take their classes in 
Saskatchewan, and to stay in Saskatchewan to help us build this 
economy. 
 
When you talk to people, one of the problems that we face in 
Saskatchewan is not that we don’t have enough youth, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not that we don’t have the seniors here. It’s that 
we don’t have the people in the middle between those two 
groups in those tax-paying years, Mr. Speaker, to help support 
the programs that we all desire such as education, such as health 
care, such as good highways to drive on. We need to grow this 
economy, Mr. Speaker, and this party is prepared to step 
forward and take the necessary measures to ensure that the 
economy in the province of Saskatchewan grows. 
 
Manitoba has managed to grow by 15 per cent over the last 10 
years, Mr. Speaker, and yet when I listened to the former 
government speak, said it was impossible to grow 
Saskatchewan. The one member said it’s statistically impossible 
for Saskatchewan to grow. Well I understand that under the 
NDP policies it was statistically impossible for the previous 
member from Regina Wascana Plains, who was the Deputy 
Speaker at the time, Mr. Speaker, I believe, that under the NDP 
policies it would be statistically impossible for that previous 
government to have grown the population of Saskatchewan. 
 
But under this new administration, Mr. Speaker, the province 
and the population of Saskatchewan will be growing, Mr. 
Speaker. People will be remaining in Saskatchewan to build 
their careers — not just have a job, Mr. Speaker, not just a job, 
but to build a career here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh they’re enthusiastic, Dan. They all 
want you to . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, they’re all listening carefully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has promised something 
innovative, innovative at least in the sense of the normal course 
of action by the Government of Saskatchewan when viewed in 
comparison to the previous 16 years worth of administration. 
This government, new government, Mr. Speaker, is going to 
fully fund the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program for agriculture, Mr. Speaker — 
something which the previous administration would never do. 
And fact is, I still get phone calls, Mr. Speaker. I got a phone 
call this week asking, asking that we meet the commitments 
made by that government in 2003 to fully fund the CAIS 
program. 
 
The previous administration had no concept of rural 

Saskatchewan, no concept of meeting your commitments, no 
concept of supporting the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why they’re sitting on that side of the aisle 
now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was like their balanced 
budget statements. They would set up one little fund and say, 
yes, that fund is balanced, while they’re paying debt, Mr. 
Speaker, to support that program. 
 
They set up in the CAIS program a fixed amount of money and 
said, yes, we have fully funded our fixed amount. When the 
needs of the CAIS program exceeded that, they demanded the 
federal government pay more in, but they refused to fund their 
share of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We always funded our share. 
 
Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — No, you didn’t; 2003, you did not 
fund your share. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We always funded our share. 
 
Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite are claiming they always funded their share. They 
would designate what their share was, prior to the needs of 
CAIS, and fund that commitment. They would not fund the 
needs of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, within the CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that the new Premier has asked 
me to deal with is Government Services, Mr. Speaker. And 
within that role, Mr. Speaker, Government Services provides 
vehicles to all of the government entities. One of the things that 
we promised in our election campaign, Mr. Speaker, was that 
the vehicles of the Government of Saskatchewan would be as 
green as possible, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we will be 
providing direction to the Government Services directorate, that 
ministry, Mr. Speaker, that the vehicles that we purchase, cars 
or light vehicles, be either hybrid or high, fuel efficiency 
vehicles. We will be doing our part, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
we meet our reductions in CO2 in the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working and supporting the 
government. I look forward to voting in favour of the Speech 
from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today and provide my reply to 
the Speech from the Throne. But first, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to pass along my congratulations, and I would like to join the 
members of the House to offer congratulations on your new role 
and your appointment as Speaker of the House. And I would 
agree with many of the comments that have been made by 
colleagues, that your experience will be a benefit to each and 
every one of us. 
 
I would also like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to thank 
the constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow for their support 
during the provincial election, and not only during the 
provincial election but throughout the years that I’ve had the 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

privilege of representing them. 
 
Moose Jaw Wakamow is a great constituency. It’s an urban area 
or has an urban section to it, with everything from brand new 
housing developments to more established neighbourhoods to 
heritage homes. We have a historic downtown and a revitalizing 
industrial sector. And of course I can’t make comments about 
Moose Jaw without mentioning our jewel of an urban park, the 
Wakamow Valley. Moose Jaw truly has it all. Our rural area of 
the constituency is home to cattle operations, feedlots, grain, 
mixed farming and, of course, just south of the city, 15 Wing, 
the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] flight training 
school and home of the Canadian Snowbirds. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what truly makes my job special is the people 
in Moose Jaw that I represent — innovative, dedicated, 
down-to-earth . It’s a community with a strong and vibrant 
sports sector, arts and culture sector. And we can talk about 
many of the names that you will see, authors, artists that are 
well-known within Saskatchewan and beyond. It truly is a great 
place to live and represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank all of the volunteers who 
worked on the election campaign. I had some great people that 
have come out over the last three election campaigns that I’ve 
run in to help, done a huge amount of work. But I’d also like to 
pass along a thank you to all the volunteers from each campaign 
that came out to work. Many hours were put in supporting their 
candidate. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank them for the 
time they dedicated, not only to individual campaigns but in a 
larger purpose of supporting a democratic process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t be appropriate if I didn’t pass 
along a thanks to my family for their support. The hours that 
they put in, not just at election time but throughout our busy 
lives in these very public jobs, I couldn’t have done it without 
them and I couldn’t do it without them so I’d like to thank 
them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re here today to offer comments and a 
reply to the Throne Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, when I think of 
the Throne Speech there are two things and two comments that 
have stuck in my mind since I’ve heard the speech and I had to 
go back, go through the written copy to make sure I had heard 
them correctly. 
 
First there was a comment that led off the speech early on, and 
it talked about keeping our word. The other comment contained 
later in the speech was, actions speak louder than words. So 
how do these comments fit in to what we’ve been seeing and 
hearing over this past six weeks? I know that the members 
opposite — and we’ve just heard some pretty long-winded 
examples of this on that side of the House — have continually 
blamed the members on this side of the House saying that we’re 
responsible, have been, will be for years to come, responsible 
for all the woes of the province. And we’ve seen that attitude in 
excess since they’ve been sworn in. And we’ve watched as they 
have tried to soften their commitments and lower expectations 
on all of the election commitments and promises that they put 
forward. 
 
Now fresh from the swearing-in ceremony the member from 
Swift Current spoke to the media about our stark financial 

picture, but one of the first orders in council that this new 
cabinet passed was to increase wages of some of their political 
staff. Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is right. Actions do speak 
louder than words. 
 
Finances are stark, but they kicked off their government with 
some new wage increases and I’m sure there are more coming 
down the pike. With the release of the mid-term financial 
report, we could all see just how stark the financial picture was 
or is. Mr. Speaker, it must have kept everyone up right across 
this province wondering how this new government was ever 
going to be able to balance the budget with only 1.9 billion in 
cash and surpluses — stark indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we can look towards Prince Albert, where 
even though the member from Prince Albert, the new member 
from Prince Albert ran his election campaign on a promise to 
keep the P.A. mill open — a vote for him was a vote to keep the 
mill open and people working — but then tore up the MOU as 
soon as they could get their hands on it. No plan put forward to 
keep the mill open. No consultations with stakeholders, the 
community or the owners, Mr. Speaker. So is that keeping your 
word to the people of P.A.? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, over the past week we’ve all listened to 
another issue. The Minister of Health and the Premier said 
before the election that no essential services legislation was 
necessary. It should be negotiated by the parties. That’s what 
they said. And then their sudden decision to introduce essential 
services legislation. Well now maybe it wasn’t a sudden 
decision, because now we hear that it’s been in the works for 
the last year. So then why are they saying it wasn’t necessary in 
October, and it wasn’t a topic during the election? Are they 
keeping their word? Or maybe we’re asking the wrong 
question, Mr. Speaker. What we should be asking is: which 
word are they keeping? No consultations and they won’t table 
the legislation till late next week to avoid, and I quote, “inciting 
unnecessary fears.” They’ll sneak the legislation into the House 
at the last minute, adjourn, and head home for Christmas. 
 
Simple questions that can’t be asked, Mr. Speaker. What’s in 
this legislation that they’re afraid to table it and open up 
legitimate debate? Is that not what we’re here for, legitimate 
debate? Who are they trying to scoop into this basket covered 
by essential services? 
 
In manufacturing, welders are essential. Nurses are essential in 
the health sector, lab techs. Is it teachers? Highway workers? 
Prison guards? City workers? Who else besides the university 
support workers that they mentioned yesterday? Mr. Speaker, 
actions do speak louder than words. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also commented on the 
operating grant for school funding, stating that it will be 
increased by 20 per cent over four years. But it still leaves many 
questions. Does the 20 per cent increase include teachers’ salary 
increases or are they calculating salary costs over and above 
that amount? There’s a big difference in what it means for 
education funding. 
 
So last spring after going through some very difficult school 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

board amalgamations, and eventually some school closures and 
grade reductions, the members opposite took every chance to 
criticize and play on the emotions of families and communities. 
At that time the members stood out front of this legislature and 
offered $350,000 to boards of education for each school that 
was kept open, to be paid when they were elected government. 
Well now they’re government. So where are we now? And are 
they keeping their word? 
 
Revising The Education Act to improve consultation is now a 
commitment to “examine revising The Education Act.” All 
these soft word changes. They’re lowering expectations, or 
trying to lower expectations. Where did keeping your word to 
parents and school boards go? Actions truly do speak louder 
than words. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, agriculture is always a big topic of any 
discussion in Saskatchewan. And the Throne Speech 
commitment is to fully fund CAIS — and oh, Mr. Speaker, I 
almost forgot the rest of this exciting agricultural proposal — 
and lobby the federal government for more programs. This 
Minister of Agriculture has criticized the shortfalls of CAIS 
consistently and criticized any calls to the federal government 
that they should be funding agriculture in Saskatchewan 
appropriately. You’ve criticized them. You’ve criticized them 
as purely ploys to avoid our responsibility. 
 
So now what is this government and the new Minister of 
Agriculture doing? What is your agriculture vision laid out in 
the Throne Speech? This Saskatchewan Party government is 
doing exactly the same thing that they criticized the previous 
government for — fund CAIS fully and lobby the federal 
government. Mr. Speaker, how underwhelming for the 
agricultural community. I can hardly wait to see this new 
minister hit the speaking circuit to sell this new idea, telling 
producers they can’t afford anything else with only $2 billion in 
surplus sitting in the treasury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign they were quite 
definite that a commitment was to hire 800 nurses. And I was 
very pleased . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to hear the 
Minister of Health stand up this morning and use definite 
language when he again spoke of this commitment in the 
House, because the worry is, in the Throne Speech, it had gone 
from being a definite commitment to a goal. And the targets for 
improvement for residencies at the university and for seats for 
doctors have disappeared from the Speech from the Throne. So 
you start to worry that . . . what happens with these words and 
what happens to the downplaying of expectations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t new, because we can look back to 
early 2000. The Saskatchewan Party had a cute logo. The 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people in 10 years. We heard it everywhere. It was 
everywhere. But after a couple months, you looked on the 
website and it said, the Saskatchewan Party has a goal to grow 
Saskatchewan. It went from a plan to a goal. And then you 
know what? It disappeared — gone, gone. Nobody says it. 
Nobody talks about it. No targets, no goals. 

So, Mr. Speaker, soon as we hear, from election campaign to 
Throne Speech, the wording starts to change, the commitments 
that we know about that were made previously — like the one 
that now-Minister of Finance made to parents out in front of 
this legislature and now just shrugs like it’s no big deal — 
playing on the emotions of voters and parents and families and 
communities is unacceptable. And this opposition will keep this 
government accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on because 
there are lots and lots of examples — too many examples for 
the time that I have allotted for me here — where keeping your 
word is purely a cliché and not a value of this Saskatchewan 
Party government. And I’m sure, and I’m afraid to say, we will 
see more and more of this as the years go on. 
 
Actions do speak louder than words. And all of their actions to 
date have been contrary to their words — say one thing, do 
another, flip-flop — call it what you will, but I cannot support 
this Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to participate in this debate and pleased to 
support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you on your election and 
wish you the best in your new responsibilities. You’ve been a 
member of this Hon. Assembly for longer than any of us on 
either side, and you’ve always represented your constituents 
with dignity. And now you will represent the province the same 
way in your new role as Speaker of this Hon. Assembly. 
 
I’d also like to take this opportunity to thank my hard-working 
constituents, the constituents of Thunder Creek, the salt of this 
earth, Mr. Speaker, for their dedication, commitment, and loyal 
support in the last election and for many years before. 
 
For my constituents, the election of this Saskatchewan Party 
government is like the sun rising on a new Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — They want to see this province as a land 
of opportunity, and the opportunity is now available to do a 
better job for this province than has been done in the past. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I will do the very best job possible for my 
constituents and all of the people of Saskatchewan. I thank my 
constituents, and I ask them for their continued support as I 
represent them in this Legislative Assembly and through my 
new responsibilities as Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me to rise in this House as the 
new Minister of Enterprise and Innovation for Saskatchewan to 
talk about our bold and innovative approach to securing the 
future for our province and its people. Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful 
to the Premier as well for the confidence that he has shown in 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

me by appointing me as Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 
 
We are setting a new course, Mr. Speaker. We are a government 
that believes in Saskatchewan values. We believe in keeping 
our word. We believe in security and compassion. We believe 
in growth and opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as stated in the Speech from the Throne, our 
government has a plan to create lasting growth for 
Saskatchewan and to ensure that this growth means security and 
a better future for all Saskatchewan people. And central to these 
plans will be the creation of Enterprise and Innovation 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years governments have 
attempted to dominate the Saskatchewan economy at the 
expense of the private and co-operative sectors. The old 
government domination model hasn’t worked, Mr. Speaker, and 
those days are over. Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that Saskatchewan’s 
economic strategy for the last 60 years have failed to improve 
our economy, grow our population, attract investment, or 
adequately capture and commercialize intellectual property and 
innovation. And it’s time to try something new. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economic vision for the province must 
recognize that the private sector, co-operative and non-profit 
sectors must be the engines for economic growth, and not the 
government. Mr. Speaker, we are going to do things differently 
and do things better. We’re going to involve the people of 
Saskatchewan, those people who create the jobs, invest the 
dollars, and build the labour force, in setting the course for 
economic development into the future. Mr. Speaker, this will be 
done through a new special operating agency called Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will be a unique 
public-private partnership that will be governed by a broad 
cross-section of stakeholders and leaders from business, labour, 
Aboriginal, municipal, regional, education, and research 
communities. Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan represents 
a new co-operative team approach to economic development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Enterprise Saskatchewan will coordinate the government’s 
growth agenda by working across government and with 
stakeholders throughout the province on focused, collaborative 
economic development efforts. Mr. Speaker, this approach will 
ensure that stakeholders in our economy have an opportunity to 
share ideas, identify opportunities and challenges, and build 
strong relationships between government and business. Mr. 
Speaker, this approach is about shared responsibility for 
economic development in Saskatchewan and about sharing in 
the wealth and success that such collaboration will create. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan will take the form of a 
special operating agency similar to the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership, and it will be governed by a board of 
directors who will be selected through a broad consultation 
process to ensure that the interests of key stakeholder groups 
are well represented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan will create a network of 
business and industry sectors to work with government to 

attract investment, strengthen existing business, promote 
Saskatchewan’s advantages, and to work to create more wealth 
and more jobs for our province and its people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan will address key issues 
affecting economic development in Saskatchewan such as the 
shortage of trained workers in the province. And this agency 
will focus on building capacity across communities and 
networks, and removing barriers to growth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we will focus on knowledge transfer, entrepreneurial 
training and development, investment attraction, business 
development, and enhanced services. And it will do this, Mr. 
Speaker, because Enterprise Saskatchewan will have the direct 
involvement of the stakeholders and community leaders who 
can make this happen. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, Innovation Saskatchewan will represent 
a new approach to research and development, and to the 
commercialization of innovation in the province. Innovation 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will ensure that provincial 
resources are allocated to research and development in the areas 
that will provide the greatest benefit to Saskatchewan people 
and to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that the fruits of the fertile minds of 
our Saskatchewan innovators are more able to achieve 
commercial traction within the boundaries of this province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the ultimate goal of our government; to 
ensure that the people of this great province share in the 
benefits and successes of a growing Saskatchewan economy to 
provide a safer, better, and more secure life for every 
Saskatchewan citizen. The new collaborative approach to 
economic development and growth that we are undertaking 
through Enterprise and Innovation Saskatchewan will help us, 
Mr. Speaker, to achieve that goal. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning we listened to a speech from the 
member from Athabasca — more, I’d say, Mr. Speaker, a 
25-minute angry rant at the top of his voice. Mr. Speaker, 
apparently that member believes that volume is some sort of a 
replacement for good sense. 
 
In that rant, Mr. Speaker, that member talked about . . . He 
ended that rant, Mr. Speaker, by talking about how we 
shouldn’t blame the failures of the NDP government for the 
problems that we may have in governing this province. And fair 
enough, Mr. Speaker. You know, we can manage, we can 
manage around the mistakes that have been made by that NDP 
government. But, Mr. Speaker, he started that angry rant by 
blaming the Devine government of the 1980s for all of the 
problems that they had and for losing the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not one who likes to pick at the members 
opposite, but inconsistencies of that sort ought to be brought to 
the attention of this Hon. Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a new day, Mr. Speaker, and we’re ready and eager to get to 
work on a new direction for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
accordingly I will be supporting this Speech from the Throne. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that there’s time for another 



December 13, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

speaker, but if it pleases you, I would, due to the lateness of the 
clock, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Thunder Creek has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. This House stands recessed 
until Monday the 17th at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:46.] 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2007 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 42 of Hansard, No. 3A Wednesday, December 12, 
2007, reference to “Sheldon Bourne” in the third paragraph of 
Mr. Forbes’s speech should read “Sheldon Born.” 
 
We apologize for this error. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................69 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 United Way Recognizes Saskatoon Citizens 
  LeClerc ........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
 Tribute to Late Senator Miles Venne 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
 Recognizing Saskatchewan Rivers Constituents 
  Wilson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................69 
 Support for Abused Women and Children 
  Wotherspoon ...............................................................................................................................................................................69 
 Saskatchewan Joins The Energy Council 
  Harrison.......................................................................................................................................................................................70 
 Arts Training Program for Saskatoon Youth 
  Broten ..........................................................................................................................................................................................70 
 A Great Lady’s Strength and Determination 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................70 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Enterprise Saskatchewan 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................71 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................71 
 The Ministry of Health 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................73 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................73 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................76 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................76 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................76 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................76 
  Norris ...........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................81 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................84 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................88 
  Higgins .........................................................................................................................................................................................91 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................93 
CORRIGENDUM ..............................................................................................................................................................................96 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


