


















































Hansard: May 01, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 54A  TUESDAY, MAY 1, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1443 
 May 1, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s again 
my privilege to present petitions to the Assembly in regards to 
the need for a dialysis unit in the Broadview and surrounding 
area. And I read the prayer. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by a number 
of folks from the communities of Broadview and Whitewood. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the water levels on Pasqua and Echo Lake. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to work with and to lobby the federal 
government to put in place a long-term agreement that 
deals with the issue of the water structure at Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people from Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Regina, Lebret, Indian Head, Osage, and 
Qu’Appelle. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition signed by people who want the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. 
They are concerned that the banks cannot accept payment if the 
customer doesn’t have documentation of service that the office 
supplies. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are primarily from 
Rosetown, but I also see Zealandia and Swift Current noted. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise 
with a petition of citizens concerned when driving on Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Sunset Estates and 
St-Denis. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who 
are very concerned about the government’s plan to discontinue 
the basic education classes at the Southeast Regional College in 
Estevan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Wilkie concerned 
about their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Landis and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at 
the Lafleche and District Health Centre would cause undue 
hardship to residents, particularly seniors. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Lafleche, 
Gravelbourg, and Glentworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the potentially 
dangerous situation that’s happening in the Shellbrook, 
Spiritwood, Big River, and Hafford areas. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Canwood and 
Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition presented by Saskatchewan people who are 
deeply concerned about the presence of sexual predators that 
present a threat to our communities. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Wakaw and 
Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that are concerned about the underfunding for 
school divisions: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
and Nokomis, Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis, Lockwood, and Watrous and Drake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today and present a petition calling for mandatory drug 
and alcohol testing. Mr. Speaker, I received these petitions from 
all across the province. I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Humboldt 
and Muenster. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great pleasure to introduce some guests from Saskatoon 
today from Evan Hardy Collegiate, the home of the Souls. 
 
And these students are part of the international students 
program, and Evan Hardy is the focal point for that program in 
Saskatoon, and that program is quite important. It helps 
Canadian students gain knowledge about cultures and countries 
with which Canada’s likely to have social and business ties in 
the future. Participants include people from Hong Kong, 
Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Mexico, and Brazil. 
 
And we’re very pleased to have 32 grade 9 to grade 12 English 
as a second language students in the gallery today. And they’re 
accompanied today with their teachers: Mrs. Charington, Mrs. 
Bandula, Ms. Mancusi, and Ms. Molaro. And I’ll be meeting 
with them after question period and answering any questions 
that they may have. And I’d ask all hon. members to welcome 
the students here today. 
 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure to introduce my 
constituency assistant who has joined us from Swift Current 
today. Crystal Martens is in your gallery. It’s a good chance for 
me as well to acknowledge the good work that she does on 
behalf of the people of Swift Current, dealing with their 
concerns and questions on provincial government matters. So 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming her to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two introductions today. First of all I would like to 
introduce to you and, through you, to all members of the House 
19 grade 10 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate here in 
Regina in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. And 
they are accompanied by their teacher, Tana Mitchell, and I’m 
looking forward to meeting with them following the session 
here. I expect we’ll have some good discussion about life and 
politics, and I look forward to that time. I’d ask all hon. 
members to join me in welcoming them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And while I’m on my feet I would 
also like to introduce to you and, through you, to all members 
of this House a recent addition to my staff. We have in the west 
gallery, accompanied by two of my administrative support staff, 
the summer student in our office, Tenille Baudu. And Tenille 
was raised on the family farm near the town of Wawota. She 
has just completed her arts degree with a major in psychology 
from the University of Regina, and her plan is to return to 
university in the fall to obtain her social work degree. Please 
join me in welcoming Tenille to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Outstanding Organic Farmer of the Year 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every year the Organic Crop Improvement Association presents 
the Outstanding Organic Farmer of the Year Award to a 
talented producer who certifies to the OCIA [Organic Crop 
Improvement Association] level of excellence. I am proud to 
say that this year’s recipient is Saskatchewan’s very own Marc 
Loiselle of Vonda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Loiselle organic family farm is an 
intergenerational farm that has been certified since 1985. 

Together with his wife Anita, Marc is a mentor for others 
transitioning to organic farming. They practice responsible 
stewardship to meet both consumer demands and environmental 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Marc and Anita grow cereal, oil seed, pulse, 
clover, and hay crops. And in particular they grow Red Fife 
wheat, a heritage wheat that was grown by Marc’s 
great-grandfather. The Loiselles are therefore continuing a 
family tradition in agriculture that began in the Vonda area 100 
years ago as of this year. As they save and grow crops like Red 
Fife wheat, they keep genetic diversity intact to preserve an 
important part of our agricultural heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 
congratulating Marc Loiselle for winning the 2007 OCIA 
Outstanding Organic Farmer of the Year Award and for 
furthering the practice of organic agriculture in this great 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Snowbirds Acceptance Air Show 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
had the distinct pleasure of attending the formal acceptance 
show for the 2007 Snowbirds along with the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. This show is performed for the approval of 
Major General Bouchard and Canadian and US [United States] 
air traffic regulators. 
 
431 Air Demonstration Squadron, better known as the 
Snowbirds, represents a tradition of excellence. As 
ambassadors, this group demonstrates the skill, professionalism, 
and team work of the men and women of the Canadian Forces. 
The Snowbirds are a Canadian institution, flying Tutor jet 
aircraft adorned with the colours of the Canadian flag. 
 
The team represents a vibrant spirit of this nation, thrilling 
audiences across the continent with precision formation flying 
and crisp solo aerobatics. Requiring the highest degree of 
piloting skills and maintenance expertise, the team flies their 
nine-plane formations with distances as close as four feet of 
wing overlap at speeds ranging from 100 to 320 knots during 
their exciting show which is comprised of more than 50 
different manoeuvres. 
 
Now in their 37th season, the Snowbirds have flown in more 
than 2,000 shows for more than 120 million spectators. The 
2007 team will fly in 58 shows at 35 locations across North 
America from May to October. I would like to congratulate 
Major Rob Mitchell and his 2007 team for an excellent 
acceptance show and would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the 2007 Snowbirds and wishing them a 
successful season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

Umoja Performance 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure to attend the Umoja drum group’s Children Helping 
Children benefit concert at the Western Christian College here 
in Regina. Also attending was my colleague, the member for 
Regina Rosemont, who is a drummer herself and well 
acquainted with the talented adult drummers group of Regina 
who practise at Jack MacKenzie School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Umoja is a world drumming group made up of 
grade 7 and 8 students from Jack MacKenzie School in the 
constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. They have enjoyed a 
very successful history even though it was only formed three 
and a half short years ago Thanks to the efforts of artistic 
director Marlene Hinz; group manager, Joanne Patron; and 
Andria Moller— Umoja has performed at provincial and 
national conferences as well as numerous school concerts in 
Regina, Moose Jaw, Lumsden, White City, and Pilot Butte. 
And, Mr. Speaker, their school’s namesake, Jack MacKenzie, is 
still very involved attending concerts and rehearsals and 
providing a very positive inspiring role model. 
 
Umoja’s motto is One Heart, One Beat and they certainly lived 
up to it at last week’s concert. All proceeds went to the Regina 
branch of Save the Children Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all the members to join me in 
congratulating Umoja on another spectacular performance, and 
Marlene Hinz, Joanne Patron, and Andria Moller for making the 
group possible. It’s cultural groups like Umoja and the people 
that support them that help to ensure that Saskatchewan remains 
the best place to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Promoting Heritage, Culture, and Recreation 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a week 
ago my colleague, the member for Souris-Cannington, and I had 
the privilege of attending the South East Saskatchewan 
Association for Culture, Recreation and Sport 23rd annual 
awards program. The purpose of the southeast awards program 
is to acknowledge the work of the many volunteers in the region 
in the areas of heritage, culture, and recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year there were 15 recipients who received 
awards thanking them for their work in promoting heritage, 
culture, and recreation in the southeast corner of the province. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, time will not give me the ability to 
present all the names of the award winners. But my colleague 
and I and the members of our caucus would certainly like to 
extend our appreciation for the many volunteers across this 
province who donate their time to support culture, heritage, and 
recreation. We want to congratulate the winners in the southeast 
awards program and say thank you to the board of directors for 
all their hard work in promoting this worthwhile awards 

ceremony. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

Celebration of Physical Therapy Education 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to let members of the legislature know about and at the 
same time offer congratulations to Cherie Illingworth of North 
Battleford who, on Saturday, April 28, was recognized by the 
Saskatchewan Physiotherapy Association to receive the Clinical 
Instructor and Physical Therapy Clinical Education Award 
(Rural). 
 
Ms. Illingworth, who has worked in North Battleford since 
1992, is the very first recipient of this SPA [Saskatchewan 
Physiotherapy Association] Award presented for outstanding 
contribution to the clinical education of physical therapy 
students. 
 
Her nominator said, “she acts as a role model in her interaction 
with patients, peers, physicians, and other caregivers.” 
 
The award was presented at the SPA annual banquet which this 
year also celebrated the 10th anniversary of the association’s 
permanent office and new organizational structure, the 10th 
anniversary of the continuing physical education therapy 
program, the 40th anniversary of the first graduating class from 
the school of physical therapy, and the 100th anniversary of the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The event was hosted by the Saskatchewan Physical Therapy 
Association, the Saskatchewan College of Physical Therapists, 
and the school of physical therapy, University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I should also mention and celebrate the fact that Dr. Liz 
Harrison of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] school of 
physical therapy is the 2007 recipient of the Canadian 
Physiotherapy Association’s Enid Graham Memorial Lecture 
Award, the national association’s highest honour. 
Congratulations all around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Sigma Polling 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the very end of an article in today’s Leader-Post is a tiny 
paragraph that bears some repeating. The article, entitled 
“Calvert will lead party into next election” finishes with the 
following paragraph: 
 

One NDP MLA, who spoke on condition of anonymity, 
said Monday that while the poll has raised concerns 
among some government members about Calvert it is far 
too close to an election to change leaders. 

 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

This quote of course is referring to the recent poll by Sigma 
Analytics that reports 6 out of 10 people surveyed do not want 
the current Premier to be the premier after the next election. 
This is the same poll that reported 9 out of 10 people surveyed 
rate the NDP [New Democratic Party] government’s handling 
of the Murdoch Carriere scandal very poorly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this small paragraph is not the only one provided 
by an anonymous source from the NDP that appeared in today’s 
paper. In one article an anonymous NDP source goes to bat for 
the former NDP caucus chief of staff, Jim Fodey, implying he 
was hung out to dry by the very people he had worked for for a 
number of years. In another column another NDP source 
reveals a detailed accounting of the NDP caucus’s meetings and 
retreats where the NDP caucus fraud scandal was given a full 
airing. 
 
It sounds like the Premier doesn’t have a lot of company in 
terms of confidence in his government. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
has a very leaky ship and makes one wonder if they can make it 
to an election — next election before the ship sinks completely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Climate Change 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, former Vice-president Al Gore’s visit to Saskatchewan 
received plenty of criticism from members of the Saskatchewan 
Party, and that was not a surprise to me since the Saskatchewan 
Party has consistently opposed the Kyoto Protocol and its 
targets. 
 
The United Nations has very recently issued an 
intergovernmental panel report on climate change which is a 
consensus document, Mr. Speaker, supported by representatives 
by the world’s governments and drawing on the work of over 
1,000 scientists from across the globe. And this report 
reinforces and confirms, Mr. Gore’s message. 
 
A consensus report requires cautious wording, Mr. Speaker. Yet 
the UN [United Nations] report predicts the average surface 
temperature of the earth will rise from between 1.8 degrees 
centigrade and 6.4 degrees centigrade by the end of the century. 
It says quote: 
 

Projected climate change exposures are likely to affect the 
health status of millions of people through increases in 
malnutrition and consequent disorders, and through 
increased deaths, disease, and injury due to heat waves, 
floods, storms, fires and drought. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this consensus United Nations document backs up 
Vice-president Gore’s message and our Premier’s resolve to do 
our share to address climate change in a substantive way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Response of Caucus to Misappropriation of Funds 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Government House Leader’s story becomes more unbelievable 
every day. Version one was that they turned over all the 
documents to the police in 1992. Well that wasn’t correct. So 
version two is, Jim Fodey told me we turned all the documents 
over to the police in 1992. And that’s what he thought for 15 
years until last Friday night. Mr. Speaker, that version’s pretty 
shaky as well. 
 
According to a column in today’s paper, the Ann Davey 
situation was discussed in detail at two meetings in the summer 
of 1994 — a staff retreat meeting at Madge Lake and later at a 
caucus retreat in Prince Albert. The minister was at both of 
those meetings and would have been involved in those 
discussions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that he knew in 1994 that 
the relevant information had not been turned over to the police 
in 1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. This is a matter which is not 
under the administrative responsibility of the executive 
government. I rule the question out of order but any minister 
may exercise the option to respond. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as Government House 
Leader I will voluntarily accept that question. Mr. Speaker, I 
made a statement in the House here yesterday correcting a 
statement that I had made in error in the House previously, and 
I stand by that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me once again just reiterate the facts. The facts 
are that in 1992, hired by a false name of Ann Lord, an 
employee advised the caucus chief of staff that she had 
misappropriately received funds. The caucus chief of staff 
presented that information to me. Together we decided that she 
should be fired, the matter should be referred to the police. An 
investigation was done, including an audit. That information, to 
the best of my knowledge, was communicated to the police and 
there were no charges pending. 
 
That whole matter, Mr. Speaker, was revisited in 1994 as a 
result of some concerns that were expressed and all of that 
information then subsequently taken to the police with no 
charges pending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the minister could not recall detail about meetings, about 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

letters. And let’s look at the newspaper column of today. It 
indicates that the meeting at Madge Lake was a pretty 
memorable one according to the NDP sources. It ended with 
several people crying, Lorjé demanding to clear the air, and the 
Government House Leader pressing to keep a lid on the issue. 
It’s pretty hard to believe that the minister wouldn’t remember a 
meeting like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what discussions took place at that meeting 
regarding Ann Davey? And does the minister still expect us to 
believe that he had no idea that Jim Fodey had withheld 
information from the police? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Once again I just wish to advise the 
Assembly that the line of questioning is out of order but I will 
not interrupt again if the minister is willing to answer. The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of a personnel 
matter expressing concerns about relationships within the office 
and question of the actions of different people within, a decision 
was made in 1994 to revisit the issue. And all of the information 
including, then, as a result of discussions a request by a 
concerned employee to document, to write out her concerns that 
her statement of concerns was taken along with the letter from 
Ms. Lord in 1992, along with the audit, the special audit done 
by Mintz & Wallace in 1992 — all of that was taken to the 
police for their consideration. 
 
After reviewing that information the caucus office was advised, 
Mr. Speaker, that there were no charges pending, and the matter 
was dealt with as a personnel matter within the caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
everyone in the NDP government truly believed that all the 
information was turned over to the police in 1992, why did they 
think it was necessary to turn it over to the police again in 
1994? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the master of innuendo 
is at it again. And that’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when issues are, personnel issues are brought which do suggest 
that some action may have been appropriate in the past, in order 
to ensure that appropriate action was taken or if it was not, that 
appropriate legal action then would ensue, and in order to 
achieve that, Mr. Speaker, then the information related to the 
accusations by an employee, as well as the audit, as well as the 
letter from Ann Lord in 1992, all of that was taken to the police 
so they could review it and judge it in its entirety with any 
possible implications regarding violations of the law. Mr. 
Speaker, that was done in order to protect the integrity of the 
operation of the office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
obtained a report to the government caucus administration 
committee by former NDP MLA Pat Lorjé, dated September 
11, 1994. It says, and I quote: 
 

During the June Caucus Office retreat, members of the 
Administration Committee became aware of significant 
problems . . . within the Government Caucus Office. It 
appeared that most of the problems stemmed from 
outstanding matters related to the departure of the former 
Director of Administration, Ann Lord, in September of 
1992 . . . 
 
Glenn Hagel and I met with staff on July 6th to inform 
them that the concerns raised at the retreat would be dealt 
with as fully and completely as possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that the Ann Davey 
departure and the disclosure or non-disclosure of information to 
the police was discussed at that meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there were discussions about 
personnel concerns related to operations within the office. And 
Mr. Speaker, as part of that it was determined that, by the admin 
committee, that the appropriate course of action was to ensure 
that any accusations that were made were properly considered, 
including the possibility that perhaps the matter was not 
appropriately handled in 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was specifically as a result of that, that the 
decision was made to pull together the information, including 
the written allegations about improper conduct made by an 
employee, and together with that, the audit and the letter from 
Ms. Lord in 1992. All of that was taken to the police for their 
review and their consideration, with the request that they would 
simply review it and take appropriate course of action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were subsequently advised that there were no 
charges pending and that, Mr. Speaker, the appropriate thing to 
do was to deal with it as a personnel matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let’s clear some 
things up. Is the minister saying that Jim Fodey was instructed 
to take all the relevant documents to the police in 1992, and that 
until last Friday the minister believed Jim Fodey had taken all 
the relevant documents to the police in 1992, and every other 
NDP MLA had the same understanding? Is that what the 
minister wants us to believe? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I can only relay the facts. 
That’s all I can do. And I point out again, Mr. Speaker, that a 
personnel matter was dealt with. And the way it was dealt with 
was to turn it over to the police — all of the documentation. 
That I’ve already said several times, okay. The facts are the 
facts. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, the 
caucus office was advised that there were no appropriate 
charges pending, that what the caucus had was a personnel 
issue, and that it should be dealt with as a personnel issue. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that is the fact of the matter. 
 
Now the hon. member will know that the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner is reviewing the matter and will have 
opportunity to talk to, will talk to all people who have input 
including, I assume, the hon. member, and will be interested in 
knowing where he got his information from and from whom 
and how long he had it. All of those things will be part of that. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll await the results of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like the minister opposite to know that I had a meeting with the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner this morning at 8:30, and we 
talked about a lot of the material that is present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has also obtained a copy 
of the 1994 Regina police investigation report. In the report, Pat 
Lorjé told investigators, and I quote, “Complete disclosure to 
the NDP caucus regarding the Ann LORD situation and the 
current problems was made in Prince Albert during the week of 
September 11, 1994.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will repeat: “Complete disclosure to the NDP 
caucus regarding the Ann LORD situation was made in Prince 
Albert during the week of September 11, 1994.” 
 
Is the minister still sticking to his story that he had no 
knowledge that information was concealed from police until 
Chief Johnston’s news conference last Friday? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall the chief of 
police saying that information was concealed. I recall the chief 
of police saying that they did not have record of having 
received information referred to. Mr. Speaker, there is a 
difference. There is a difference. And as a result of that 
disparity between the comments of the chief of police and the 
advice I had received prior to the comments I made, Mr. 
Speaker, I was surprised. 
 
And consequently because of the . . . in the incomplete briefing 
provided to me by the chief of staff, he did the honourable thing 
and he resigned. Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that this 

matter in 1994 was revisited in its entirety and was turned over 
completely to the police for their reconsideration and their 
conclusion that there were no charges pending to anyone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants us to believe 
that Jim Fodey was acting on his own, but the police report says 
something quite different. The report says, and I quote, “LORJE 
advised that it was the intention of Caucus to conceal the fact 
that LORD had committed fraud.” Let me repeat: “LORJE 
advised that it was the intention of Caucus to conceal the fact 
that LORD had committed fraud.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this very clearly shows it wasn’t an accident. It 
wasn’t an oversight. It wasn’t even Jim Fodey disobeying 
orders. It was the intention of the NDP caucus to conceal fraud. 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP caucus intentionally conceal 
fraud? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member may wish 
to table the document and we’ll be happy to review that. But the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, if there is an intention to 
conceal fraud, turning over the complete package of 
information is an odd way of doing that. Mr. Speaker, in 1994 
all of the information, all of the information that was available 
including accusations — unsubstantiated accusations but 
accusations made by an employee — all of that was turned over 
to the police for their consideration. And, Mr. Speaker, that was 
the fact of the matter as to what was done. The conclusion is 
clear that at the end of that, Mr. Speaker, the police advised that 
there were no charges forthcoming and that the matter would be 
dealt with as a personnel matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat that phrase again. 
It says, “LORJE advised it was the intention of Caucus to 
conceal the fact that LORD had committed fraud.” 
 
It appears that the reason Pat Lorjé took this information to the 
police in 1994 is that she thought her own NDP caucus had 
intentionally concealed fraud in 1992. She goes on to tell 
investigators, and I quote: “One factor that influenced this 
decision was a previous budget leak that was embarrassing for 
the government.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, note that she calls it a decision — not an accident; 
not an oversight. She calls it a decision and says it was the 
intention of caucus to conceal fraud. Why was it the intention of 
this NDP government to conceal fraud? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can 
continue to ask the same question, and the answer is the same 
answer. He may not like the answer. In fact I know he doesn’t 
like the answer because he would much be rather talking about 
statements of innuendo and talking about a time 15 years ago, 
Mr. Speaker, than to be talking about what’s going on in the 
world of Saskatchewan today — or, Mr. Speaker, even more to 
the point for this apparent government in waiting, talking about 
what they would do if the people of Saskatchewan were ever 
inflicted with them as the government of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s an interesting approach, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen by 
the hon. member and by the Saskatchewan Party in this session 
where they would much rather talk about matters of some time 
ago rather than to talk about what’s going on in Saskatchewan 
today and what’s going on in Saskatchewan for the future that 
the New Democratic Party is a part of building for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ll keep talking 
about the innuendo from the police report. Mr. Speaker, Pat 
Lorjé told police it was the intention of the NDP caucus to 
conceal fraud. She told police they made this decision because 
of a budget leak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that the NDP withheld crucial 
evidence in 1992. According to the police report, Pat Lorjé used 
these words — intention and decision — to describe this 
cover-up. She does not blame Jim Fodey for acting alone. This 
is very different than the minister’s version of events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit that he knew 
evidence had been withheld from the police in 1992? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely no reason 
to believe that that occurred. The information that I received 
from the chief of staff back in 1992 was information that I 
trusted to be true — in the same way, Mr. Speaker, that I trusted 
to be accurate the briefing that I received from the chief of staff 
of last week in response to the question raised by the member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have explained already that it has been clearly 
the intention of the New Democrat caucus to ensure that the 
police would have full access to all matters when they were 
raised, suggesting that there was a possibility that the matter 
had not been appropriately handled the first time around. 
 
It was once again brought to the Regina city police for their 
consideration. They looked at that material and concluded at the 
end of that, Mr. Speaker, that there were no charges pending — 
that what we had was a personnel matter to deal with. And 
that’s the facts of the matter, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
financial statement tabled yesterday by the minister in fact had 
not been given to the police as it was quoted as fact. Mr. 
Speaker, Lorjé goes on to say she believes, and I quote: 
 

. . . that FODEY and Glen HAGEL attempted to deal too 
quickly with the LORD situation. A more complete audit 
should have been completed in 1992. 

 
Those are the words of Pat Lorjé, NDP caucus Chair at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence is mounting that the minister tried to 
sweep this under the rug in 1992 and that the NDP caucus 
intentionally concealed fraud. Will the minister do the right 
thing today — take the responsibility for his role in this 
cover-up seriously and resign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member either isn’t 
listening or prefers not to listen or prefers not to hear. Mr. 
Speaker, what I said was, what was provided to the police in 
1994 was the audit from 1992. Now the hon. member says that 
the accusation is that it was done too quickly. He says that’s the 
problem; it was done too quickly. 
 
Well I don’t know if that’s a legitimate accusation or not, Mr. 
Speaker. But what was done was done and what was done was 
this: is that the matter was referred to the police in 1994 and 
subsequent to that as well, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, at 
the advice of the police, a full audit of the caucus operations 
was done by the firm, Peat Marwick. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
has been tabled in the House. That is what has happened. 
 
The hon. member wants to get on to anything but talking about 
the present — anything about talking, anything but talking 
about the future in Saskatchewan because he knows that this 
party, that the Saskatchewan Party, is a party that Saskatchewan 
people are afraid of if they know what their real agenda is all 
about. And that’s what this is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you know what’s really unfair 
in this entire matter is that the NDP decided to make Jim Fodey 
the scapegoat for this whole cover-up. Pat Lorjé didn’t say it 
was the intention of Jim Fodey to conceal fraud. She said it was 
the intention of the NDP caucus to conceal fraud, Mr. Speaker. 
So why does Jim Fodey lose his job when none of the NDP 
MLAs are willing to take responsibility for their role in this 
cover-up? 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fodey did an honourable 
thing. When he gave advice to a minister who was responding 
to a question raised, that was proved to have been incomplete, 
he resigned. That’s what happened. And as a result of that, Mr. 
Speaker, in this House yesterday I made a correction because I 
stand by my words. 
 
It is the obligation of all of us when we come to this House to 
bring the information to the best of our ability and honestly as 
we can. That’s what this House has a right to expect of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I think I understand more clearly what this is 
about all the time. Because this is all about politics. This is all 
about raising an issue of 15 years ago, which was subsequently 
documented to have been properly investigated the first time 
when reconsidered in 1994. Because this is all about politics; 
it’s all about the pending election. It’s all about the 
Saskatchewan Party wanting to deal with anything but the real 
political agenda, getting on with the questions that people of 
Saskatchewan want to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s story just doesn’t hold up. Yesterday in this House he 
said, and I quote: 
 

. . . it was my understanding at the time that the 
information related to the letter and to the audit was 
communicated to the Regina city police. That’s why I was 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear Chief Johnston on Friday 
[night] say that that was not the public record. 
 

Let’s compare that to Pat Lorjé’s statement to police. Lorjé 
said, “It was the intention of Caucus to conceal the fact that 
LORD had committed fraud.” Lorjé said this decision was 
influenced by a budget leak. And Lorjé said, and I’m quoting 
now: “. . . that FODEY and Glen HAGEL attempted to deal too 
quickly with the LORD situation.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister’s story so vastly different than 
what Pat Lorjé told the police? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has asked 
that question earlier. I’ve already answered the question. The 
answer’s the same. Same question, same answer. 
 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, back in 1992, the brand 
new NDP government was dealing with a financial basket case 
that Saskatchewan had become because of the predecessors of 
the Saskatchewan Party, the Conservative government. That’s 
what we were dealing with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and since that time things have improved for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and the last thing that the 
Saskatchewan Party wants to talk about today, the last thing 
they want to talk about today is a buoyant economy. The last 
thing they want to talk about today is jobs for people — more 
jobs than people. The last thing they want to talk about is young 
people coming home. The last thing they want to talk about is 
stringent financial requirements put in place by this New 
Democrat government to determine that the basket case that his 
predecessors had left with us will never happen again. The last 
thing they want to talk about is a positive future for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the political agenda in this province — the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve it — is to get on with building the 
province of Saskatchewan for a place for young people to build 
their futures. And that’s what this is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to talk about the cover-up of this NDP caucus in the 1990s. Mr. 
Speaker, today I am tabling all of the documents the 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained related to this matter. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, today I am tabling all of the 
documents the Saskatchewan Party has obtained related to this 
matter. And earlier today I sent this same package of 
information to the Regina Police Service and the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] commercial crimes division, 
together with a cover letter requesting an investigation. And I 
also indicated to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner this 
morning at a meeting that I had with him that I will be tabling 
these same documents with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the police decide to launch an investigation, will 
the NDP government provide full co-operation instead of 
concealing evidence like they did in 1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is a significant accusation 
the hon. member makes and it’s unfounded and he knows that 
I’ve answered that question. The fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner can count 
on the full co-operation and any police investigation can count 
on the full co-operation by this caucus, by this government, as it 
has had in the past, Mr. Speaker. As it has. And I point to . . . It 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

was the New Democrat caucus that brought this matter back to 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. The 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member may want 
to tell us if he’s had information that should go to the police that 
he’s held for a long time too. He may want to explain that. 
 
But I’ll tell you one thing that won’t happen, Mr. Speaker. This 
New Democrat government will not stop governing. This New 
Democrat government will continue to work for the people of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that what happens in the future of this 
is a good place for young people to build their futures, to build 
strong futures in a strong Saskatchewan. That’s the agenda of 
this party. This is a party that works for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That is a party that works for the Saskatchewan 
Party. And that’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling written responses to written questions no. 1,298 
and 1,299. And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I’ll 
be converting return no. 21 to motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’d just prefer to deal with these 
one at a time. Responses to questions 1,298 and 1,299 have 
been submitted. And now we go to motions for return. The 
Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return No. 21 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the 
government we’ll be converting return no. 21 to motion for 
return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — This is no. 21. No. 21 has been converted to 
motion for return (debatable). 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 44 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House 
to participate in the debate regarding The Class Actions 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in an increasingly global and complex 
economy. As part of our litigation system over the last 100 or 
more years, we’ve seen a variety of class actions taking place. 
And the courts have introduced rules and pieces of legislation to 
allow for litigation to take place where there are common 
plaintiffs, common defendants, and common causes of action. 
This Bill is an attempt to try and codify and make for uniform 
types of procedures to allow for claims to be dealt with in a 
class action method. 
 
Most litigants in small claims dealing with consumer goods, 
where there are many of them, are unable to bear their high cost 
of litigation and the cost of proving what would be a relatively 
small claim in the global context of things. On the other hand, 
there are large corporations that have to deal with many small 
claims in a myriad of different jurisdictions. 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to allow for those class actions to be 
certified as a class action, to be dealt with in an appropriate 
jurisdiction, and to allow people to participate in the cost 
savings that result from having their actions pooled in a 
common class action. This Bill allows for people to opt in or 
out of the process as it takes place. It also deals with the issue of 
forum shopping and ensuring that there’s an appropriate 
jurisdiction to deal with the action as pending. 
 
There are two current or fairly recent issues. One is the issue 
with the tainted pet food that was spread across North America. 
This is a type of legislation that will allow for owners of pets to 
have their actions brought in one jurisdiction, or allow them to 
participate in a meaningful class action where the damages 
would be insufficient to allow an individual pet owner to 
participate one action at a time. 
 
Another more local situation was a few years ago when there 
was the tainted water in the city of North Battleford. It allows 
people that would have a cause of action arising out of identical 
circumstances but may have individually provable damages that 
may be different, this Bill deals with many of those actions and 
those issues and tries to deal with those in a way that is 
appropriate. 
 
The Bill will now go to a committee, Mr. Speaker. We have 
done some consultation with members of the bar that are going 
to be affected by it, and have no objection to this Bill being 
voted off and to proceed to committee so we can consider the 
deliberations and perhaps have some consultation with 
government officials to determine the type of consultation that 
they had with members of the bar, consumer groups, and other 
people that would be affected. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 44, The 
Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 44, The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 44 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 49 — The 
Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have in the past had a very 
poor and inadequate regulatory system to deal with mortgage 
brokers and mortgage brokering. We had bits and pieces of 
other legislation that provided inadequate or incomplete 
definitions. We had one piece of legislation that dealt with 
financing corporations. It precluded a financing corporation 
from dealing with certain types of mortgages, but there was no 
prohibition from an individual providing those services in their 
individual capacity. 
 
We had an administrative quagmire in allowing for any kind of 
meaningful regulatory process. What we want to have and want 
to ensure in our province, Mr. Speaker, is a system that would 
allow for inflow of money and other resources so that there is a 
vibrant mortgage market, so that we can have homeowners, 
developers, builders have access to a good capital pool. And we 
want to ensure that we have a safe investment climate for 
people that are investing money that will go into mortgages or 
other forms of security. 
 
What we should be doing and what we hope to do in subsequent 
pieces of legislation is have a standardized practice with other 
jurisdictions across Canada and in particular Western Canada. 
We want to ensure that a broker that became licensed in one 
jurisdiction could carry on in other jurisdictions with a minimal 
process to go through, a standardized licensing and bonding 
process that would take place so that we would ensure that there 
would be safety of investors that are putting money into 

mortgage-backed securities. And at the same time there would 
be reasonable facilities available so that somebody that wanted 
to become licensed and deal with mortgage securities would be 
able to do so in a relatively straightforward way so that our 
capital markets are not adversely affected. 
 
This Bill is a relatively complex and lengthy piece of 
legislation, deals with many different aspects. We will have 
questions that we will deal with in committee, from the 
government officials dealing with how the Bill was structured, 
what other jurisdictions were compared with, and in particular 
what problems were existent in this province before this Bill 
was introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate at this time for this Bill to 
be voted off and be forwarded to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 49, The 
Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 49, The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 
Administrators Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 49 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 50 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure today to rise to address Bill No. 50, An Act to amend 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 
 
This Act has three main sections in it. The first, Mr. Speaker, 
relates to the terms of the Chair and the Vice-Chair. Changes 
are introduced to coincide with the municipal employees’ 
pension plan fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, we have consulted 
stakeholders in the province and they’ve advised us that they 
have no problem with this. The dates coincide with the end of 
the calendar year of ’07, December 31, ’07. And this indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, does make sense and it is recommended. 
 
The second area deals with the Canada Revenue Agency. There 
is some changes to requirements that affect the municipal 
pension plan. What are deemed to be flexible benefits of the 
municipal pension are no longer allowable, and that they need 
to be removed. We trust that the government has consulted with 
stakeholders like SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities]. We have indeed circulated the Bill and have 
not heard any real negative feedback from it. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The third area is a provision that allows for the pension 
allowance to be paid to a new spouse attained after a member’s 
date of retirement. Again we have consulted with individuals 
across the province and have found that there is no real 
opposition to this clause. Indeed it just reflects the changing 
culture of our society. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, we have no 
problem with the main tenets of this Bill and we would concur 
that it move to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 50, 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill 
No. 50, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 50 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 50 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 51 — The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on the Act to amend the public 
employees pension plan, Bill No. 51. This Bill introduces 
changes that allow members to contribute to the pension plan 
during leaves of absence after the age of 65. We understand that 
this is something that was necessary to allow for changes that 
have taken place, especially in the area of the changes to the 
mandatory retirement legislation in this province. This is 
something that’s necessary to reflect other changes that have 
taken place and indeed, Mr. Speaker, we would agree with 
those changes. 
 
A second area is the active and inactive members being allowed 
to move their money to the public employees pension plan. This 
is a significant change and this is something that again we have 
taken it upon ourselves as an opposition to consult with people 
across the province, and during that consultation we did hear 
back from people and not everyone was supportive of it. 
 
What we did hear back was some concern that the government 
didn’t choose to consult with them. We heard that many 
individuals and many people who operate private pension plans 
had some concerns about this and they were very appreciative 
that the opposition chose to consult with them in light of the 
government’s lack of consultation. 
 
And there was concern from private pension funds or private 
pension plans that indeed this would encroach upon their area 
of specialty. And we listened to many concerns. And we 
debated and talked about it, and I even had the chance to ask the 
minister a number of questions in estimates last year about 
changes in this regard. And at the end of the day we agree that 
this is something that is probably necessary in light of a 
competitive environment, that the private stakeholders that we 
consulted with are willing to compete with whatever pension 
plans — be they public or private out there — and that they’re 
going to indeed do that. 
 
One concern regarding this legislation is it was written before 
the budget, and it talks about individuals that cannot be reached 
or cannot be contacted for whatever reason, and at the age of 69 
that the government is able to enact certain rules. That would 
have to be changed to 71 to make sure that it is consistent with 
changes that have happened at the federal level. So we’ll leave 
that with the government to choose when they make that 
change. They could make it in an amendment sooner rather than 
later. That’s the area that we would choose to follow to make 
sure that it is indeed consistent. 
 
At the time, Mr. Speaker, we have no further concerns 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

regarding this legislation, and we recommend that it would 
move to committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 51, 
The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill 
No. 51, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2007 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 51 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 51 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 56 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand and talk a little bit about The Municipalities Amendment 
Act, Bill 56. In general terms this is a housekeeping Bill making 
some housekeeping amendments. A couple of items of note in 
this Bill. It makes a decision of the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board binding on the minister regarding municipal 
restructuring, whether it is denied or approved. It takes pressure 
away from the minister to reverse a decision of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. This amendment also gives 
councils the ability to reimburse electors who challenge the 
validity of the election of a mayor or councillors. 
 
Also included is an amendment that allows councils to establish 
bylaws for public reporting of theft and fraud, similar to the one 
adopted by the provincial government recently. And I’d like to 
repeat that. It allows councils to establish bylaws for public 

reporting of theft and fraud, similar to the one adopted by the 
provincial government recently. It supports local accountability 
and transparency. 
 
This Bill also makes changes to who owes taxes on their trailer 
homes when the owner of the land and the trailer are different. 
The owner of the trailer is now currently responsible for tax 
arrears assessed on that trailer. 
 
Without the written declaration that a property tax payer wishes 
to support the separate school system, his or her taxes will be 
directed to the public education system. This clarifies the Act 
and reconciles it with The Education Act. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is some changes included in this Bill but 
in general terms it is housekeeping. So any questions that we 
have on this we can ask in committee, so I recommend that this 
Bill be forwarded to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 56, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
56, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 56 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 56 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 57 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m 
pleased to rise and make some comments on Bill No. 57, An 
Act to amend The Assessment Management Agency Act. Again 
this Bill is mostly of a housekeeping nature and makes changes 
from previous amendments. 
 
One of the questions that will come up in . . . later on on this 
Bill is how did this Bill get generated? Was it the stakeholders 
that asked for this, for this legislation? Or what prompted this 
legislation and these amendments to come into being? And the 
reason I say that because again it appears that the NDP are 
off-loading costs of SAMA [Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency] onto the municipalities and the school 
divisions. 
 
So it really makes one wonder how much consultation was done 
with the school divisions and/or the municipalities or either. Or 
is this just another case of the NDP and their consultation 
process? They talked to their seatmate or talked to one other 
person and that constitutes consultation. 
 
And this is one that really looks very iffy because it really does 
look like it’s off-loading onto school divisions and 
municipalities. And the school divisions will end up having to 
pay out of the foundation operating grant and thus is reducing 
funding for school programs. 
 
And another question that comes up, and again it brings into 
play the consultation process because many large cities do not 
participate in SAMA yet still have to pay for its operation. And 
so I’m sure that the cities that do not come under . . . participate 
in SAMA, why would they be wishing to pay for SAMA if 
they’re not using the SAMA services? 
 
And it’s also interesting to note that SUMA had offered a 
suggestion to the NDP government to have the province pay 60 
per cent of SAMA costs, 20 per cent to the municipalities, 20 
per cent to school divisions. And SARM offered one that is 
similar at 50 per cent from the province, 25/25 funding split for 
the school divisions and the municipalities. But in this Bill we 
see that the NDP government has opted for a 40/30/30 split 
which is really not very close to what the other agencies are 
asking for — the school divisions and the municipalities. 
 
So it really leads one again to wonder how much consultation 
was done. And it clearly, it clearly is an indication of 
off-loading. And the government has basically ignored the 
options and concerns, and increased the amount with the 
40/30/30 that cash-starved municipalities and school divisions 
have to pay. So the big question here is, who generated this 
Bill? Where was the consultation done? And how did the NDP 
government arrive at these figures of 40/30/30 for SAMA 
costs? 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, questions that we have can be 
dealt with in committee, so at this time I would like to forward 
this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Government Relations that 

Bill No. 57, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
57, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2007 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 57 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 57 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 58 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 58 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thanks again, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise and talk to Bill No. 58 for a couple of minutes, 
An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. This 
Bill will be well-received by municipalities because it lays out 
what amounts the urban and rural municipalities will receive 
from the 2007-2008 budget for revenue sharing. And in this Bill 
it states that the cities will receive 46.8 million; towns, villages, 
and resort villages will receive 20.62 million; rural 
municipalities will receive 49.6 million. 
 
The issue with this Bill, or lack of within this Bill, is a 
long-term plan for revenue sharing. Municipalities, both rural 
and urban, have been talking about long-term funding plan for 
revenue sharing, and they are now going year to year with hat in 
hand, coming to the government saying, how much money are 
we going to get next year? Who knows? There’s nothing in this 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

Bill or nothing from this NDP government that ever talks about 
long-term, revenue-sharing plan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We have been stating all along that revenue sharing should be 
tied to own-source revenues. And with own-source revenues as 
revenues go up, as we are now within the oil and gas sector, 
revenue sharing should automatically go up. The municipalities 
should benefit from increased dollars from oil and gas, not just 
the provincial government that they can go out and try and buy 
an election. 
 
Why is this not a standard formula whereby a base funding 
could be created and then revenue sharing where when oil and 
gas prices, own-source revenue prices, rise that automatically 
the municipalities would receive more money. Thus if they go 
down, there would be base funding, but it would go down in the 
time of base funding. 
 
What does the government do now? Oh no, we can’t do that. 
We want to take in all of the money, and then we’ll dole it out 
to whoever we think and how much we think is necessary. In 
other words, it’s another way that the NDP government can 
grab this pot of money and try and buy votes with a pending 
election. 
 
And we know, if you look at what’s happened in this past 
number of months, how much money has been spent trying to 
buy votes. Now it would almost appear that they’re trying to do 
that within the revenue sharing in Bill 58 — $46.8 million to 
cities. Now one can debate and say, oh boy, what are they 
trying to do with that? Pacify the cities because an election is 
coming? 
 
But we suggest they have chronically . . . the NDP have 
chronically underfunded municipalities and again we’ve seen 
when they chronically underfund municipalities, guess what? 
Property taxes increase, crumbling infrastructure is more 
prevalent, and there’s higher user fees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know the municipalities are going to be 
pleased with receiving some of their own money back but there 
is still no plan for long-term revenue sharing by this NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, that being said, any questions we 
have on this Bill can be dealt with in committee, so I 
recommend this Bill be now sent to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 58, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 
2007 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
58, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 58 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 60 — The 
Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to speak to Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The 
Revenue and Financial Services Act. The main purpose of this 
updates record-keeping requirements for business to include 
electronic record keeping. Something in this day and age, Mr. 
Speaker, I think which is quite reasonable that we ask 
businesses to keep records in an electronic format so they can 
be recalled in a timely and orderly fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another element of this Bill is the $25,000 cap is being 
removed for a penalty when a tax is assessed as a result of an 
audit. Again, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a change that is just in 
keeping with the times. Although $25,000 is a lot of money in 
this day and age, it is time to remove that cap to ensure that 
fines will reflect indeed what the penalty should be for 
non-compliance. 
 
It also increases the penalty for taxes collected and not remitted 
as required. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious area. If any 
business or anybody would accept a tax as a payment and then 
not turn it over to the Crown, it is indeed something that is very 
serious and we would agree that a change in this area has to be 
made. 
 
This Bill also allows the Department of Finance more flexibility 
to share information where it will assist other departments in 
gathering information, other departments and agencies. Again 
this is something that allows more power for the Department of 
Finance. I know I was speaking about this matter to my 
colleague from Indian Head-Milestone just the other day. And 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

we were discussing it and it is indeed something that should be 
addressed. 
 
But what we did discuss was that this also adds responsibility to 
the government, to the Department of Finance, and to the 
Minister of Finance. These extra powers indeed cannot be 
abused where information is shared. We are well aware of the 
Privacy Commissioner and concerns in that regard. While we 
agree that the Department of Finance should have more power 
to share this information, indeed again we call upon the 
Minister of Finance and the Department of Finance to be very 
judicious in the way they share that. 
 
It allows for taxing agreements to be reached with First Nations. 
This is an area, Mr. Speaker, that again is very important. We 
have taken it upon ourselves, as we do with almost all Bills, to 
consult all stakeholders across the province, and we have 
indeed initiated consultation with First Nations groups. We 
haven’t heard back in the entirety of the information that we 
requested. We haven’t heard back from all First Nations groups, 
but we are satisfied at this point, Mr. Speaker, that we will 
continue that consultation process and bring up any concerns at 
the committee stage. So at this time, we will recommend that 
this Bill do indeed go to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 60, 
The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill 
No. 60, The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act 
be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 60 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill No. 60 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 61 — The Vital 
Statistics Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
join into the debate on Bill No. 61, An Act respecting the 
Keeping of Vital Statistics and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was introduced not very long ago. But it was 
interesting. I was looking at the press release by the minister 
just after they introduced this piece of legislation, and it talks 
about this is one of the oldest pieces of legislation in the 
province, and it needed to be looked at. It has been looked at, at 
other times, going back to 1995. 
 
But I also look in the press release, and I find it interesting. It 
says that in 1998 the Act was looked at as well, but it was 
unproclaimed. And I, you know, it does I guess kind of draw 
some questions as to why the Act was passed in the legislature; 
it would come into effect on proclamation, but it never was 
proclaimed. So there really hasn’t been any change in this Act 
for about 12 years. The last change was in 1995 even though 
changes were proposed in ’98, but they weren’t proclaimed. 
 
But after talking to a number of the stakeholders regarding this 
Act, which really just allows for electronic transfer of records 
— be it births or deaths, marriages, electronic transfer of those 
records — I was interested in a bit of correspondence. We did 
hear back from some of the stakeholders. And they were saying 
that Saskatchewan is currently the only province that does not 
have the ability to register deaths or marriages online, but 
hospitals can register births. So there is . . . We’re kind of 
lagging behind in this area. 
 
When we talk to the stakeholders in this area though, they do 
feel that it is a good piece of legislation. In fact also talking to 
some of the stakeholders, there has been some preliminary work 
done in this area. Many of the people that are affected by this 
have done a lot of upgrading in their IT [information 
technology] and are equipped to be able to function once this 
Bill comes into place. And they have been working towards that 
for the last number of years in pilot projects, I do believe. So I 
think most of the technology is in place. 
 
What needs to happen now is this Bill needs to . . . after it’s 
gone through its proper scrutiny through adjourned debates, 
which we feel it has. We haven’t heard any other concerns. I 
guess the only concern that we have heard is that it’s been a 
long time coming. And the stakeholders are interested in seeing 
it passed. And hopefully we don’t run into the stumbles that 
happened in 1998 when the Bill was passed and not proclaimed. 
 
When this Bill is passed and once it goes through the committee 
stages, hopefully it will be proclaimed so that the stakeholders 
can reap the benefits of this legislation change which has been, 
in some cases, probably 12 years in the making. So with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 61, The 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

Vital Statistics Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 61, The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 61 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 61 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 62 — The Vital 
Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 
portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital 
Statistics Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s a 
privilege to rise and talk about Bill No. 62, an Act respecting 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Vital Statistics Act, which I just finished speaking about. And 
what this Bill does is just change other legislation that the 
previous Bill that I spoke about will . . . These changes need to 
be made because of the previous Bill that I spoke about. 
 
I guess really the only thing it affects, The Adoption Act and 
The Change of Name Act, Mr. Speaker, but as I had mentioned 
in the previous Bill, the stakeholders are more than welcome to 
see this Bill go through the House and then be proclaimed once 
it’s gone through the proper channels. So I would move this Bill 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Health, that Bill No. 62, 
The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 62, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 
2007 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 62 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill 62 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
Bill No. 64 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 64 — The 
Graduate Tax Exemption Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into the debate about Bill 64, The Graduate 
Tax Exemption Act. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s ever an area in this province that 
legislation was long overdue, it would be in an area where we 
can retain our graduates in Saskatchewan. We are all aware of 
the statistics of young people leaving Saskatchewan at a record 
rate — young people, students, graduates leaving our province. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have had the worst 
retention rates of this group over the last 15 years, the worst in 
the country, Mr. Speaker. And to be clear, that’s a statistic that 
none of us are proud of. I’m sure none of us on this side are 
proud of it, and I’m sure none of the people over on the 
government side are proud of the lack of retention of our young 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this opposition would certainly support any 
effort, any effort, how small, how large, any effort whatsoever 
by this government to try to reverse this trend. Indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s fair to say we’ve been very reasonable 
when it comes to dealing with this legislation. 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

For too long in this province young people, post-secondary 
graduates have had to leave the province because of a lack of 
job opportunities in Saskatchewan. Graduates did not want to 
leave our province. They wanted to stay here. They wanted to 
make a career here. They wanted to raise their family here, but 
the economic situation was such that they could not find a job 
opportunity here at all. So, Mr. Speaker, because of that I would 
argue, because of many of the policies of the government 
opposite, they had no choice but to leave our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in meeting with students across this province, both 
when I was the post-secondary education critic and now in my 
present responsibilities, students have a lot of ideas on this. 
They have many, many, many, many recommendations. And 
most of what we have heard, they want something that is tuition 
based. They have not seen that from this government. 
 
In fact what we have seen . . . And students commented on 
budget day and after they learned more about the program. 
They said, are savings of $1,100 per year enough to keep our 
young people here? This will do . . . and I’m quoting. This is 
from students and their comments on budget day: “This will do 
precious little to encourage students to return to Saskatchewan.” 
And again the overall theme — students want something that is 
related to tuition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote once again in this House 
something that has been quoted many times in the media and in 
this House. And it comes from the University of Regina 
external affairs VP [vice-president] Kathleen Wilson who, as it 
has been outlined in this House, also serves as the 
Saskatchewan Young New Democrats secretary on their 
provincial executive. And she was quoted on CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] as saying, and I quote: 

 
Students don’t take tax credits into consideration. I mean 
it’s a pretty small detail and especially students who 
haven’t paid taxes before really. I don’t think it’s a big 
consideration. I mean students are going to be going where 
the jobs are. 

 
Very telling words indeed, Mr. Speaker, something that I’m 
hoping that the government listened to, but I’m not sure if they 
did because not long after the budget we had the report from the 
member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre come out. And it’s 
like the Finance minister didn’t talk to the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre about his report because we saw very little 
of the recommendations. 
 
And this was a report that was long overdue. It was supposed to 
be presented in January. We were told that it couldn’t be 
presented at that time, that it would be presented three, four 
months later. We in opposition said, okay we’ll wait for the 
report. And when it came, the report was there, but the 
information that went to the Finance department was not 
included in the budget. So we have some very serious concerns, 
both about the timing, the lack of coordination between the 
author of this report and the Department of Finance, and the 
lack of results. We seem to be spinning our wheels again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I’ll reiterate that this is legislation that is long overdue. 
The Saskatchewan Party will support this initiative. But, Mr. 

Speaker — and here is the important part — we will continue to 
work with students, to listen to students, to develop a much 
better program than the one that the government has put 
forward here. It will be better because students will be a part of 
it. They will be consulted. And their ideas on tuition . . . We’re 
all aware of the program that was implemented in Manitoba to 
receive a 60 per cent rebate on tuition fees. Many students, 
many students say that this is a superior program to what was 
brought in here in Saskatchewan. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we will indeed consult with 
those students and work as an opposition as we always do to not 
only, not only criticize, but to come up with alternatives. And 
the students of Saskatchewan can rest assured that they will be 
able to choose a program between what the government offers 
and what this opposition offers, based on the consultation that 
takes place. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recommend that this Bill now be 
moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment that Bill No. 64, The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that The Graduate Tax Exemption Act, Bill No. 64 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 64 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Bill 64 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 65 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time.] 
 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 65, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act. I am happy to enter into this debate and to talk 
about changes that are necessary in The Income Tax Act. 
 
This Bill is largely housekeeping in nature. It is quite standard 
in its recommendations to make sure that changes to The 
Income Tax Act are fully compatible with other initiatives 
initiated by the government, in particular the graduate tax 
exemption initiatives that I just spoke about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also this Bill has provision for the indexing of The Income Tax 
Act. It’s something that members on this side of the House have 
been advocating for quite some time and are happy to see that 
it’s coming into legislation. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, investment tax credits for manufacturing 
and processing in certain types of non-renewable energy and 
energy equipment between certain dates, that’s something that, 
again something that needs to be done to make sure that 
Saskatchewan laws within Finance and with other laws in other 
departments are compatible within the province and also with 
the federal income tax system. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we have taken it upon ourselves to consult 
stakeholders across Saskatchewan to ask them for their input, to 
ask them if indeed these changes are necessary, or something in 
their view may be offside. And I’m happy to report that we’ve 
had a favourable response from those stakeholders. And we ask 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at this time that this Bill now be 
referred to the committee. Thank you. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I thank the hon. 
member for Silver Springs. Members of the Assembly, the 
motion before the Assembly is adoption of second reading of 
Bill No. 65, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007. It’s 
moved that, it’s resolved that this now be read a second time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — To which committee 
will this Bill be referred? I recognize the Hon. Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move 
that Bill No. 65, The Income Tax Amendment Act be referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
Minister of Finance that Bill No. 65 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
Bill stands referred to the Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and 
Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a pleasure 
to speak to Bill No. 53, An Act to amend certain Environment 
Statutes with respect to matters concerning Inspections and 
Investigations. 
 
Upon research, we see that it’s mainly a housekeeping Bill and 
it’s standardizing terms and wordings throughout the Bill. It 
also allows for additional inspection powers of the conservation 
officers in various areas in the Bill and changes words in areas 
to better understand constitutional challenges, and also 
understand officers are made to be liable for wilful damages 
that may be caused when entering on land in The Forest 
Resources Management Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note though even though 
they’re mainly housekeeping Bills, it’s certainly the, it needs to 
be clarified what conservation officers can and can’t do, their 
rights, their legal rights, and also what liability may be incurred 
when they carry out their job. Certainly in the past we’ve seen 
where there has been, when visiting regional parks, that there’s 
bans on alcohol, and certainly officers need the powers and the 
proper authority to deal with those areas when a disturbance 
breaks out and there’s a ban on alcohol. 
 
It’s unfortunate. Many people are law-abiding and go to parks 
with their families and may want to consume some alcohol but 
there’s always people that overdo it and disturbances break out, 
so certainly we need the officers given the right to deal with 
those issues. And also issues throughout the province when 
they’re dealing with hunters and fishermen and other people 
that are generally law-abiding, but the conservation officers 
need to deal with any infractions that may exist. 
 
As an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the changes in the Bill, 
Bill No. 53, I’d just like to refer to clause no. 6. The explanation 
says: 
 

The inspection provision is expanded to provide inspection 
of vehicles for compliance with regulations. Part of the 
regulation is modelled after the federal Bill C-45 [which is 
the] (Fisheries Act, 2007) to better address the issue of 
constitutional authority respecting the inspection of places 
or vehicles where one of three conditions is met. Officers 
may also request the production of items to which the Act 
applies and inspect anything required of the Act or 
regulations including electronic documents. Wording is 
standardized for [the] four Acts. 
 

So that basically standardizes the wording. 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

Two or three other things of interest. Clause no. 7, the 
explanation is that: 
 

This section is repealed. Instead of including separate 
provisions for stopping vehicles in both the inspection and 
investigation sections, one provision has been proposed to 
address both purposes. A warrantless search [or] 
(investigation) of a vehicle may still be done where 
conditions for a warrant exist, the officer has reasonable 
grounds to believe that there is evidence in the vehicle of 
an offence against the Act and a delay in obtaining a 
warrant would result in danger to human safety or loss of 
evidence. [And then the] Similar wording is applied to 
four Acts. 

 
And it goes on to other things that are just trying to standardize 
the wording across these four Acts. And this in clause no. 9 as 
another example: 
 

This section is repealed and replaced with an expanded 
“Obstruction” section that sets out what constitutes an 
obstruction of an officer in his or her duties. [And again 
the] Words are standardized across four Acts. 

 
So that’s the examples of a various number of items in various 
clauses that are being standardized in the Bill and across the 
four Bills which relate to officers and the work that they do in 
the conservation and in environment. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have sent out some information; we’re still waiting for some 
reply from the stakeholders but we don’t really see any problem 
with this. But we’d like to keep this Bill for a little while longer 
just to wait for some more information. So I’d like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member has 
moved that debate be adjourned on Bill No. 53. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a pleasure 
for me to participate in the debate on this piece of legislation 
this afternoon because it’s of considerable import to the people 
of Cypress Hills and I think some of the concerns they have 
regarding the delivery of services related to health care will be 
addressed in this Bill. But there are issues that have been noted 
as part of this legislation that we have some reservations about 
— not only we as an official opposition, not only some of the 
people from the constituency of Cypress Hills, but others who 
have had a chance to look at this piece of legislation, 
particularly SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 

Services Association], the organization that provides delivery of 
emergency services through the private sector. And I want to 
raise some of their concerns in our discussion today. 
 
[15:15] 
 
This particular piece of legislation I guess is a mixed bag. It has 
some very positive and beneficial elements to it and it has some 
other areas that, although potentially negative, I guess I 
wouldn’t go so far as to say that just now. The problem is that 
some of the areas of this piece of legislation are problematic for 
the private sector service delivery group, and we really would 
like to see that area of contention worked out and resolved 
between these service delivery individuals and organizations 
and the Department of Health before this piece of legislation in 
fact becomes the law of the land. 
 
And so I’d like to review a little bit of the history of this piece 
of legislation and some of the issues surrounding the Bill for 
those people who provide emergency health services in the 
form of ambulance care. Mr. Deputy Chair, this legislation 
formalizes provisions of services provided by affiliates and 
other health care providers that are not actually designated as 
health care organizations, and I specifically refer to ambulance 
services. 
 
The auditor, as we understand it, has over the last number of 
years made a request of the regional health authorities that they 
enter into formalized agreements with these private sector 
health care providers as part of the overall delivery of health 
care in the regional health authorities. And I think that’s good 
advice. I think the auditor has struck kind of an important point 
when he recommends that. Because in this day and age it’s 
important to have formalized agreements, details of which are 
understood by both contracting parties. And I think the habit 
has been in the past to require a much less formalized 
agreement and, in some cases, just a verbal agreement to 
provide services. 
 
But the auditor says in this very complicated area of service 
delivery, and in other areas of services that health regions 
require, there really needs to be a pretty clear understanding — 
a formalized arrangement — as to how those services are going 
to be provided, how they’ll be paid for, how they’ll be treated 
going forward. And so as part of the legislation here today, the 
auditor’s recommendations are being addressed by the 
Department of Health and the provincial government. And I 
think we, as an official opposition, acknowledge the 
requirement of the Provincial Auditor as a needed part of this 
particular legislation so that everybody, all parties to the 
agreements, know what their obligations and responsibilities 
are. 
 
Formal agreements, Mr. Deputy Chair, will actually ensure 
performance standards that can be met or ought to be met by the 
service providers. They’ll outline responsibilities much more 
specifically and clearly, and they’ll really ensure that at the end 
of the day Saskatchewan Health is accountable for the services 
that it contracts the providers of these services — that it 
contracts from, I’m sorry, the providers of these services. 
 
So clarity will be provided but so will accountability, and I 
think that that is especially important in this particular area. In 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

this respect these types of formal agreements are I would say 
overdue, and as I mentioned earlier the auditor has been 
suggesting that these kind of agreements be entered into for 
some time now. And it’s just as a piece of this legislation, as 
part of this particular endeavour, that the effort to meet the 
auditor’s recommendations has been complied with. 
 
However there remain, Mr. Deputy Chair, some concerns with 
this Bill, and as is our duty as the official opposition we want to 
consult with some of the stakeholders that would be affected by 
legislation of this nature, and we have done that. And in some 
instances the concerns of some of the stakeholders have been 
addressed, and we recognize the good work that has gone into 
making these contentious areas finally resolved. But I regret to 
say that there are still some outstanding issues, and from what I 
understand discussions have been going on between 
Saskatchewan Health and SEMSA, which we indicated earlier 
is a group of private sector emergency service delivery 
organizations and/or companies. 
 
And given the history of this government’s intentions when it 
comes to ambulance providers or ambulance service providers, 
as I would recall the introduction of The Ambulance Act a 
number of years ago, probably four or five years ago, brought a 
great deal of upheaval and concern to this sector. There was 
tremendous resistance to the efforts of the government when the 
concept of The Ambulance Act was brought to the public — 
especially in rural Saskatchewan, but not reserved or 
exclusively in those areas of the province. There are other areas 
that depend heavily on private sector ambulance service 
delivery that found that Act objectionable. And it would appear 
almost that what the government wasn’t able to accomplish in 
The Ambulance Act a number of years ago, that they are trying 
to accomplish with this piece of legislation. 
 
So there remain concerns among the Saskatchewan emergency 
measures services association, the acronym for which is 
SEMSA. And I know that there have been meetings from time 
to time between this organization and the deputy minister, 
where they’ve tried to resolve the outstanding issues. But there 
do remain two specific outstanding concerns, and I’d like to 
detail them for the House today. And for the sake of this debate, 
I think it’s important that this be on the record. 
 
In section 36.1 of Bill No. 31, there’s the matter of 
compensation for termination or non-renewal of a written 
agreement. And I think this is a particularly problematic area 
for the ambulance operators because what it says here is that an 
evaluation of the business — that would be the ambulance 
operator, the business of providing this ambulance service — 
under a fair market value concept is based on the fact that 
contracts for one year’s duration or 12 months will be the basis 
on which the business is evaluated. That might sound 
reasonable from the perspective of the casual observer, but 
rarely would a business operator say that the business I 
undertook or conducted in the last 12 months, the contracts that 
I had in place in the last 12 months, would substantiate the 
amount of my investment overall in this business. 
 
The fact of the matter is that a 12-month duration and the 
amount of money and revenue you can generate over a 
12-month period may not come anywhere close to reflecting the 
true value of the business. And in many instances you can have 

ambulance operations with two, three, four, maybe half a dozen 
expensive ambulance vans, fully equipped ambulance vans, that 
would amount to literally millions of dollars. And in a situation 
like that, is the true value of that company reflected in the 
contracts they had in place in the previous 12 months? Well I 
would argue, not likely. And I think most of the people in the 
business of providing ambulance service in that situation would 
make the same argument. And they find it particularly difficult 
for them to accept that the fair market value for their business 
would be based on the previous 12 months of business. 
 
And I think that that particular stumbling block is going to 
prevent a resolution of this difficulty unless of course 
somebody’s willing to move. And I think if you want to come 
to a resolution on this, the government is going to have to 
address that particular issue because it’s unfair to the existing 
operators in this province. 
 
The second area that is of major concern is section 37 where it 
talks about cessation of payments if a dispute arises. The time 
allowed for dispute resolution under this particular section is a 
period of 14 days. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m sure that you 
would concur, given the experiences we all have in the world 
that we know of which is filled with complications and 
legalities and sometimes lawsuits — whatever comes to bear on 
our contentious issues these days — 14 days to resolve the 
dispute seemed highly and wholly inadequate. And the 
legislation in this particular Bill only allows for 14 days to 
resolve disputes, and that’s simply not enough. 
 
And if in fact payments are stopped to the service delivery 
company or organization, it could mean that the payroll of that 
company couldn’t be met. If pay is interrupted while this 
dispute is being resolved then the obligations of the service 
operator might be, well, unmet. And that means employees 
would possibly go without their paycheques; that other bills 
accumulated over the previous 30 days would be unpaid; that 
any number of other financial difficulties might ensue. And so 
that’s a particularly problematic area for the members of 
SEMSA as well. And both the operator and staff would 
obviously be adversely affected by this type of consideration. 
 
It seems that instead of The Ambulance Act which this 
government introduced or tried to bring to bear on the people of 
the province — they were unsuccessful then as I alluded to 
earlier — and now in order to accomplish the same purposes 
they tried with The Ambulance Act, ambulance operators and 
members of SEMSA are being thrown into the mix with other 
health care organizations under this new Act. And it’s simply 
inappropriate to the realities of the companies that provide the 
ambulance services, and to the delivery of suitable ambulance 
response for the people of the province. 
 
There remains concerns about how the clauses that I just 
alluded to will affect the ability of operators to make their 
businesses not only suitable and practical and operational on a 
day-to-day basis, but how it will impact their long-term 
viability. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, viability speaks to the heart 
of financial success. Viability speaks to whether or not they can 
meet payroll, whether or not they can meet their financial 
obligations. 
 
They also need to be able to determine with some certainty, the 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

future. And if somebody comes to terminate your contract and 
wants to buy you out based on your 12 months of previous 
business, that’s bad enough. But that very provision doesn’t 
allow the ambulance operators today to plan too far in the 
future. 
 
You know, if their business is always under threat to some 
extent, they aren’t able to plan for the long term. They aren’t 
able to make good business decisions about buying new and 
more modern equipment as expensive as that is. You want some 
assurance going forward that your business is going to be 
respected and that your financial requirements will also be 
acknowledged. 
 
So we need a stable business environment for these ambulance 
operators. We need it for the sake of the continuum of service 
that they have provided, for the certainty of service. We need it 
so that they can plan their own business future, so that they can 
offer stability to their employees, and so that they can obtain 
financing if they need it. If they need financial backing from a 
financial institution, if they need a line of credit, if they need a 
loan, that given the stability of their enterprise, their business 
enterprise, they can make an application that would be well 
received by a financial institution. 
 
It’s really a shame, Mr. Deputy Chair, to pass legislation such 
as this when significant stakeholders have . . . Maybe they’ve 
been consulted, but maybe there hasn’t been enough effort to 
find resolution to these very troubling parts of this legislation. 
And we need to see a resolution achieved where both the 
Department of Health and the members of SEMSA can live 
with the new legislation. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I sold farm machinery for a 
long time, and if I . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
question becomes what kind, automatically. And I was a John 
Deere salesman and very proud of it. But when I was selling 
equipment, you know, if I arrived at a deal with a customer and 
he wasn’t satisfied, I likely wasn’t able to have that customer as 
a repeat customer in the future. 
 
There was an elderly gentleman that used to own the dealership. 
After he retired, he’d come around and he’d give us advice free 
of charge. And one of the things he said to me that stuck with 
me over the years is, you know, when you’ve completed a deal, 
if both the salesman and the customer go away a little mad, 
there’s probably a pretty fair deal. If both parties feel they 
didn’t get everything they wanted, it was probably a pretty fair 
deal. 
 
And in this case, I think I’d like to extrapolate to this particular 
piece of legislation. If the Department of Health and the 
operators of SEMSA can come to an agreement where both of 
them feel that they’ve had to give up a little bit, it’s probably a 
pretty reasonable deal. But if one side feels it has to give up a 
lot more than the other side, it’s pretty likely that it wasn’t a fair 
deal at all. 
 
And I think the Department of Health and the minister should 
consider that in their discussions with the SEMSA operators 
because they have very much at stake in this particular piece of 
legislation. And we really would appreciate that kind of 
co-operative approach to finding resolution to this stumbling 

block in this particular piece of legislation, rather than have the 
government use the heavy hand of law to move legislation 
forward that really isn’t going to benefit anybody. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order for the two parties to 
come to consensus on this particular piece of legislation, in 
order to give them some more time, and in order for the 
negotiations to continue, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cypress Hills has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 31. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today and enter into the debate on An Act to 
amend The Court of Appeal Act, 2000. 
 
It’s really a very brief Bill. There’s only, I think, about a page 
and a half — one page. So the Bill is quite brief. But what it 
does do, and in the explanatory notes it just talks about the 
amendment of section 3 will reduce the size of the Court of 
Appeal from nine judges to seven, effective as vacancies occur. 
So that’s pretty much it. That’s the whole intent of the piece of 
legislation. 
 
We’ve had the opportunity to talk to people that are 
stakeholders in this area and see whether that is a good move, 
moving from nine to seven. But I think before I get into what a 
number of those stakeholders have said, I think it’s important to 
realize that a number of years ago — two years ago at least — 
our Justice critic, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, talked 
about this very thing in estimates. He had suggested at that time 
that we should look at reducing the Court of Appeal from nine 
judges to whatever the number should be to be able to facilitate 
the workload that they’re receiving. 
 
The government of course at that time, I guess probably 
because it was an idea that came from the opposition . . . 
Generally that is the case, if we come up with the idea, they 
better just sit on it for a little while because if they implement it 
too quickly, it looks like they’re just taking another one of our 
ideas. So I guess they sat on it for a couple of years before they 
then decided to change the legislation. Now they’re changing 
the legislation to encompass pretty much exactly what our 
excellent critic of Justice had said a couple years ago — the 
member from Southeast. Well, some of our members are saying 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

maybe not excellent but . . . But anyway, he had definitely 
brought this idea forward. 
 
And it’s always interesting to see the lag. You know, as I said, 
we had talked about it . . . or the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast had talked about it in committee a number of times, 
and then nothing was done for a couple of years until now the 
introduction of the Bill. 
 
We’ve had the opportunity to talk to the stakeholders and to see 
that . . . Is seven the right number? Is the workload for seven the 
right number, or should it be six? Should it be eight? Should it 
have remained at nine? We had heard already from a couple of 
years ago that we had realized that it needed to drop, and now 
that the government has finally moved on that, we’re happy 
about that. 
 
I do know though that there are a number of other members on 
our side of the House that would like to speak to this Bill. 
Maybe they’ve had issues with the Court of Appeal and the 
number of judges in the Court of Appeal. I know I haven’t had 
any issue that way. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until we give all 
members on this side of the House — such as the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood may want to enter into the debate 
— until we give all members on this side of the House time to 
speak to this Bill, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Indian Head-Milestone is moving adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 37. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 43 — The 
Payday Loans Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am certainly pleased that I’m able to enter into the 
debate on this particular Bill. This is a new Bill; it’s not an 
amendment to an existing Bill. It’s a Bill that deals with 
regulating an industry that is a fairly new industry of very 
short-term loans as the name infers, payday loans. And to the 
industry’s credit, I believe there was some initiative taken by 
the industry to ask for some regulation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I certainly concur with that opinion. 
 
I think statistics will indicate that those people who are clients 
of the short-term payday loans are quite often people who may 
for whatever reason have some difficulty in managing their 
finances, whether that be due to lack of long-term, permanent 
employment, or perhaps it’s a situation of a case where 
particularly young people never really received the type of 
information that would enable them to manage their salaries and 
their income. 
 

And so I think, speaking in generalities — I know when you 
generalize there’s always exceptions to the generality — but 
speaking in generalities, I think the vast majority of clients of 
this particular industry are very vulnerable and can be easily 
taken advantage of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And therefore I think 
it is incumbent that governments act and set up safeguards so 
that the individuals are protected and also the industry knows 
what the regulations and rules of their business is. And that’s 
what this Act is attempting to do. 
 
The minister outlined in his second reading speech a number of 
things that this Bill does. It requires the payday lenders to be 
licensed. It sets maximum limits as far as the costs. And the 
cost can be made up of a couple, at least a couple of things: 
interest rates and fees. And these can be very prohibitive. I 
understand that under certain . . . I believe it’s under the 
Criminal Code that the maximum interest rate cannot exceed 60 
per cent. Well if you think of 60 per cent as a maximum interest 
rate, I mean that’s prohibitive. I don’t know of anyone that 
could possibly service a loan that is 60 per cent even though it 
may be very short, and I think in most cases these loans are 
very short. 
 
So it also prevents lenders from making more than one loan to 
individuals which would minimize the risk to individuals. It 
also indicates that companies who have multiple places of 
business within the province, each one of those places of 
business must be licensed. 
 
There is quite a number of provisions within the Bill. As you 
might know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite a lengthy Bill. And 
from reading the Bill, it looks like, it appears that this Bill is the 
framework, but there are a lot of the detail which really will 
indicate the effectiveness of the Bill, will be developed in 
regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that certainly leaves us 
with some concern because, as the saying goes, the devil is in 
the detail. 
 
And until we have some of those details . . . and I know there 
are some concerns both from the consumers but also from the 
industry. As I said, this is a new Bill, and I think there is more 
time is required, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to look into the various 
sections of the Bill, so that the stakeholders need, I believe, a bit 
more time to make their thoughts known, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And so at this time I would move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood is moving adjournment of debate on 
Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 46 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 46 — The Crown 
Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is a Bill that’s called The Crown Minerals 
Act, and it deals with minerals in Saskatchewan that are owned 
by the Crown — not the Crown corporations, but the Crown in 
right as the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are some interesting items in this particular Bill I think 
need to have some exploration done with them as to why 
they’re in place and why the changes are taking place within 
this Act. The one in particular that caught my eye was called 
acquired oil and gas rights. Now in Saskatchewan traditionally 
we’ve had two different kinds of oil and gas rights. We’ve had 
freehold rights which are held by individuals that in most cases 
acquired them with the homestead rights when they acquired 
land or purchased land initially. And in the main, that is in the 
southeast corner of the province up along the Manitoba border 
because they acquired their mineral rights when they purchased 
their homestead rights. 
 
The rest of the province I’m told, at one point in time back in 
approximately the mid-1930s, individuals had the right to buy 
the Crown minerals at that time. And it may have been the time 
when the province actually acquired the Crown minerals from 
the federal government that the individuals had that opportunity 
as well. 
 
I know one farmer out west. I know one farmer out west in an 
oil field that I worked in, in the Swift Current area near Hazlet, 
said that he had the opportunity to acquire the mineral rights on 
his land at that point in time, and he said, but in the mid-1930s, 
who had any money? 
 
Well when I worked there — and this was in 1970 — that 
particular piece of property was still making, at that time, 2,500 
barrels of oil a day and had been in production since 1952. So it 
had been producing at that point in time for almost 20 years and 
was still producing a very significant amount of oil. But while 
he had had the opportunity to purchase the mineral rights, those 
mineral rights rested with the Crown. And that’s the case across 
most of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when this Bill talks about acquired oil and gas rights, you 
have to ask yourself: acquired from who? Under what 
circumstances? I do know of circumstances that the Crown has 
acquired mineral rights because there’s a capital tax in place on 
mineral rights. And I believe what it is, is if an individual or 
corporation holds a million acres or more, there’s a 2 per cent 
capital tax on those acres, and that’s a significant amount of 
money if there is no production on that land. 
 
So I know that in the past the government has picked up some 
considerable amount of what we would call freehold land from 
corporations in the past because they have not wanted to pay the 
capital tax on those mineral rights. And in one particular case I 
know of, where there was a company called Freehold oil and 
gas as well as Farmers’ Mutual, that farmers in the late 1940s, 
early 1950s had entered into an agreement where they turned 
over approximately 80 per cent of their mineral rights to this to 
someone like the more co-operative organizations, Farmers 
Mutual, which in turn — through some means that I don’t 
understand all the legalities of or the confusion that resulted in 
this — that land, those mineral rights were turned over to a 
private corporation even though they were supposed to have 

been held in co-op. 
 
And then a significant amount of that land was non-productive 
as far as oil at that particular point in time, and the Crown 
acquired those Crown mineral . . . the mineral rights on those, 
and so it would have become acquired oil and gas rights. So 
that’s the one area that it may take place. I suppose an 
individual, if they wanted to, could turn over the mineral rights 
that they own to the Crown, free and gratis. I think that would 
be the extremely rare occasion that that would happen because 
these are all seen as assets or at least potential assets at some 
point in the future. We all hope that the diamond mine is found 
on our particular piece of land although it may be astronomical 
that it would happen. But nevertheless people always have 
dreams. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The other area that was pointed out by a colleague, that you 
could also acquire, the Crown could acquire these mineral 
rights in the case where land is being subdivided for urban 
development, that the urban municipality may not want to have 
to deal with potential production in their jurisdiction because of 
some of the complications that can arise in that area, 
particularly if the area might have sour gas. And so there would 
be concerns about safety, and some municipalities would not 
want to have to deal with it. 
 
So to develop a piece of property, the Crown may very well 
acquire those mineral rights at that point in time so that the 
urban development could proceed. And then there would be no 
concerns about any mineral development occurring on the same 
property because if two separate owners have the surface and 
the mineral rights, both owners have right to access their 
property. And so the owner of the mineral rights can acquire 
access through the Surface Rights Arbitration Board, if 
necessary, to be able to access their property, the value of their 
property, which in this case would be the mineral rights. So an 
urban municipality may not want to have to deal with this, so 
that’s perhaps where acquired oil and gas rights become a part 
of this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But yet the changes that are occurring in this, I’m not sure how 
it affects the Bill that’s already in place. I know the government 
has said that this is worthwhile legislation, and yet it doesn’t 
given any rationale as to why the change needs to take place, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so that’s a bit of a curious entity that 
the government has provided no real good rationale as to why it 
wants to — at least from what I’ve heard the government talk 
about — provided no real good rationale as to why this needs to 
take place other than to give the government more access to 
these acquired lands and others, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think in my own mind I need to have some more 
explanations dealt with on this. And I think I see one of the 
ministers at the back who is prepared to say he’s prepared to 
provide me with some assistance in providing that information, 
although he is an urban member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and may 
not be totally familiar with mineral rights and how they affect 
people in Saskatchewan because in my area there is a 
significant impact to the mineral rights. 
 
The government gathers a huge volume of dollars. I think the 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

Finance minister could elaborate on that, probably more than a 
billion dollars. And while those monies are collected by the 
Crown through royalties on those mineral rights, very little of 
that money in turn is put back into the areas where the 
production takes place to support the infrastructure that’s 
needed to provide for this production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it would be very worthwhile if the ministers opposite 
were to give some consideration to that, that while they’re 
extracting this huge volume of dollars at the present time from 
the oil and gas industry, that some of that money needs to go 
back into the local infrastructure where the actual production 
takes place, where the roads are taking that damage, and where 
the other infrastructures such as schools and hospitals need to 
be maintained to provide employment opportunities. So I’d like 
to give the minister the opportunity to do that, so at this time I 
would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cannington has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 46, 
The Crown Minerals Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 48 — The Freehold 
Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
Act is a corollary to the previous one, the Crown mineral Act. 
This one deals with explanations on what freehold lands are. 
Freehold lands are mineral rights owned by individuals or 
corporations that acquired them either at the time they 
homesteaded or acquired the land at first settlement or have 
purchased the mineral rights of someone who had acquired 
them in that manner in the beginning. 
 
And I had mentioned in my previous speech about Farmers 
Mutual, Freehold oil and gas, how they had acquired the 
mineral rights from the original homesteaders, from the original 
people that had settled the land and had received those mineral 
rights in that manner and how they had joined together to put in 
place an organization, the two organizations that I mentioned, to 
share co-operatively the revenues that would have come from 
those surface rights — excuse me, not the surface rights — 
from the mineral rights, and collectively they would be 
distributed amongst all the unit holders. Well that failed to 
happen. 
 
That carried on into the mid-1950s, late 1950s when changes 
occurred with the board of directors there and the land, the 
mineral rights were sold to Scurry-Rainbow at the time. And 
there was a good many people in this legislature that were 
aware of it — in the province of Saskatchewan, in Regina in 

particular — that were very aware that there was some concerns 
at that point in time about how those transactions had taken 
place and to the legalities of them. Nevertheless they went 
ahead, and those farmers and those landowners who had put 
their mineral rights into Farmer’s Mutual and freehold oil and 
gas lost the value of those mineral rights. 
 
While they did receive in exchange non-voting shares in the 
corporations that had bought those from Farmer’s Mutual and 
freehold oil and gas, there was never any dividends paid, to my 
knowledge, on that. There was never any appreciation in the 
value of those shares. So over time while the oil and gas was 
produced off of that land, the original owners of those mineral 
rights received no benefits because of that. They simply 
received the shares that were originally issued to them in 
exchange for the mineral rights that had been held previously. 
 
Also it created a huge problem because there were others who 
were interested in developing the oil and gas industry in 
Saskatchewan but couldn’t access the land because it was held 
by Scurry-Rainbow or other companies at that particular point 
in time. And it stifled the oil development in Saskatchewan, 
particularly in the southeast corner of Saskatchewan at that 
time. 
 
So freehold oil and gas is generally more particular to southeast 
Saskatchewan than it is to the rest of Saskatchewan but it’s a 
direct benefit to a good number of the communities in my 
constituency and the individuals that benefit from them. And 
many of those individuals are now very, very strong supporters 
of their community, providing philanthropic support to the 
rinks, to the hospitals, to the schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
so it becomes of great interest and value to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So again I look forward to what the ministers can provide in 
enlightenment as to why these changes are needed. I know that 
some of my colleagues are also interested in addressing these 
particular issues, so at this time I would like to move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cannington has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 48, 
The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion for 
adjournment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 45 — The 
Agricultural Societies Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

responding to and speaking to Bill No. 45, An Act to repeal The 
Agricultural Societies Act and make consequential amendments 
to other Acts, I just want to raise a few issues as I enter into this 
debate. 
 
In the minister’s opening comments regarding Bill No. 45, The 
Agricultural Societies Act, he acknowledged the fact that 
agricultural societies, the first agricultural societies Act was 
first drafted before Saskatchewan became a province which, 
Mr. Speaker, we all know — or Deputy Speaker — that’s some 
100 years ago, which speaks to the importance that agriculture 
has played in this province for the past 100 years. 
 
The minister also mentioned that since then Saskatchewan has 
developed a much more advanced economy. And some of the 
changes that we’ve seen in our economy certainly reflect the 
fact that, while agriculture has played and continues to play a 
significant role, we also recognize the fact that this province is a 
province that’s been blessed with the resources of abundance. I 
believe we’re the third highest in oil and gas in the country, one 
of the largest in potash. We certainly have uranium sources that 
a lot of jurisdictions would dearly love to have, given the issues 
surrounding the environment. 
 
And I believe one of the members from Saskatoon spoke today 
about a recent meeting of a former vice-president in regards to 
the environment. And as we look at the overall impact of 
agriculture and we talk about the environment, no doubt some 
of the issues that are surrounding the whole issue around global 
warming and the concerns that are being raised . . . And I would 
add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in some cases some of those concerns 
certainly on one hand will have, a group of scientists will really 
belabour the fact that we’re on a spiral downward, and yet on 
the other hand you’ll have other scientists pointing out that 
there’s research indicating that the issue is not as desperate as 
we’re led to believe. 
 
But when we talk about environment — bringing this back to 
agriculture and agricultural societies — the agriculture 
community is quite well aware of the impact of how we conduct 
ourselves, how we farm, the way we farm, and the way we 
produce commodities. Even that can have an impact on our 
environment. I know that through the years we’ve all been 
warned about the fact that as we remove trees and part of the 
landscape has certainly changed, as the minister indicated. 
 
We’ve seen new technologies advance in the area of agriculture. 
We’ve seen new economies grow on the province of 
Saskatchewan. And when we talk about agricultural societies 
and agriculture in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think back 
and I look at what the community agricultural societies that are 
currently active in my constituency are representing. And when 
you attend a number of their fairs — and no doubt many 
members in this Assembly have attended an agricultural society 
fair in some form or another whether it’s in rural or urban 
centres — these groups of individuals who have set up these 
societies, in many cases they set up the agricultural society for 
one reason and that was to promote agriculture as an economic 
engine in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it might 
be needed even more than it has been in the past for the simple 
reason that has been pointed out. Certainly our economy has 

evolved. While we’re not as reliant on agriculture and 
agriculture production in our economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan because of the place that oil and gas exploration 
has taken in the province, because of where the potash industry 
has now moved, and of one of the largest fertilizer companies in 
the world now has its headquarters here in the province of 
Saskatchewan or even the whole economy that is developing 
around uranium. 
 
So in some ways those economies have diminished the role of 
agriculture. But the facts are we can have all the oil and gas we 
want. We can heat our homes. We can derive revenue through 
the sale of potash and that’ll put revenues into the coffers of the 
province of Saskatchewan. But as individuals, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we all are very reliant, we’re still very reliant on the 
agriculture community because potash, outside of the use in 
agriculture, doesn’t put food on the table. Oil and gas outside of 
generating, creating job opportunities, unless there’s an 
agriculture community creating and growing the food, oil and 
gas doesn’t necessarily put food on the table except for the fact 
that it may be used to transport that commodity from the field to 
the urban communities and into our large urban centres through 
our local grocery stores. 
 
So we see that while the ag societies have diminished — and I 
believe that’s where the minister was going when he suggested 
that this Bill is not very long. I understand that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You look at the Bill, it’s a one-page Bill and it’s not 
only repealing The Agriculture Societies Act, it also was 
repealing The Auctioneers Act, The Cities Act, and The 
Municipalities Act. 
 
[16:00] 
 
While it’s a fairly short Bill, it also reminds us of the fact that in 
100 years, yes we’ve moved quite a ways from being a strictly 
agricultural-based economy to being a very broad-based 
economy as far as the revenue that is generated from other 
sources. But I trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we do not forget 
the role that agriculture continues to play in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the concerns I know that many of my constituents raise 
in view of the fact that a lot of my constituency is agriculture 
and the fact that we are seeing diminishing numbers of people 
in some of our rural communities because of the challenges the 
agricultural community has faced over the past number of years 
with low commodity prices. And then as we saw last year we 
had quite a diversity in weather conditions in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the Southwest of the province. We had an area 
of the province where the agricultural community was facing a 
significant drought and had to cut back on what they could do 
because of the impact drought had on them. 
 
When yet on the other hand, in the northeast part of the 
province many producers got less than 25 per cent of the crop in 
the ground. And then the bit they did get, by the time fall rolled 
around the rains came again and they were unable to harvest 
that grain. And so that left producers . . . On one hand producers 
were dried out and on the other hand producers were drowned 
out. And then you had an area of the province where actually 
producers had an excellent crop. 
 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

And for the consumer in the province of Saskatchewan, they 
were fortunate that we didn’t have a total calamity or 
catastrophe in the agricultural community. And one would say 
well it really, it really doesn’t matter that much because we’re 
. . . In the big scheme of things we’re still a small player in the 
overall world agriculture production. 
 
But the facts are I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at 
some of the numbers and I see that the supply of food — what’s 
on hand if there was a total catastrophe in this world — there’s 
something like 60 or 90 days carry-over. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s not very much when you look at the seasons and 
how long you move or it takes to move from that time of 
harvest back into seeding and back into harvest. 
 
So I think it points out the fact that agriculture continues to play 
an important role in the province of Saskatchewan, and I’m 
concerned in some ways with regards to the fact that this Bill is 
almost sending a bit of a signal that agriculture isn’t as 
important any more. Some of the minister’s comments almost 
leave us with that thought. 
 
And I know that people across Saskatchewan, especially rural 
Saskatchewan, are feeling that they have not been listened to 
very carefully, that some of the challenges they’ve been facing 
have not been heard very clearly, and that they, well they are a 
smaller number in proportion to the overall population. 
 
And I believe nationally we’re less than 2 per cent now. The 
agricultural community or people in food production is less than 
2 per cent. That’s a significant number, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but that less than 2 per cent still is providing more food than we 
can consume in the country of Canada, which talks to the ability 
of agricultural producers right across this country to produce. 
And it speaks to the heart and soul, not only of our province but 
the agricultural community in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I look at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the comments the 
minister made, and we look at what some of the concerns that 
have been raised by the agricultural community, and I know 
many of the volunteers who are parts of agricultural boards 
across this province lament the fact that we have moved so 
much in a significant way from agriculture being a priority in 
this province, and it has been a concern. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many members in this Assembly 
will know that many of the members have actually a 
background and have come from rural communities. And many 
can go back to their rural communities and what they see is a 
dramatic shift in population. They’ve seen their communities, 
the communities that they grew up and used to call home, how 
that community has slowly lost population and as a result 
they’ve lost businesses in the communities. 
 
And part of the reason for that loss: you just look around, and 
you look at the farm sizes. What was it 20 or 30 years ago? You 
still had farms with a half and three-quarter sections or a 
section. Nowadays, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to survive you’re 
looking at 2 to 3 to in some cases 10,000 acres being farmed by 
one farm family or by a company. 
 
And what that has done has reduced the number of people that 
continue to be part of the agriculture community. And also with 

the ability we have to commute from point A to point B and the 
economies of scale, even in the farm communities, many times 
just to help the farm survive, you’re looking even outside of 
your local community because you can get a better deal. If you 
save 10 cents on a commodity here by volume, it can make a 
significant impact to the bottom line on your farm and on its 
survival. 
 
So there are and will continue to be significant challenges in 
Saskatchewan, in the agriculture community. And it’s an issue, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where people will continue to have the 
debate in the coffee shops as to what’s happening to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about rural 
Saskatchewan, we’re all aware of the Save Our Schools 
committee, and we’re also . . . And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
speaks to a couple of things and directly related to agriculture. 
It’s the fact that many rural communities are finding that, as 
their population has decreased, so has the number of students in 
schools and the challenge to keeping these schools open. And 
there again, when I was growing up, it wasn’t uncommon for 
most families to be four or five and six members to a family. In 
my parents’ generation, it wasn’t uncommon to have families of 
11 to 14. And so you can see how it was fairly easy to fill a 
school, a schoolroom or classroom. But nowadays, it’s 
becoming a challenge. 
 
So the issues around agriculture are actually very broad and 
very far ranging. And while this piece of legislation is actually 
fairly small and minute, I think it is a fairly significant piece of 
legislation as well. And I would trust that in all of this, that this 
government, while we’ve had issues raised before about the 
lack of consultation, that there has been actually some 
significant consultation. And we’ve taken the time or the 
government has taken the time to talk to leadership outside of 
the larger urban centres, not just the department or some of the 
larger groups within the province, but they’ve actually met with 
leadership from across the province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to first of all say how 
proud I am of the work that has been done by the many 
agriculture societies across our province. And it’s certainly a 
pleasure to attend the agricultural fairs in the constituency, just 
to observe how these groups and these societies, through their 
fairs, continue to promote agriculture and its importance in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the role that agriculture serves in 
ensuring that the large grocery stores and grocery chains have 
the product on the shelf so then when people go shopping to 
feed their families they can know that there will be a 
commodity there for them. 
 
And as I mention that, I think to myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think to myself of some of the pictures we’ve seen in other parts 
of the world. When we go to the grocery store — whether it’s a 
Safeway, whether it’s an IGA [Independent Grocers Alliance] 
or a Superstore — we walk in and we just see lines of produce, 
lines of canned goods. And those shelves are filled to the limit. 
And yet I’m reminded of the fact there’s other parts of the 
world where we’ve seen pictures of people going to shop and 
there’s hardly anything on the shelf. 
 
And I think that again speaks very well of how the agriculture 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

community has responded to meet the needs and to provide the 
commodities and the food goods that people look for, for 
sustenance on a daily basis. And I think at the end of the day, 
one of the other things that speaks well of the agriculture 
community is how many places across our province, where we 
have food banks — and the Canadian food bank for one — 
where farmers have donated a quarter section and then 
equipment dealers and chemical companies and fertilizer 
companies have worked together on that quarter section to grow 
whatever commodity. And then they sell, and they then give the 
return from that commodity to provide food for people in other 
parts of the world who unfortunately, due to the circumstances 
beyond their control, are lacking and are in desperate need of 
having food sources supplied to them. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe when we look at the 
agriculture societies and their role and their endeavour to ensure 
that people of Saskatchewan do not forget the importance in the 
role of agriculture in this province, it’s important for us to 
remember that there is a role for agriculture communities. We 
want to acknowledge the role the agriculture societies have 
made and continue to make in this province. And I know some 
of my colleagues would also like to speak to this Bill as well, so 
I therefore at this time move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Moosomin has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 45, 
The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a privilege for me to stand and make a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 
2007. And I believe this Bill is just An Act to Amend The 
Wildlife Act of 1998. 
 
As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my voice is somewhat 
different. It is a little hoarse. My colleague from Cannington 
said he was going to give me a present, and he give me his cold. 
I’ve had it for a few days, and I would like to pass it on to 
somebody else. But I have many comments to make. I don’t 
know if my voice will hang out, but I’ll do my best, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in some of the comments regarding 
this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe just in looking at the 
Bill, in summary, this wildlife Act or amendment to The 

Wildlife Act gives the deputy wildlife officers the same power 
as our wildlife officers. And in addition it gives the additional 
inspection powers to these deputy wildlife officers. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anybody that’s a hunter or a 
fisherman in the province of Saskatchewan knows the role that 
COs [conservation officer] play. And you have to work with 
them because they are the ones that enforce the management of 
the wildlife and the environment. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not that long ago that I 
remember that the COs that are today were known as DNRs, 
and it was part of the Department of Natural Resources. And 
still today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no matter where you go in the 
province of Saskatchewan, many people still refer to our COs as 
DNRs. It just kind of resembles them, and they know what 
they’re talking about. 
 
For COs nowadays, there are many names. They’re SERM 
[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management] 
officials. They’re Cos. They’re wildlife managers, whatever. 
But when it comes back to DNR, when they’re referred to 
DNR, everybody knows who you’re talking about. And maybe 
that should be back what they should be because COs a while 
ago looked after the natural resources of our province. And we 
have in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many, many natural 
resources which the nowadays COs have to look after. 
 
One of the things I wanted to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
regarding COs is back in I believe — correct me if I’m wrong, 
if I’ve got wrong in the year — was I believe in 2002, and that’s 
when the present government decided that, through budget cuts, 
they were going to do away with 200 COs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Two hundred COs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a lot 
of COs. Most of which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were from the 
North, and most were from the rural, but the biggest majority of 
them were from the North. Now can you imagine up in the 
North as we have today . . . we have lakes. We have wildlife. 
It’s in abundance. But we have no managers. There were very 
few COs in the area managing our wildlife and our habitat. 
 
[16:15] 
 
In fact just to give you an idea, I believe it is in Buffalo 
Narrows, there is only one CO up there today that looks after a 
huge area. Where does he start? We need more COs in our 
province. When you take 200 out of the system, what’s going to 
happen? So maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the minister’s 
indulgence to do this — to allow for deputy COs to have the 
same power as COs — that’s a good thing. If it’s some way of 
building up on our enforcement and wildlife management 
through deputy COs, hey, that’s great. I’m sure every one of the 
COs out there welcome this news to allow deputy COs to have 
the same power. 
 
But also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can go overboard. When we 
allow the COs to carry firearms, because they deal with people 
with firearms, that’s a good thing also; it gives them protection. 
But now you run a point where do the COs have the same 
power as our police? One begs to ask the question. And in many 
cases, some people say they do, or almost they do. But there’s 
sometimes a problem with that. If the COs are going out and 
just doing the investigation on areas that they feel need to be 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

looked at, that is fine. But under this Act I believe it gives more 
power for them to do investigations. And sometimes you can 
take your job too far and go overboard, so it may cause some 
problems. Time will tell. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, regarding the COs and our wildlife 
management in the province of Saskatchewan, I look at the 
Environment minister’s role as we speak now. And I know in 
the last two or three years, there has been a real push for a green 
strategy. You’ve heard it. We’ve heard it. There’s been a real 
push. In fact I think if I remember right, the amount of dollars 
going into this budget alone was seven and a half million 
dollars, if I’m correct, that went into the green initiatives or 
green strategy. And that’s all well and good. Everybody will 
applaud that to a point, but the point I’m trying to make is 
what’s happening with our resource management side of the 
equation? 
 
In talking with many COs, which I have, they have totally 
forgotten about the resource management part of our province. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan we 
have an abundance of wildlife. We have abundance of issues 
regarding resource management, but you don’t hear a lot about 
it. And I’m wondering why. When we were under the 
jurisdiction of the DNR, Department of Natural Resources, their 
mandate was to look after that portfolio, and they did a great 
job. 
 
We have moved away from that. Ever since we brought 
Environment into the Department of Natural Resources, it 
seems that’s taken precedence over the natural resource 
management part of that portfolio. And I beg the question: why 
are we going that far? It’s okay to look after the green initiatives 
and the problems to accommodate what’s needed to be done in 
the province of Saskatchewan and in the world regarding 
greenhouse gasses, but let’s not lose sight of the resource 
management of this province. And we are doing that right now. 
This comes from, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of COs that have 
talked to me about this. They see it firsthand. They know it. 
And they said we need to move back to at least the centre to 
discuss that and do something with that. 
 
One of the points I want to speak about just in regards to that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a problem with a disease that we have 
in our wildlife, and that’s CWD [chronic wasting disease]. 
What has the province done with CWD in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Well very little. This came about some 
half-dozen, ten years ago. And right now in the province of 
Saskatchewan, we are number one in Canada with the CWD 
problem. The COs have mentioned this to me, and we’re doing 
little or nothing with it. 
 
And I make those comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because if 
you look on the east side of the province in Manitoba, there is 
no CWD except for one case — one case that came to light in 
the fall of ’06 where there was a CWD case. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that certain case in Manitoba is related back to a game 
farm in Yorkton. So now whether there’s an investigation going 
on I don’t know, but that still leaves the province of Manitoba 
free from CWD. 
 
We also have a problem with the borders on the west side with 
Alberta. Alberta have stated over and over there is no problem 

with CWD in that province except, except right along the edge 
of the border between Alberta and Saskatchewan. But what 
about in Saskatchewan? We’re full of CWD, so why are we 
lacking in looking after our wildlife in our province? Well it’s 
no wonder when everything looks at a green strategy, and the 
resource management is left alone. That’s why problems like 
CWD have thrived in this province. 
 
Here’s another problem that’s linking with the province of 
Saskatchewan and CWD, is the amount of illegal horns going 
out of the province and you hear this from COs all over, that we 
don’t have the control. We don’t have the manpower to control 
the amount of illegal horns going across the border, especially 
into the United States. 
 
Well here’s an option that they could look at and it ties with 
CWD and I’ve talked to the wildlife federation many times. I’ve 
talked to the president and directors of the wildlife federation 
regards to this, to talk to the government and try and come up 
with a consensus that would eliminate CWD in this province 
and also curb the problem with illegal horns. And here’s an idea 
that may work and I hope the minister is listening. 
 
We have a problem with CWD. The amount of illegal horns 
going across the province is growing. If the minister would look 
at every head, every animal head, that wants to be transported 
back out of the province of Saskatchewan — whether it’s going 
to Manitoba, whether it’s going to Alberta, or going to the 
United States which the most of the heads go because of 
outfitting — they could put a stipulation that all the heads going 
out are tested for CWD. Then they have control, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of somewhat of our problem, also can control the legal 
sale of horns coming out of the province. 
 
It’s fair to everybody. Doesn’t matter what race you are because 
every horn going out of this province has to be tested. Then the 
ones that are legal are not going to go for a test because they’re 
legal horns anyway. This is one way the COs said could curb 
our problem with illegal horns. You could help the COs with 
their problem of legal hunting. It could help with the problem of 
illegal trafficking. It would also help with the problem that we 
have with our CWD. 
 
It’s just one suggestion that I have in regards to that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The minister can take it for what it’s worth but 
I know the wildlife federation has talked to me about it and 
they’ve agreed that it’s a great idea. It’s at least a step forward 
because, in regards to CWD right now, there is very little going 
on with this present government in controlling the resource 
management of our province. And the COs will come out first 
and forefront in regards to that. 
 
Another problem that I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s 
regarding with COs . . . I’m going to have to have a drink, my 
voice is starting to go. Thank God for tea, works great. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The problems that COs are having is . . . and that’s in regard to 
last year when we had a problem in the Spiritwood-Shellbrook 
area, and that was predator problems. We had a huge problem 
with wolves, coyotes, and cougars — and I’m speaking 
two-legged cougars, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or four-legged 
cougars, not two-legged cougars. 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

Anyway in regarding to predator problems, the government of 
the day and the COs in the area and the minister said that we are 
going to deal with the wolf problem. But they’re not going to 
deal with the cougar problem, and we have many problems 
regarding cougars. But the COs at that time . . . And at the 
meetings we had, the COs that were there were not translating 
the information from that area to Regina where the minister 
could look at and deal with it. 
 
And I do want to take this time to applaud the minister and his 
staff here for dealing with the problem. Even though it took a 
long time to come, he dealt with the problem, and it’s working. 
It’s working great, but it took a long time for it to get from my 
area to Regina. And why is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s 
because the COs were not working with their counterparts to 
pass on the information to Regina where they can make the 
adjustments in the rules and the procedures. 
 
Sometimes COs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, take it under the 
jurisdiction that the wildlife is theirs, that they don’t need 
changes. We’ll look after it. Well that’s not right. There was a 
huge problem with the predator problem, and if it wasn’t for the 
public outcry in that area and the meetings that we had that the 
minister finally came to the meetings, sat down with us and 
realized there was a problem, and through some of his deputy 
ministers realized the problem and made the significant changes 
that were needed to solve this problem. 
 
Just in regards to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the minister I 
know is listening — there was a demonstration in late January, 
February to deal with the predator problems, especially with 
wolf and the trapping of wolves. There was nothing there 
regarding the cougars, but especially in the wolves and the 
coyotes where they had a demonstration. The COs were there. 
They promoted this. And it was very, very good to have that 
there because when these trapping demonstrations went on, 
people learned how to look after the predator problem 
somewhat on their own by learning how to trap the wolves and 
the coyotes and whatever have you. 
 
The question that some of the people from the area made 
mention was the fact that timing may be wrong. Yes, let’s have 
another demonstration. Let’s do it again this fall; especially in 
the fall because the trapping season, even though it’s started, is 
not a prime time for trapping wolves. November, December is a 
proper time for trapping wolves. 
 
And if the minister would change his procedures a little bit to 
allow the demonstrations to go on in before Christmas and not 
after Christmas when a lot of farmers are dealing with their 
animals, with calving time, and also they’re also out there 
trapping, other than that the meeting or the demonstration 
meeting was very, very good, and hats off to the minister and 
the COs in his department for doing that. It was mentioned that 
it was a very good thing and I wanted to pass that on to the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act that is before us, I made mention 
about the 200 COs that were taken away in — I believe it was 
year 2002 — and that time the then minister of Environment 
was the member from Athabasca. And I found it ironic at that 
time that the then minister would allow that to happen, 
especially in the North, right in his backyard, and still to date 

from 2002 to 2007, we’ve seen no adjustment to those COs. In 
other words, there hasn’t been an increase in COs. And I 
thought at that time, you know, over time we would’ve seen 
some improvements in that area. And I say to the minister, we 
need more COs. If the deputy COs are going to have the same 
empowerment as the COs, that is great, but we need more COs. 
 
One point I want to make perfectly clear and that’s in regards to 
the road that’s being built from La Loche over to Fort 
McMurray. If and when that roads gets built, you’re going to 
see a flood of Albertans coming across to Saskatchewan 
through that northern road to utilize their resource, especially in 
fishing, but also with hunting. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I 
mentioned before, there’s only one CO in that area and that’s at 
Buffalo Narrows. What can one member, what can one CO do 
in an area that big when you’re going to have a flood of people 
coming across that border to Saskatchewan? The minister needs 
to address that problem, the sooner the better. 
 
Now as long as the road’s not being built, the problem’s not 
going to be as . . . [inaudible] . . . as it is now, or it will be. But 
the point is that we need more COs in that area. If that needs to 
be addressed, it should be addressed. And if he needs more 
information regarding that, then talk to his own COs in that 
area. There are many COs from around the P.A. [Prince Albert] 
area that have told me this is going to be a huge, huge problem. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And regarding the 200 COs that was let go in 2002, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’s a gentleman from P.A. that wrote an email or 
sent an email, I should say, to my colleague, my seatmate. And 
he said in there, and he said, and I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

I watched Yogi question the Gov’t . . . [about] proposed 
changes A key point that he was making was that 200 CO 
had been let go, mostly rural and northern officers, were 
enforcement of various aspects of laws re Environment, 
wildlife, fishing and other resources WAS NOT a priority 
. . . [some] years ago. Maybe Al Gore will restore these 
CO positions!! 

 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to go down the road with Al Gore. 
But I do want to stress that there are people out there that watch 
this channel and see the comments made by opposition 
members regarding the lack of what this government is trying to 
do. And therefore they’re voicing their opinion and they’re 
sending emails and letters regarding this. 
 
So in wrapping up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to the minister, 
we need more COs. We need more COs very soon, just like our 
police officers. And we need to further the Bill that’s before us 
today regarding the deputy COs because that’s a good thing. 
But we need more COs. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there’s some other 
people that would like to speak to this Bill. And at this time, I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook is moving adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 59 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to get up to speak 
to this particular Bill on amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation Act. 
 
Gaming has been, you know, very important to Saskatchewan. 
It’s always been very contentious too. I can remember when the 
rules were changing and they were bringing gaming in through 
the ’80s. I can remember the present Premier at the time raising 
quite a few comments and really condemning the present day 
government for bringing any form of gaming in. 
 
And now gaming has become quite important to the present day 
government in revenues and also to the people of 
Saskatchewan, also the economies of Regina, Saskatoon, 
surrounding towns, and areas such as — new ones going up — 
Swift Current; another one, a new casino going up on the edge 
of my constituency. So gaming has grown quite substantially in 
the number of years through the ’90s and probably will grow. I 
know that there’s lots of interest in gaming especially with the 
new game Texas hold’em that seems to be tournaments . . . 
everybody holding tournaments. There’s a huge, huge interest 
in gaming. So this is very important. So when they make 
amendments to this particular Act, you have to be . . . they 
should be very careful when they’re doing it. 
 
I noticed they’re making amendments, moving this from a 
Treasury Board into CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]. And under the Treasury Board I think that they 
. . . it was . . . be a little bit more transparent, it would be under 
CIC. I hope this government’s moving cautious because you’re 
dealing with gaming, and there has been some scandals in the 
past involved with gaming, that it should be as transparent as 
possible because it is a sensitive subject. It still is out in . . . 
throughout Saskatchewan. I mean, I still have people that come 
to me and say that, you know, that it should be scaled back; that 
there is, you know, problem gambling out there; a lot of money 
going out of communities, especially small communities with 
machines that are in the local establishments. 
 
And I know that when I was on city . . . or town council years 
and years ago, there was . . . the government had sent out a 
particular questionnaire — that’s when the first machines were 
coming in — of how to put the money back into the 
community. And I know one of the options was that they should 
get a share of . . . the town should get a share of the gaming — 
or a recreation board or whatever — because they did lose a lot 
of other avenues of gaming. One of them was bingos. Bingos 
were quite important throughout small towns. Kinsmen, Elks, 
lots of service clubs used to put them on. And with machines 

coming in, they lost revenue with that. 
 
And the government chose at that time not to give a share or 
portion back to the RMs [rural municipality] and towns and 
villages at that end of it. And I think that they should have at 
that time as they . . . especially if they’ve cut back the funding, 
whether it’s your recreation facilities which a lot of town are 
suffering to keep open throughout Saskatchewan. You talk to 
any recreation board that’s running a rink, a skating rink, a hall, 
a community centre, a senior centre, they’re struggling with the 
bills that are out there. And I know that extra money from the 
gaming portion would have been quite helpful at that. 
 
Dealing with this particular Act, moving it into CIC, I know this 
is only the second time this Bill has been up and I know that 
we’re still looking at it and researching it and talking to people. 
But moving it to CIC, I don’t know if that’s such a great idea. 
The Treasury Board, I know that you had some avenues there. It 
was more transparent. Under the CIC it’s going to give them a 
little more power. I know one of them is, you know, there could 
be some political overturns. The head office could be 
determined now by the provincial cabinet and more by CIC. 
And I believe that the Gaming Corporation is first of all now, 
before it puts its money in the Treasury Board, you have your 
audit, moves into general revenue. Now I think, the way I 
understand this particular Bill, the money from it is going to go 
through the Gaming and then from there, move to CIC and then 
moved into general revenue. 
 
Now the question being asked is, is CIC going to take some 
administration money for it? How are they going to handle the 
money flow-through? Are they actually going to take some of 
the money out, or is it going to be a straight flow-through? Or 
are they going to say, well no, we have to, now that it’s a CIC 
under us, that we have some extra people to hire; we’re going to 
maybe do another audit; we’re going to maybe take some more 
money out of it? So that’s one of the questions and concerns 
that hasn’t been answered yet on this particular Bill, on it. 
 
With that there may be even less scrutiny. One, is it going to be 
able to come up in the legislature where you’re going to be able 
to ask committee questions on it or be able to trace it? Because 
this is, like I said, an issue in the past has been contentious. And 
it is money and it’s an industry that is growing, and there is 
quite a bit of money coming in. I’m not sure the last budget, I 
don’t have right in front of me of what it was but I know it’s 
quite a substantial part of the general revenue that’s coming 
through at that end of it. 
 
Also is, how much power is the CIC board going to be over the 
Gaming Corporation? Is it going to affect the way they pay out 
reimbursements for the board and the members and the 
committee board? Are they going to be making new board 
members? Is the government going to be appointing board 
members to it? Are they going to be appointing more of them? 
So there’s quite a few unanswered questions on this, when this 
Bill or this particular is moved into CIC. 
 
I mean, this is important. It’s important to the First Nations end 
of it. That’s always been an important part of their revenue 
coming in, the casinos that they run. The one casino that is 
being built at Whitecap, you know, is going to be quite 
extravagant. It’s going to be an excellent casino. 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2007 

That was my first constituency. That was in, before the border 
change is added. And I can remember sitting down with Chief 
Darcy Bear and him showing me the plans and laying them out. 
And, you know, he was quite proud of what they’re building. 
And now that it’s actually coming into force, you know, I’m 
looking forward for the grand opening and that end of it. 
 
And also, the talk that he had of the money he wanted to use to 
help his people, you know, at that end of it, to provide jobs for 
them. And I think he did an excellent job, as I think all the other 
casinos have for providing work and job opportunities for First 
Nations at that end of it. So this is an, important amendments 
are being done. When you move this to CIC, you hope that 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and SIGA 
[Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] are totally in 
favour of this if they’ve been consulted at that. Those are things 
that you want to be checking further down the line and that 
we’ll be looking at, that there is no opposition. 
 
But the main thing is you’re dealing with this particular entity. 
You want to make sure it’s transparent because if you’ve 
looked at other jurisdictions over the years, there has been 
trouble in gaming. A lot of scandals have been through because 
it can be quite contentious with money, so you want to make it 
as transparent as you can, that the public can scrutinize it, that 
the legislature can scrutinize it, that the money is going to the 
right places and being used for the right things for the benefit of 
the people. 
 
And one of them I had mentioned was coming back to small 
towns throughout rural Saskatchewan. I don’t think this 
government has did a good enough job in providing a share of 
that revenue because a lot of that money comes out of rural 
Saskatchewan, whether people driving in to gamble at Regina, 
Saskatoon — the casinos — or at the ones that are spread out in 
Yorkton, North Battleford, P.A. A lot of that money comes out 
of all of Saskatchewan and I think it comes out of all the 
communities, and I think there needs to be a little more money 
put back into them communities with the Gaming Corporation 
at that end of it — a responsibility. 
 
Because like I mentioned before, a lot of the towns have lost 
gaming opportunities at that. They don’t run as many 
break-open tickets. They don’t do as many raffles because a lot 
of the people . . . Gambling, government gambling is so readily 
available whether it’s VLTs [video lottery terminal] or your 
casinos or whatever. So a lot of that use is directed towards the 
government gambling rather than maybe the small town service 
clubs that used to do a lot of little things that helped to raise 
money for their, like I say, their rinks or all the little functions 
that they used to help the towns a lot in that area. I know that 
service clubs, that was one of their main focuses or main ways 
of making money was small gambling . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
they’ve said it’s dropped off quite substantially over the number 
of years. 
 
But back to the amendments, and I think this is pretty well the 
main amendment I can understand with this particular Bill is 
moving it into CIC. And there’s a lot of questions that should be 
asked with that. And I think some more research to be done on 
this particular Bill. So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will 
move that we adjourn debate on this particular piece of 
legislation. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill 59, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 63 — The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to be able to rise in the Assembly to speak on Bill 63, 
An Act respecting the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when I first had a look at this Bill 
when it was introduced by the Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, I was struck by the fact that after over 100 years, 
101 years that the Royal Saskatchewan Museum didn’t have its 
own Act. And so I think it’s good to finally to see that after a 
century in our province, serving our province it finally has its 
own Act recognizing and noting its importance, and not only 
that but setting out the policies under which it will operate. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum is actually, it was the first museum not 
only in the province of Saskatchewan but in fact in all three of 
the Prairie provinces. While it was formed in 1906 it actually 
goes back to December 1905 when a boulder — a large boulder 
that had a carved face on it — was actually donated to the 
province of Saskatchewan. And that’s how the museum started, 
by that one single donation. In 1906, as I said, it was formed to, 
quote “secure and preserve natural history specimens and 
objects of historical ethnological interest.” 
 
And I think that as anybody in the province of, certainly of my 
age, I recall that my first trip to the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum was a part of a school trip. In fact, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I’ve said I think a time or two in the House I’ve 
mentioned my first visit to the legislature was part of a school 
trip. And also it was in fact that very same day where the 
students of Halbrite School visited after . . . I can’t quite 
remember that far back but it was either before or after visiting 
the legislature that we went to the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum. 
 
And I would just say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that was always 
important for our principal, the late Doug Becker, who made 
sure that the students of Halbrite School came into Regina once 
a year and that we toured the tourism opportunities in the city of 
Regina in the provincial capital and he always made sure that 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum was on that trip. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, just getting back to a bit of the history. 
I do want to mention that for more information I think it’s 



May 1, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

important that people know about the resources for our tourism 
sites in the province. Royal Saskatchewan Museum, like most 
organizations, have a website and I would just like to say that 
for more information people can go to royalsaskmuseum.ca and 
find out what our, what Royal Saskatchewan Museum has to 
offer for the people of this province and for people outside the 
province that are interested in coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan, our province, is rich in heritage and heritage 
opportunities and historical tourism. And as noted by the 
Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation the day that he 
introduced this Bill and I just would quote from his news 
release: 
 

The Royal Saskatchewan Museum contributes to the 
province’s heritage, education, scientific knowledge and 
tourism and is an important asset and institution for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

And if I would just add to that with . . . I don’t mean a criticism 
of the minister for leaving it out but I think it’s not only an 
important asset and institution for the Government of 
Saskatchewan but I think also for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I think that it’s important to recognize that we have 
incredible opportunities in tourism and historical tourism 
opportunities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important — and I 
welcome the Bill that the government has put forward — 
especially the government’s recognition of the importance of 
involving First Nations and the First Nations cultural 
community in working with the museum to establish policies in 
regards to sacred and culturally significant and sensitive 
artifacts that are part of the museum’s collection or that will in 
the future become a part of the museum’s collection. And I 
think that the government certainly needs to be commended for 
putting it into the legislation, not just putting it into the 
regulations that would follow or to the policies that the museum 
will follow or do follow currently, but to enshrine it into the 
legislation that will become the law once this Bill passes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think at this point I would think 
that’s all the comments that I would offer, but just to close I 
would just want to congratulate and commend the management 
and the staff of the Royal Saskatchewan Museum on all the 
good work that they do. And at this point I would move to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 63, item no. 
20, The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to 
accommodate the good work of the standing committees on the 
Economy as well as Crown and Central Agencies, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:50.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1444 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Outstanding Organic Farmer of the Year 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
 Snowbirds Acceptance Air Show 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1445 
 Umoja Performance 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
 Promoting Heritage, Culture, and Recreation 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
 Celebration of Physical Therapy Education 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
 Sigma Polling 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1446 
 Climate Change 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Response of Caucus to Misappropriation of Funds 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return No. 21 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1453 
 Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1453 
 Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1454 
 Bill No. 51 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1454 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1455 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1455 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1455 
  



 

 Bill No. 57 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1456 
 Bill No. 58 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1457 
 Bill No. 60 — The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1458 
 Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1459 
 Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 
 Loi de 2007 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1459 
 Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1459 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1460 
 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1461 
 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)  
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1462 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1464 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
 Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1466 
 Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1467 
 Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1467 
 Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
 Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
 Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1474 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


