






















































Hansard: March 14, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 30A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 817 
 March 14, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a couple more pages of petitions signed by individuals 
from the Cypress Hills constituency concerned about the 
Shaunavon office of SaskPower and the likelihood that it will 
be closed at the end of this month. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by individuals from 
the communities of Shaunavon, Eastend, Claydon, Frontier, 
Gull Lake, and other communities in the vicinity. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Eston, 
Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to maintain full service of the SaskPower office in Rosetown. 
This petition notes that if the office closes there will not be 
immediate receipt of payment for customers. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition are from 
the communities of Rosetown and Fiske. And I am pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again stand today 
with a petition of citizens that are concerned about Highway 
No. 5 as it prevents defensive driving due to it being too 
narrow. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Osler, Saskatoon, 
and St-Denis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from 
southeast Saskatchewan who are very concerned about the 
condition of Highway 18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Gladmar, Lake 
Alma, Regina, and Beaubier. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition for safer driving conditions on the Highway No. 3. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek, Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek, Willowgrove. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Today the petitioners live on Kenderdine Road, Guenter 
Crescent, and Kutz Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in the South that are very 
concerned about the hardships that can be caused if the lab in 
the Lafleche and District Health Centre is closed. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Glentworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the condition 
of our provincial highways. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Livelong and 
Turtleford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from the citizens of Batoche that are concerned 
with the cellular service in their area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in regions 
encompassing the constituency of Batoche. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people from St. 
Brieux, Humboldt, Muenster, Colonsay, and Carrot River. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
citizens of the town of Jansen, I’d like to present a petition 
calling on the government to upgrade Highway 20 to primary 
weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
In duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition dealing with highway weight 
status. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway No. 20 be 
upgraded to primary weight status to ensure the economic 
viability in the surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Nokomis, Govan, Lockwood, and Strasbourg. This area is 
immediately southeast of my constituency of Saskatoon 
Southeast. I’m pleased to present this on their behalf. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have been 
instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 
Bill No. 5, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
2006 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 5 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 5. Is leave 
granted? 
 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that this Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its seventh report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Biggar: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy now be concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Biggar, that the seventh 
report of the Standing Committee on the Economy be now 
concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: has the department 
recommended to school divisions that 160 schools be 
closed over the next two to three years? 

Also, while I’m on my feet, a similar question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: has the department created a 
plan or strategy to close 160 schools over the next two to 
three years? 
 

I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

National Farm Safety Week 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, March 14 to 20 marks the 36th 
annual National Farm Safety Week. The Canada Safety 
Council’s theme for this year is Farm Safety: The Reward is 
Worth the Effort. 
 
Since farming and Saskatchewan go hand in hand, the message 
of Farm Safety Week is an important one. As many of us in this 
province are too well aware, farming is one the most dangerous 
occupations. Too many rural families in Saskatchewan have 
either lost loved ones or have a family member who has been 
seriously injured in a farming accident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many farming accidents are preventable. As the 
Canadian safety council rightly points out, National Farm 
Safety Week may only be seven days long, but farm safety 
should be carried out every day. With spring seeding on the 
horizon, it’s important that all producers and their families and 
workers heed the important message of Farm Safety Week and 
remember that the reward is worth the effort. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I would invite all members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking the many farm and safety associations who are 
working with the co-operation of producers to help decrease the 
number of farming accidents through their work during 
National Farm Safety Week and throughout the entire year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Saskatoon Grandmothers for Grandmothers Organization 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On International 
Women’s Day, March 8, I attended the fundraising dinner for 
Grandmothers for Grandmothers, or G to G as we call them in 
Saskatoon, of which I am a proud member. The money raised at 
the gathering and all the money raised by the G4G goes to the 
Stephen Lewis Foundation. 
 
In March 2006 the Stephen Lewis Foundation launched a 
Grandmothers to Grandmothers campaign to encourage 
awareness in Canada about African grandmothers and their 
struggle to secure a hopeful and healthy future for generations 
of children orphaned or made vulnerable by HIV/AIDS [human 
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

syndrome] and to build solidarity between African and 
Canadian grandmothers in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 
 
Sharon Maher and Orla Lockerbie founded the G4G last year in 
Saskatoon, and the steady growth of the membership indicates 
the willingness of Saskatoon women to help out their 
counterparts in Africa. 
 
Members of the Grandmothers for Grandmothers organization 
act as facilitators, motivating others to make donations. The 
support enables African grandmothers to develop 
income-generating activities to sustain themselves and to 
provide the basic necessities to the children in their care. 
 
The Saskatoon G4G organizes four major fundraisers annually 
— a dinner on International Women’s Day, a grandmothers tea 
in May, a garage sale working for Child and Youth Friendly 
Saskatoon in August, and coffee parties throughout the year. 
 
Thank you to Reta Taylor and her dedicated group of volunteers 
who organized this very successful event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Northern Youths Participate in Canada Winter Games 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to acknowledge 
four outstanding athletes from the North. These four youths 
have recently returned from Whitehorse after participating at 
the 2007 Canada Winter Games. They all say it was an 
awesome experience. 
 
Zone 9 is the area of northern Saskatchewan that covers both 
the Athabasca and Cumberland constituencies. This year zone 9 
sent four athletes to compete in cross-country skiing, hockey, 
and archery. 
 
Haley Robinson and Keewatin Trottier of La Ronge 
participated in the cross-country ski portion of the events. Haley 
finished 45th of 53 participants, and Keewatin finished 31st out 
of a field of 48 skiers. Both represented zone 9 outstandingly. 
 
Gaelan Patterson, originally from La Ronge, was a member of 
Team Saskatchewan in this year’s hockey competitions, 
finished sixth place overall. Jonovan Kokan of La Loche was in 
the archery competition. During individual competition Jonovan 
finished ninth overall. In the team competitions he and his 
partner from Estevan secured a bronze medal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the competition against other athletes at the 
Winter Games was challenging for these athletes, but they have 
all done an excellent job of representing the North and 
representing Saskatchewan. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Jonovan, Haley, Keewatin, and Gaelan for all the 
hard work they have done to get to this level of competition. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Jim Kook Citizen of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate Doug Ball from Outlook on receiving the Jim 
Kook Citizen of the Year Award. Each year the Outlook and 
District Chamber of Commerce chooses one outstanding citizen 
to be recognized for their community efforts. 
 
Doug Ball has received this award for his continued 
commitment to Outlook, his home town of Conquest, and the 
surrounding municipalities. While in Conquest, Ball sat on the 
Conquest Community Centre board and was president of 
Conquest Minor Sports. He was also involved in municipal 
politics for six years and was a dedicated coach for minor and 
senior hockey clubs. In Outlook his community commitments 
continue with involvement in Outlook Minor Sports and other 
volunteer work. 
 
However, it has been his continued commitment in making sure 
that Outlook is a good place to live that makes him worthy of 
this award. Doug has served as administrator for the Pioneer 
Home, the Outlook Hospital, the home care, and later as CEO 
[chief executive officer] of Midwest Health District. Doug Ball 
has been committed to ensuring a high level of quality health 
care for Outlook and district. He was a driving force in the 
initiative for approval and construction of a new integrated 
health centre in Outlook. 
 
A more recent initiative for Doug is providing leadership for the 
west side irrigators as they press producers and governments to 
get on with expanding irrigation on the west side of the South 
Saskatchewan River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the dedication of community members such 
as Doug that make Saskatchewan a great place, and so I would 
like to thank Doug Ball for his continued commitment to his 
community, congratulate him on receiving this honourable 
award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Youth Award 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, in 2006 the Saskatchewan Youth 
Award was established to recognize young people who have 
made significant contributions to Saskatchewan through 
personal accomplishments. Citizens between the ages of 15 and 
24 are eligible for the nomination, and these young people can 
be nominated for individual projects or achievements that they 
were involved in for up to one year prior to the nomination. 
 
Criteria for the award are made up of a broad range of 
achievements and endeavours that include leadership, 
volunteerism, innovation, artistic or cultural accomplishments, 
academic excellence, athletics, and outstanding personal 
achievements. The nominations are then reviewed by an 
independent committee that will include members of the 
Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council and the provincial 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

youth advisory committee, and they will recommend four to 
five individuals for the award. The deadline for nominations is 
Friday, March 16, 2007. Recipients and their family members 
will be invited to the annual gala presentation event where they 
will receive a specially designed youth award pin and a 
certificate signed by the Lieutenant Governor, the Premier, and 
the Provincial Secretary. 
 
The Saskatchewan Youth Award is a way to honour 
Saskatchewan’s youth for their commitment and dedication to 
this great province that we call Saskatchewan — the best place 
to live, work, and build a strong future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Citizen’s Response to Carriere Settlement 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the government’s disgraceful handling of the Murdoch 
Carriere affair has outraged people from across this province. I 
would like to share a letter that was published in the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix on March 10 of this year that gives voice to these 
sentiments of outrage. And, Mr. Speaker, I quote: 
 

The provincial government pays a man out after he was 
convicted of an offence to women. 
 
Legalities aside, what about ethics? Carriere was found 
guilty of assault. A group of men takes the hard-earned tax 
dollars of women and hands it to Carriere. I certainly do 
not believe it is OK to spend my tax contribution in this 
manner. 
 
It is time for more women to become involved in running 
this province, contrary to what many would have you 
believe. I think Premier Calvert sent a wrong message with 
the settlement. This should have been fought in the courts. 
 
We need a leader with backbone. It is time to say no more! 
 

End of quote, Mr. Speaker, and it’s signed by Diane Sawatzky 
of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, as Ms. Sawatzky says, it is shameful 
that this government didn’t have the backbone, the intestinal 
fortitude, or the courage to stand up for these women and fight 
Mr. Carriere in the courts. I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Opposition Policy Development Process 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we were all a little 
confused and amused last session when the members of the 
opposition raised the topic of funding from tobacco companies 
in the House. Naturally people thought that they were being 
hypocritical since they received tobacco funds themselves, and 
started asking questions. It was then that the Leader of the 

Opposition made his stunning announcement. He decreed that 
the Saskatchewan Party did not accept donations from the 
tobacco companies and that was his party’s policy. Many were 
left to wonder, Mr. Speaker, what about the democratic 
process? 
 
The situation became a little bit clearer at the Saskatchewan 
Party convention . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — The situation became a little bit clearer at 
the Saskatchewan Party convention in February. Opposition 
members didn’t worry themselves about the pesky details of a 
policy debate. They simply didn’t debate any policy. So why 
bother discussing details when you have a leader able to make 
up a policy on a whim as part of his improvised Saskatchewan 
plan? If anything, a policy convention would only get in the 
way for the Leader of the Opposition. He needs the freedom to 
do and say whatever he thinks is necessary to get elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has had a long tradition 
of allowing one member, one vote when it comes to the policy 
development process. Sometimes there are differences of 
opinion, but that’s important to democracy. 
 
The opposition believes in a one-member, one-vote system as 
well for policy development, Mr. Speaker. Only for them, the 
Leader of the Opposition is the one member who gets to vote. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Population and Education Policies 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 
people of the province woke up to screaming headlines that 
detail this government’s woeful performance and record in the 
key area of population. Mr. Speaker, the statistics from 
yesterday show that under this Premier, we’ve lost a population 
roughly the size of the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. The 
numbers show that Saskatchewan and only one other province, 
Newfoundland and Labrador, lost population. 
 
Yesterday the minister responsible was quite cavalier in his 
attitude towards these numbers, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact 
that, because of this government’s record on depopulation, 50 
schools are slated for closure in Saskatchewan. Fifty schools 
could well be closed by the end of the year. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: in light of the fact it’s his 
record on depopulation that’s forcing the whole conversation of 
school closures, what leadership is his government prepared to 
show to make sure that these closures aren’t short-sighted in 
terms of future opportunity and in terms of limiting bus rides 
for kids in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for starters, this 
government has increased the funding to the foundation 
operating grant over the last 10 years by over $200 million — 
52 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 
correct one thing for sure that the Leader of the Opposition said. 
Now he does a wonderful job exaggerating the facts and 
stretching the truth and putting some real scare tactics out and 
across the province. Mr. Speaker, there are 39 schools that are 
under review for closure and one school that is under review for 
grade discontinuance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of scare tactics, frankly 
there is nothing in rural Saskatchewan as scary as the prospect 
of this NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker. 
And the numbers bear it out from yesterday, the numbers that 
rural Saskatchewan is dealing with because of this Premier’s 
extremely poor performance in growing the population at a time 
of economic opportunity. Fewer people are living in 9 out of 13 
of our cities; fewer people living in 36 of our 45 towns; 39 — 
and those folks out there will say up to 50 and maybe more 
down the road — schools that are slated for closure. 
 
The question to the Premier is this. We need his leadership. 
There are some alternatives, including designating schools of 
opportunity for those communities that could well be growing 
in the next while for whom a school closure would be 
short-sighted. We need some compassion from this government 
to ensure that there aren’t 10-hour class and busing days from 
the government. We need to know that this government’s 
providing leadership on alternative and complementary uses for 
school facilities. What is the Premier going to do on these 
issues, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing that this 
Saskatchewan Party does is repackage policies that are already 
in place within the foundation operating grant and the province 
of Saskatchewan. Schools of necessity, isolated schools — 
that’s a factor that has been in place for just about seven years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he stands here and says increase funding, do this, 
do something, do something. But what a person needs to do is 
really have a look at the Sask Party policy papers and little 
informational items they put out. 
 
First off they talk about if they have the opportunity in 
government they will have a steady, gradual reduction in 
government spending and taxation, while maintaining a firm 

commitment to balanced budgets. Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
myself, what are they going to take away? If they think there’s 
so much waste in the system — they’re going to skin us all back 
— what are they going to take away? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at their policy document, 
they are going to encourage increased co-operation between all 
publicly funded school systems in an . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about what’s in 
place now in terms of remote or isolated schools. What’s in 
place now is not precluding the closure of schools across this 
province that parents and trustees agree could result in 10-hour 
days for kids between bus time and class time — 10 hours, Mr. 
Speaker. Whatever is in place now is clearly inadequate. 
 
Will the government, will this NDP government show some 
leadership? It’s its record on depopulation that is forcing these 
decisions to have to be made out in the country for these kids 
and these parents. Will they do the right thing; show some 
leadership with respect to the idea from our party on schools 
and necessity, schools of opportunity? And will they ensure 
there is a complete review of potential complementary uses for 
schools that they may remain open in some cases, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the easiest thing to do is 
stand up and criticize, but when you need to make tough 
decisions, those decisions are being made by this government, 
putting in place programs and processes that are appropriate for 
the education system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back to the Sask Party policy and they talk about 
encourage increased co-operation between all publicly funded 
school systems in an effort to streamline both systems and 
eliminate unnecessary and costly duplication. I think the Leader 
of the Opposition owes the people of this province an 
explanation about what his policies actually mean. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister — if she chooses to 
run and then is, frankly, a little bit lucky in winning re-election 
— will have plenty of opportunity to ask questions from this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, in just a few more months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one area of complete control for the provincial 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

government is how the funding . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the House Leader is yelling 
from the government side, well what does that mean, what I just 
said. What it means is that after the next election, that member, 
that current minister is going to be sitting on the opposition side 
of the House. That’s what that means. That’s what that means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one area, one area of control this government has 
is over how busing is funded. Right now Learning funds 100 
per cent of busing. So you could see how there would be an 
automatic bias in the system for more busing and a less 
emphasis on class time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier agree to at least review this 
policy of the government agreeing to fund 100 per cent of 
busing, thereby putting in place a bias for busing and far too 
long a class and school days for the kids of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 
questions when it comes to the Sask Party educational policy. In 
the Weyburn Review in January of this year the member from 
Weyburn said, “I’m not a Catholic, but I believe when we take 
God out of the schools we are bringing in guns.” 
 
I’d like to know if the member from Saskatoon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has a 
great deal of explaining to do when you see quotes like this in 
the Weyburn Review talking about “. . . when we take God out 
of the schools we are bringing in guns.” What kind of a 
comment is that on the public school system of this province? 
It’s appalling, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that leader owes 
this province a bit more explanation on what his policy means. 
Streamlining both systems? Eliminate unnecessary and costly 
duplication? That member owes this province an explanation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Complainants 
in the Carriere Case 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, first Murdoch Carriere’s victims 
were harassed and pressured in the workplace. Next, these 
women went through a lot in order to get the NDP government 
to listen to them. After all the victims went through, the NDP 
government pressured all nine women to sign a small settlement 
and told them that they had no other offer coming forward and 
that they had to sign it the very same day. To add even more 
pressure, the NDP government told the victims that all nine had 

to sign the agreement or none of them would receive a penny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today these women can’t even remember all of the 
details of what they had signed because the NDP government 
won’t even give them a copy of the settlement agreement. Mr. 
Speaker, will you today allow these victims to get a copy of 
their own settlement? Will the minister table a copy of that 
settlement agreement today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well the opposition continues desperately to confuse the issues 
quite deliberately, Mr. Speaker, but the facts are very clear. Did 
Mr. Carriere receive compensation for his actions? The answer 
is no. To suggest he was rewarded compensation for his actions 
is insensitive and outrageous. Was Mr. Carriere’s hard drive 
erased? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, was 
there a gag order for the women when they settled? The answer 
is no. 
 
What these members continue to do is to quite deliberately 
obfuscate the issues. There are two separate issues. There was 
the question of harassment, and there was the question of 
settlement with Mr. Carriere because we did not follow the 
proper procedure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear the minister 
say that there is no gag order in place. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
advised the women to retain legal counsel in this matter. Mr. 
Speaker, that is exactly what has happened. Some of these 
women have retained legal counsel, and the lawyers 
representing them have asked for their legal file as well as the 
copy of the settlement signed by the victims. 
 
The response from the original law firm that represented them 
is that it can’t provide a copy of the settlement because the NDP 
government imposed trust conditions. Mr. Speaker, the law firm 
can’t release the copy of the settlement, and I quote from their 
letter, “. . . without the prior written consent of the Government 
of Saskatchewan.” And nothing would be released until, and I 
quote further, “. . . I receive authority to do so from the 
Government of Saskatchewan”. 
 
What kind of government won’t even allow the women who 
signed the agreement to have a copy? What is the NDP 
government hiding in this document? Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister today stand in this House and allow the victims to have 
a copy of their own settlement? Will the minister provide that? 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am aware, Mr. Speaker, that there is legal counsel that has 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

requested a copy of the settlement, and the Department of 
Justice has been instructed to contact the nine people who were 
involved in this settlement to gain approval from the nine 
people because it was nine people that were involved. And if 
that is agreed to by the complainants, that copy of the 
settlement will certainly be made available to the legal counsel 
for the woman who has asked for it through her legal counsel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement that the minister 
is talking about is an agreement that affects each and every one 
of those women. To tie each and every one of those women to 
each other is not an acceptable position for that minister to take 
today. 
 
Each one of those women has the right to their own settlement 
agreement. And for the minister to stand up now and require 
each of the nine to do it, is exactly the same position that she 
took when she forced those people to all accept the agreement 
on day one. It’s a wrong thing to do then, and it is a wrong thing 
to do now. Those people are not all available today. 
 
Will the minister stand in this House today and consent to each 
and every one of those women having agreement individually 
without having to get consent from the others? They don’t 
know each other. There is not a reason in the world why they 
would have to contact each other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there were nine people 
that signed the agreement. There were nine individuals that 
signed the agreement. As I understand it, their names are 
contained upon . . . in the document their signatures are 
contained. As well, Mr. Speaker, their own private information 
is attached as an addendum to the agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have said, and I’ve said it to the Department of Justice 
officials, that if we can get agreement from the nine that 
certainly that information can be available to the legal counsel 
of the one complainant that wishes to receive her copy of the 
settlement. But as I said before, the settlement is available in the 
original lawyer’s office. The complainants are free to see the 
settlement information in the lawyer’s office. And we certainly 
have instructed Justice to determine whether or not it is possible 
to provide the settlement agreement to the individuals but there 
is nine people’s information contained . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Most of us can’t even understand the 
minister’s talking about instructing Justice to release it. Then 
she’s saying they’re not going to release it. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to make it easy for the minister to do the right thing. All the 
NDP government has to do is provide its consent, and a copy of 

the settlement will be given to the victims requesting it. Right 
now I am tabling a consent that either the minister can sign 
immediately or that the Premier can sign. All the minister has to 
do today is pick up a pen — and I’ve got one handy if the 
minister doesn’t have it — all she has to do today is put her 
signature on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the victims deserve a copy. Will this minister 
provide that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the Justice critic, 
who is a lawyer, is asking me to do is to consent to the 
distribution of individuals’ private information. And I want to 
tell the Justice critic opposite, I will not sign that until I hear 
from the women, Mr. Speaker. And that is my legal obligation 
as a minister of the Crown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP has not been able to explain why the nine 
women received just $15,000 each. And they have not been 
able to explain why Murdoch Carriere received $275,000. This 
is an excessive payout even to someone with an exemplary 
record in the public service, let alone someone who has been 
fired for harassment and convicted of assault. $275,000 
represents well over three years of salary for Murdoch Carriere. 
The most that is usually paid out in severance is 18 months. So 
this is clearly not just a severance payout. 
 
How did the NDP arrive at a $275,000 payout for Murdoch 
Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Minister of Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I see the member opposite is 
taking his questions from the Mandryk article in the 
Leader-Post. 
 
But what I will say — this to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker 
— is that I’ve already answered that question. I’ve already 
clearly indicated that Mr. Carriere had a number of issues that 
he launched in his action including defamation of character, 
including the fact that the Government of Saskatchewan did not 
fire him properly, that we did not follow due process. And as a 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

result of the settlement, all of those issues were addressed in the 
settlement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for three weeks now this NDP 
government has refused to tell the people of Saskatchewan why 
they paid Murdoch Carriere $275,000. They’re hiding the 
answers, Mr. Speaker. It must be hidden in their secret legal 
opinion that they refuse to show anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one interesting theory is that the NDP never 
legally fired Murdoch Carriere. That would explain why they 
paid him over three years of salary and allow him to top up his 
pension. Mr. Speaker, is that what the legal opinion says, that 
the NDP may have never technically fired Murdoch Carriere 
and therefore they owe him over three years of pay? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do note that 
CanWest also settled to . . . The StarPhoenix settled with Mr. 
Carriere. I’m not familiar with how much they settled for, but I 
understand it is in the tens of thousands of dollars. 
 
What I can say to the member opposite — and we certainly 
have said this in the legislature — that under The Public Service 
Act there is the role and function of the professional public 
service. They get to hire and fire. The elected set broad public 
policy. We do not get to hire and fire. 
 
As I said, and the opposition agreed with the government at the 
time, that we fired him without following proper protocol, Mr. 
Speaker. Proper protocol is the deputy minister does the hiring 
and firing. And instruction was given from the Premier to the 
deputy minister. We did not follow due process. Did the 
members opposite agree at the time? Did their critic, Arlene 
Julé, say that if they were in government they’d help to pay for 
it? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the NDP can 
clear this up very easily by releasing the legal opinion. Then we 
would know exactly why they paid $275,000 to a man who was 
fired for harassment and convicted of assault. 
 
The Public Accounts document of 2001-2002 says Mr. Carriere 
was paid $83,325. How did they arrive at a settlement of 
275,000? Is it a legal opinion? Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan were forced to pay 275,000 to Murdoch Carriere. 
People of Saskatchewan paid for the NDP’s secret legal 
opinion. The people of Saskatchewan deserve answers. Why 
doesn’t the Premier show some leadership, show some 

backbone, and release the secret legal opinion today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in April 2003, did we know that we would likely have 
to pay Murdoch Carriere money? The answer is yes. Did we tell 
the public we would likely have to pay? The answer is yes. And 
more importantly, did the members opposite support our 
decision to fire Murdoch Carriere? The answer is yes, Mr. 
Speaker. There is nothing more that one can say about this. Yes, 
yes, yes — this is old news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the minister 
about someone else who agreed with this position — her 
seatmate, the minister for Saskatoon Massey Place, who was 
then the minister of Justice. And he had this to say on April 3, 
2003. And I quote from Hansard: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was 
justified. We will defend that position vigorously in the 
courts. 
 

Mr. Speaker, end of quote. Mr. Speaker, what happened? The 
NDP didn’t defend their position vigorously in the courts. 
Instead they wrote Mr. Murdoch Carriere a big, fat cheque. 
Why? Obviously the answer is hidden in their secret legal 
opinion. Will the Premier come clean and release that legal 
opinion today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What’s clear to me is that the members 
opposite, had they sat on this side of the bench . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really clear to me 
is that if those members were sitting on this side of the bench, 
they would have gone to court for politics only. They would 
have gone to court and cost taxpayers a lot more than $275,000. 
They would have gone to court in opposition to what their own 
Justice officials would be telling them — that we were going to 
lose, Mr. Speaker. And their own Justice critic, who I think is a 
lawyer, has said and I quote, on April 21, 2006, and I quote: 
 

Refusing to settle a lawsuit when the cost to taxpayers 
would have been much lower is patently unreasonable. 

 
Which is it? Is it unreasonable then or is it unreasonable today, 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to refer the minister again to a comment made by her 
seatmate on that very same day, April 3, 2003. And it says this: 
 

Mr. Speaker, facts have become known related to this case 
this week that has brought a different result with respect to 
this case, as has been outlined in this House. 
 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the minister goes on to say the quote that I 
read where he now says that we’re going to vigorously fight this 
case in the courts, Mr. Speaker. So what has changed? What has 
changed from that position taken in 2003 to today? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, you know why people are so upset about this? Because 
the bad guy won and the NDP didn’t even put up a fight. They 
just rolled over and gave him a cheque for $275,000 based on 
some legal opinion that they won’t even show anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP is so confident that they did the right 
thing, why won’t the Premier release the secret legal opinion to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know about rollovers, 
Mr. Speaker, and I know who’s rolled over, over there. They 
roll over every time Stephen Harper comes to town. They roll 
over and roll over the Canadian Wheat Board. They roll over on 
child daycare. They roll over on the labour market agreement. 
All they do is, Stephen Harper, Stephen Harper . . . and we 
know what they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make this point. In 1990 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. I 
thank the members for their attention to the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1993 the government, the NDP 
government introduced into this legislature amendments to the 
occupational health and safety legislation where we put 
harassment into the occupational health and safety legislation. 
 
And what did the members opposite do? They moved an 
amendment to get rid of it. Then they moved an amendment to 
water it down. Mr. Speaker, then they voted against the 
provision of occupational health and safety and harassment. So, 
Mr. Speaker, these people say they’re the great defenders of 
women, but they opposed harassment in the occupational health 
and safety legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 
Administrators Act 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, 
the mortgage brokers and mortgage administrators Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: —It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 49, the mortgage brokers and mortgage 
administrators Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The next sitting of the house, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Introduction of 
Bills. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to move first reading of Bill No. 50, The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 50, The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to move first reading of Bill No. 51, The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 51, The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Not a point 
of order — a request for leave. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — That’s the good way. That’s the way to do 
it. Mr. Speaker, I think the House will recognize that there was 
a great deal of noise in the House when you called ministerial 
statements and then moved to orders of the day. And it was still 
difficult to hear and, because of that, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the 
House revert to permit ministerial statements. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to revert to ministerial statements. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 

Expansion of Digital Cellular Coverage 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pride to inform the House of 
an announcement that was made earlier today that by the end of 
2008 SaskTel will expand and improve digital cellular coverage 
to 39 more communities across the province, including eight 
previously unserved northern communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, those eight northern 
communities are Stanley Mission, Pelican Narrows, Sandy Bay, 
Chitek Lake, La Loche West, Pinehouse, Denare Beach, and 
Deschambault village. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this latest expansion is complete, over 96 

per cent of Saskatchewan population will have access to 
SaskTel digital cellular service and SaskTel will have invested 
over $122 million in its digital cellular network since 1998. 
 
SaskTel already provides unmatched cellular coverage and 
exceptional call clarity, Mr. Speaker, not to mention 
award-winning customer service. For the past two years, J.D. 
Power and Associates, a global market research firm, has 
ranked SaskTel number one in customer satisfaction for 
contract wireless service in Canada. 
 
This latest major expansion reinforces . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Members will come to order. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Learning. Continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this latest major expansion reinforces SaskTel’s unwavering 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, who can be very 
proud of the industry leadership demonstrated by their very own 
communications company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend SaskTel and its 
employees for continuing to deliver first-rate digital cellular 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Speaking to the ministerial statement, the 
Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure to respond for the first time as the official 
opposition critic responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is good to see, it is good to see that SaskTel is 
providing Saskatchewan citizens with much needed cellphone 
service. You know, too often, Mr. Speaker, in the past we’ve 
had this NDP government spending tens of millions of dollars 
of taxpayers’ dollars in out-of-province, money-losing ventures. 
 
While many communities . . . And I mean, the minister has 
outlined 31 communities that will benefit. These 31 
communities have been asking for years to have an 
improvement to their cell service, and this government has 
chosen to spend millions and millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money outside of this province. Mr. Speaker, this is a positive 
move for those communities that are going to be receiving this 
type of service. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition has 
received letters from many parts of the provinces, from RMs 
[rural municipality], from small communities, asking for 
SaskTel and this government to address the needs of those 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, money that could’ve been saved from projects like 
Navigata or Retx, could have been invested into Saskatchewan 
communities that would have made life better for so many 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
[14:30] 
 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan where great distances 
separate neighbour from neighbour, reliable cell service is 
necessary for doing business and staying in touch in an 
emergency. And, Mr. Speaker, with the disastrous state of the 
NDP highway system the likelihood of an accident is even 
greater and reliable cell service is that much more in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think many people in Saskatchewan will be 
thinking, why now? Why at this time? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
because there is a looming election in this province and the 
NDP will do anything to cling to power. While the 
Saskatchewan Party commends the hard work of everyone at 
SaskTel, this might be just one of those things. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, before I make my 
remarks in respect to this second reading motion, I request leave 
to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Meewasin, 
Minister of Justice, has requested leave to make introductions. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Justice for introductions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you to my colleagues in the House. I wish to present to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly two special guests 
seated in your gallery. I’m pleased that they could be here today 
as I move second reading of an important piece of legislation, 
The Payday Loans Act. 
 
Ruth Robinson is the past president of the Consumers’ 
Association of Canada, Saskatchewan Branch. Ruth is a retired 
educator, a community activist, and volunteer. For more than 30 
years she has dedicated herself to a range of issues including 
mental health issues, consumer rights, public safety, 
architectural heritage, education, women’s issues, and her 
church. Ruth Robinson’s awards and community contributions 
are too numerous to mention in their entirety but a few 
highlights include 2004 Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal 
recipient, 1992 Saskatoon Citizen of the Year, and Queen’s 
Golden Jubilee Medal recipient. 
 

I would also like to introduce Ann Marie Buchmann-Gerber. 
Ann Marie is the administrator of the Consumers’ Association 
of Canada, Saskatchewan branch. Ann Marie came to Canada 
as a young adult from Switzerland and has made her home in 
Saskatchewan since 1972. She is also a well-known 
Saskatchewan artist, a founding member of the Saskatchewan 
Craft Council, and a former long-term member of the Mendel 
Art Gallery board. 
 
Ruth and Ann Marie are accompanied today by one of my staff, 
Alaina Wartman, who has just returned to us after six months 
teaching abroad in China. I would like to take this opportunity 
to state for the record how happy I am to have such a bright, 
intelligent, and capable young woman back in my office and 
back in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming these very special 
guests to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast for introductions. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to 
introduce guests as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister on welcoming Ruth Robinson. I had the occasion 
of meeting her last year when we were passing our consumer 
protection piece of legislation through, the first time we went 
through the committee process dealing with fitness facilities, 
etc. And the hard work of the consumers’ association and of 
Ms. Robinson was very much appreciated and welcomed by the 
committee. 
 
On a personal note, Ms. Buchmann-Gerber is somebody that I 
know well from the time we both spent on the Mendel Gallery 
board and extremely pleased to see her in the legislature today, 
and pleased to see that she’s being active in the consumers’ 
association. I would like to welcome both of those members. 
 
And while I’m on my feet as well, I would certainly welcome 
the Justice minister’s new staff member, and as much as I want 
to wish her well, I hope that her career is relatively short-lived 
with that particular minister. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome them all 
to the House. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Payday Loans Act. Mr. Speaker, 
the purpose of this Bill is to establish a comprehensive 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

framework for the regulation of payday lenders. A payday loan 
is a short-term loan for a relatively small amount to be repaid at 
the time of the borrower’s next payday. 
 
In the last decade, the payday lending industry has grown 
substantially. Payday lending is currently one of the 
fastest-growing industries in Canada. There are approximately 
1,350 retail outlets. It is estimated the industry lends $1.7 
billion or more to about 2 million Canadians each year. Payday 
loans are a very expensive way for consumers to meet their 
temporary credit needs. However, the tremendous expansion of 
the industry demonstrates that there is a demand for these 
short-term loans. 
 
A number of concerns have been raised about practices in the 
payday loan industry. Some of these concerns include the high 
cost of payday loans, inadequate disclosure of costs and terms, 
excessive fees charged for the rollover of payday loans, and 
unfair debt collection practices. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 
designed to balance the need for short-term credit with effective 
borrower protections. 
 
Currently section 347 of the Criminal Code of Canada 
establishes maximum interest rates that can be charged on loans 
in Canada and makes it a criminal offence to charge more than 
60 per cent interest per year. For the past number of years the 
federal, provincial, and territorial consumer ministers have been 
collaborating and consulting with stakeholder and consumer 
groups regarding the regulation of the payday lending industry. 
 
Based on this, the federal government has introduced 
amendments to section 347 of the Criminal Code. If passed, 
those amendments will allow the provinces and territories to set 
limits on the cost of payday loans as part of a comprehensive 
framework for the regulation of payday lenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill will prohibit a payday lender from 
charging or receiving any amount or fee that is not provided for 
in the Act or regulations. It will allow regulation to be made 
setting maximum limits on the costs associated with payday 
loans. The Bill provides a borrower with the right to refund of 
all monies paid in excess of the amounts or fees permitted to be 
charged in the Act or regulations. 
 
The Bill requires payday lenders to be licensed and requires a 
separate licence for each location from which a payday lender 
carries on business. It provides the borrower may cancel a 
payday loan before the end of the business day following the 
date the loan was made. The Bill also provides the borrower 
may cancel a payday loan at any time if he or she was not 
properly notified of this cancellation right. 
 
This Bill includes disclosure requirements to ensure that 
borrowers are able to make informed decisions in respect of 
payday loans. It also provides a number of additional 
protections for borrowers including prohibiting payday lenders 
from having more than one payday loan with the same borrower 
at the same time, taking any security in respect of payday loans, 
requesting or requiring a borrower to make an assignment of 
wages in relation to a payday loan, and making a payday loan 
contingent on the purchase of another product or service. 
 
The proposed legislation allows regulations to be made setting 

limits in the amount a payday lender can loan based on the 
borrower’s net pay. Payday lenders will also be required to 
comply with the collection practice prohibitions set out in The 
Collection Agents Act. 
 
To ensure that payday lenders have the resources to meet their 
obligations, the Bill will also allow regulations to be established 
setting capital requirements for licensees and allow the director 
to require payday lenders to file financial security. Finally, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill includes investigation and enforcement 
provisions to ensure compliance with the legislation. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow for the effective 
regulation of the payday lending industry and provide 
protection for borrowers who use payday loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve consulted with members of the payday 
lending industry and consumer groups. I appreciate the time, 
effort, and co-operation these stakeholders have contributed to 
the development of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 
second reading of The Payday Loans Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading of The Payday Loans Act, Bill No. 43. I recognize the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I rise to speak briefly today in response to the 
minister’s outlining for second readings of the details of Bill 
No. 43, The Payday Loans Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for 
this piece of legislation because I certainly believe that in 
principle it provides an absolute necessity to protect consumers 
from irresponsible situations that they may find themselves in 
when they require short-term credit around payday. 
 
I’ve heard from many, many people over the years that they 
have only a 28-day cheque and a 31-day month and quite often 
they get into credit squeezes near the end of the month before 
payday. And unfortunately some of these individuals are 
actually taken a fair bit of advantage of because of their 
precarious situation. Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very 
important that this industry, as it has grown, is also regulated so 
that it provides reasonable safeguards and protections for 
consumers against excessive amounts of interest rates and loan 
conditions. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I know that our Justice critic is going 
to want to meet with and consult with various consumer groups. 
And I am pleased to see in the news release and the coverage in 
the media that the Canadian Payday Loans Association has 
come out in favour of this legislation, and I think that is a very 
responsible position for them to take. I know our critic is going 
to want to discuss this with this association and other consumer 
associations to make sure that all of the clauses of this Bill — 
and there are very numerous and technical requirements to the 
Bill including the reference to regulations — are complete. And 
in order for that to happen, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/ 
Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Class Actions 
Amendment Act, 2007. Class actions deal with situations where 
the relief sought is the result of mass injuries. This might be 
mass products liability in relation to brand name 
pharmaceuticals or misrepresentation to prospective investors 
or mass environmental injury such as chemical spills or 
contaminated water. 
 
Class actions legislation allows consumers and other plaintiffs 
to launch a class action in situations where they would be 
discouraged from pursuing individual claims because of the 
cost of doing so. 
 
Saskatchewan passed The Class Actions Act in 2001 to allow 
class actions in the province. That Act sets out the procedure 
and rules for starting and conducting a class action. The 
Saskatchewan Act was modelled on the Uniform Class 
Proceedings Act adopted in 1996. The Uniform Law 
Conference recommended that legislation should be consistent 
across the country because many of the situations that give rise 
to class actions will not be limited to one province, but will give 
rise to claims in several jurisdictions. 
 
Multi-jurisdictional class actions refers to class actions that 
include class members who do not reside in a certified 
jurisdiction. Given the broad availability of class actions in 
Canada, it is possible that overlapping multi-jurisdictional class 
actions concerning the same or similar subject matter could be 
commenced in several different Canadian jurisdictions. As a 
result, potential class members may find themselves 
presumptively included in more than one class action in more 
than one jurisdiction, and consequently subject to conflicting 
determinations. Further, defendants and class counsel may be 
faced with uncertainly as to the size and composition of the 
class. In addition it may be difficult in determining with 
certainly which class members will be bound by which 
decisions. 
 
The proposed amendments to the Act modify the existing class 
action certification process to resolve the problem of 
multiplicity in multi-jurisdictional class actions. 
 
The current Saskatchewan Act is based on the uniform Act 
which proposed an opt-out model of class proceedings for 
residents and an opt-in model for non-residents of the province. 
This means that persons who match the characteristics of the 
classes set on the class action court certification order are, if 
residents, members of the class until they opt out of the 
proceeding, and if not residents, not members unless they opt 
in. 

Not all the provinces follow the Uniform Law Conference’s 
1996 model respecting residents and non-residents. Currently 
Ontario and Manitoba have a complete opt-out model in their 
class actions legislation so that class actions in those provinces 
are binding on the class of people no matter where they reside. 
 
The Uniform Law Conference of Canada in 2004 established a 
national class actions project and the committee on national 
class and related interjurisdictional issues to prepare a report on 
issues related to national and multi-jurisdictional class actions. 
In 2006 the committee recommended amendments to the 
Uniform Class Proceedings Act to allow courts to certify on an 
opt-out basis a class that includes class members residing 
outside the jurisdiction. It also recommended that current rules 
governing jurisdiction be changed to resolve conflicts between 
potentially competing class actions, and that a central class 
action registry be developed. 
 
The proposed legislation is based on a Uniform Law 
Conference draft. The Bill provides that class action 
commenced in Saskatchewan automatically includes 
non-Saskatchewan residents as class members, and provide that 
these members can opt out of a multi-jurisdictional class action. 
The amendments reflect the recommendation that an opt-out 
mechanism be adopted for a class that includes class members 
residing outside the jurisdiction. 
 
[14:45] 
 
One of the biggest challenges with respect to 
multi-jurisdictional class actions concerns accessibility to 
information. To address this concern the Bill requires that a 
person who commences a class action in Saskatchewan give 
notice of the application to the plaintiff in a class action 
elsewhere in Canada that involves the same or similar subject 
matter. 
 
To facilitate the provision of the notice, the Uniform Law 
Conference has recommended that a Canadian class proceeding 
registry be established as a searchable electronic database of 
class actions. This registry would be operated by an appropriate 
national body. 
 
Counsel applying for certification of an action would be 
responsible for providing the relevant information at the time a 
statement of claim is filed, and for updating the information on 
certification and when material events occur. 
 
The Canadian Bar Association has established a class actions 
registry. In an effort to reduce the problems caused by 
overlapping multi-jurisdictional class actions, a new provision 
assists both the certifying court and a subsequent court in 
determining whether a related class action in another 
jurisdiction may be the most suitable forum. 
 
This provision sets out the following objectives the judge must 
be guided by in the determination as to which jurisdiction 
would be the most suitable forum: the interests of all the parties, 
the ends of justice, avoidance of irreconcilable judgments, and 
judicial economy. The legislation provides the criteria that a 
court has to consider in making this determination. 
 
Finally, the amendments provide that a court considering 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

certification has the flexibility to consider a range of orders and 
not simply whether or not to certify a multi-jurisdictional class 
action. For example, they may also refuse to certify a portion of 
the proposed class who may be included within a pending or 
proposed class action in another jurisdiction. 
 
The advantage of the proposed approach is that it prevents a 
multiplicity of actions — that is the same issue being dealt with 
by class actions in different jurisdictions. 
 
An action that applies to and binds members of the class, 
regardless of where they live, can be commenced in 
Saskatchewan. The current provision results in actions where 
class members live in many jurisdictions being started in other 
provinces. The change will mean that there is no disadvantage 
to plaintiffs and defendants if the action is started in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Class Actions Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
second reading of Bill No. 44, The Class Actions Amendment 
Act. I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 44, The Class 
Actions Amendment Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I understand that the structure for this 
legislation came under the auspices of the Uniform Law 
Conference drafts which provide some guidance in terms of 
making sure legislation is similar in all of the jurisdictions, I 
suspect, in North America. And certainly this is a piece of 
legislation that appears to be worthwhile and likely to be 
supported. 
 
I understand that the thrust of this legislation is to insert a 
multi-jurisdictional class of, a common class action that will 
facilitate interjurisdictional types of class actions that are not 
available to us at this time. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that any moves that can be 
taken in order to streamline the law process and to make redress 
for Saskatchewan residents more attainable is a worthwhile 
piece of legislation. 
 
Listening to the outline of the Justice minister, it would seem to 
me that there are a number of organizations in the law 
community that are going to be very interested in commenting 
on this draft legislation. And I know our Justice critic is going 
to endeavour to contact them and to solicit their response and 
their comments on this legislation to ensure that in the drafting 
of it nothing has been missed or overseen. 
 
So in order for that discussion to happen between these law 
organizations and our Justice critic, at this time I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 8 — The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up to speak on this particular Bill on the 
paramedics. I’m sure members on both sides of the House 
realize how important and the huge contribution that emergency 
workers do. And there’s paramedics, emergency personnel, 
ambulance drivers, nurses, doctors — how important they are if 
anybody’s ever been involved in an accident. Especially in . . . 
You take in rural Saskatchewan where you have huge distances, 
and your nearest hospital might be many, many miles away. 
You realize how important that these crews and the services 
that they provide throughout the province of Saskatchewan is 
very, very huge. I take my hat off to the people that do that 
work, that provide that emergency services out there throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve provided very, very 
excellent service over a number of years. 
 
And it’s nothing more terrifying if you’ve ever been involved in 
an accident or even come upon an accident on No. 11 Highway, 
is a very well-travelled highway. And quite often, you know, 
even driving you’ll see cars in the ditch. And just coming back 
from Saskatoon, I think two weeks ago, I passed two cars that 
were just . . . accidents that had just happened. The ambulance 
had just pulled up to one, and the emergency service had just 
pulled up to the other one. So you stop and you want to make 
sure that you can help whenever you can, and you know that the 
people that are involved are quite relieved that they can be there 
that fast. 
 
Dealing with that . . . [inaudible] . . . I’ll talk a little bit about 
emergency response out of Davidson who . . . they did excellent 
work there. Some of the things that they’ve raised with me over 
the number of years, Madam Deputy Speaker, is being, No. 11 
is being a highway that’s getting busier and busier and busier all 
the time, I think 70 per cent of their calls aren’t what you would 
call local calls. And that’s originally what they were set up for, 
was to service the surrounding community in the area. But 70 
per cent of the calls now are dealt with people travelling on No. 
11 Highway. They get the accidents especially with . . . it seems 
like the last number of years there’s been a lot of ice on the 
highways, I don’t know, just maybe just due to the certain 
conditions we’ve had over the last few years — a lot of 
accidents and a lot of people travelling at that end of it. 
 
And they found it’s very, very hard on a small service in 
Davidson to be servicing that, and they felt that they’re not 
adequately provided money or funding for that. In fact you 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

can’t put funding in for an accident call if it’s out of your local 
area. There’s a fund there but usually time to get it . . . you 
apply for it at the end of the year, and most of the time the fund 
is empty, so you’re only paid out on a percentage. So most of 
the time, they only get paid maybe 40, 50, 60 per cent of what 
they normally should be getting for the calls out of it. 
 
And it can be very expensive considering that it’s a community 
that are raising the money for the jaws of life, for the 
emergency trucks, for the firefighters out there. It’s local 
communities that are raising . . . and getting very little help 
from the government at that end. I know that they’ve applied 
for funding for jaws of life up and down the line. 
 
In fact I think Kenaston just got theirs. They had to buy a used 
one at a sale, you know. And they, you know, being that they’re 
situated on a very busy highway, No. 11, I find that a little 
disconcerting that the only, that the only way they could raise 
funding was to go to an auction sale and buy a used one. I feel 
that, you know, this government could possibly provide them 
with a new jaws of life considering that the busyness and the 
amount of accidents that are up on No. 11 Highway. 
 
I know I met with the health district — we’d met with them a 
couple months ago — and the calls they . . . Every year they do 
an assessment of the calls, Madam Deputy Speaker. And every 
year they’re going up in my area on No. 11 Highway as being 
one of the most busiest highways in Saskatchewan. And every 
year they go up. This year they’re predicted to go up by at least 
60 more calls that the paramedics, the firefighters, emergency 
crews are going to have to make on that, just out of Davidson, 
just going up by 60 calls. And he says, you know, that’s putting 
a strain on our workers. 
 
We’ve only got . . . In ambulance drivers, I think they only have 
two full-time ones right now, and then you have a part-time. 
Part-time are only getting paid $4 an hour when they’re on call. 
And he said it’s been very hard to retain drivers in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He said a lot of times we go out on a call, we don’t have a 
back-up ambulance, and a lot of times we’ll have to go to 
another town, as Imperial, to pick up . . . or Craik or Kenaston. 
And basically we don’t have another ambulance service in our 
area. We’ll have to then use Outlook or maybe even Rosetown 
as a back-up call-in. And then you’re looking at possibly, you 
know, an hour, hour and a half for an ambulance call. 
 
I was hoping this government would pay more attention to 
providing more money and more services out there in rural 
Saskatchewan when it comes to, especially, paramedics. It 
seems like we’ve become a more and more mobile people. We 
seem to be on the road a lot more, travelling a lot more, which 
people do. Over the number of years, it’s become very mobile 
out in my constituency. And unfortunately we have to because 
you’re looking at schools . . . Right now, if they get some of the 
school closures, they could be looking at busing 45 minutes, 
taking busloads of kids down roads that sometimes aren’t that 
great a shape. 
 
You know, the people out there, that’s the only service they 
have for emergency service, is the paramedics that are located 
in centres such as Davidson and Imperial and Outlook. They 

service a huge area. Three towns like that service a huge area. 
We’re talking like many, many miles at that. And that’s the 
only service we have out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
If you’re involved in an accident, that’s the only help you’re 
going to get. And they provide excellent help, but I think they 
need more help from this government. They need more 
equipment, and they need more personnel out there because 
nothing’s more frightening than if you have a loved one 
involved in an accident and you’re sitting, waiting on a 
paramedic, knowing that they’re 40, 45 minutes; the closest 
centre is maybe 40, 45 minutes away at that. 
 
I know that our Health critic at times has talked about different 
solutions. And one of them was that what Alberta uses, is a 
helicopter to transport emergency accident victims. And I think 
we have to have an open mind when it comes to health care 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. Any way that we can 
help groups such as paramedics at that . . . with this particular 
piece of legislation that deals with paramedics and some of their 
issues that they’ve raised with us over the years. They’ve raised 
them with the government on it. 
 
You know, I think some of them deals with . . . they would like 
to be a little more self-regulatory. They would like to be a little 
more . . . look after, a little more of their administration, a little 
more of the regulations. And I think that’s a very good idea. 
With that we need to be supporting them kind of workers as 
much as we can, Madam Deputy Speaker because they provide 
a very excellent service out there in rural Saskatchewan at that. 
And paramedics all over, all over Saskatchewan, whether it’s 
urban and whether it’s rural, they provide a very excellent 
service. 
 
I mean they’re the front-line workers. When there’s an accident, 
those are the first people that you call when you’re involved in 
accidents, first people that cross your mind. And they’re there. 
They are the ones that have to use the jaws of life. They’re the 
ones that have to get the people out, put them on, load them the 
proper way to make sure that they make it to the hospital alive 
while working on them all the way while they’re being 
transported to a hospital, at that end of it. 
 
I know that they talk about having the same standards of 
training for all service providers working in the area. And that, I 
think, is very important, Madam Deputy Speaker, because they 
need adequate training. They need to be trained properly out 
there because people’s lives are depending on what they’re 
doing out there, and the service that they’re providing, and the 
care when they’re first on an accident scene at that. So I know 
that they’re asking for as much possible training as they can 
possibly get. I know the paramedics in my constituency are 
willing to take any kind of training that the government will 
provide, and trying to do anything to get as much training as 
possibly, as they possibly can. 
 
Because I mean, their main focus is to, out there, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is to save lives. That’s their one goal when 
they joined that. They want to help people at that end of it. I 
know that some of the concerns that were raised in my area was 
that some of the people just wanted to come out; they wanted to 
get more on-the-job training when they came out there. And 
they found that sometimes they’re restricted with some of the 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

health districts a little bit at that end of it. 
 
Also some of the people that actually work in the health centre, 
they would like to be able to be on call. They’re at the health 
centre anyways. They’re right there where the ambulance is 
being loaded, the paramedics are leaving. Some of their jobs 
aren’t critical that they can leave their job. And that makes it . . . 
and I’m hoping some of the health districts will look at that, 
being a little more flexible. Because when you’re on calls as a 
paramedic in rural Saskatchewan — that’s one of them — your 
employer has . . . you have to find a flexible employer that will 
let you leave your job on a second’s notice, that you’re just 
gone like that. When the call comes in, you’re out that door. 
 
And unfortunately in rural . . . [inaudible] . . . most employers 
are like that but unfortunately rural Saskatchewan, size of the 
towns, it’s hard. There isn’t that many jobs out there. There’s 
not that many jobs in rural Saskatchewan that you can just walk 
out the door that fast, that quick at that end of it. But any 
employers out there are trying to accommodate that. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I know I’m hoping that the health districts will look at it 
because I know there’s been some people that — working in 
long-term care, some in administration there — that say yes, 
we, you know, we could leave our job here and we’re right here 
on the centre where the ambulance is leaving that we could be 
ready to go. And I know that was an issue, that just having the 
people, finding the people to work out in rural Saskatchewan is 
getting to be unfortunately more and more of a challenge at that 
end of it. 
 
So I know this government has to do more work. Whether it’s 
this government or when we’re government in the short number 
of months, we have to be out there working to ensure that the 
paramedics are getting the proper funding and the proper 
training to provide the service out there to rural Saskatchewan 
that they’re going to need in the upcoming years. And we’re 
going to be relying more and more on paramedics. 
 
And out our way, we’ve had to because, under this present 
government, they’ve closed 52 hospitals. There is no, basically, 
hospital service at all out in my constituencies, you know, very 
little hospital care. It’s basically paramedics get you to the 
bigger centres at that end of it, at that. So under this 
government, with the closure of hospitals, they should be 
putting more money and looking after the paramedics because 
they’re the ones that are out there on the front line that are 
going to . . . out there. That’s the only help the people have out 
there in my constituency. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with that, I would . . . I know that 
some more . . . these are some of the issues raised. And I know 
that this being a very important Bill. And dealing with 
paramedics, I know quite a few members, I think, still want to 
make some points on it. So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will 
adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to rise in this Assembly to debate Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
As I understand it, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is all about 
formalizing provisions for services by affiliate-type health care 
organizations, such as ambulance services, which are not 
so-called designated health organizations under the Act. 
 
And I recognize, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the Provincial 
Auditor has suggested that it would be proper to enter into some 
sort of formal agreement, service agreements with this type of 
health care providers, many of which are contracted services. 
And I would agree at least in principle, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that that is appropriate and proper. The devil may be in 
the details. That’s my concern with this Bill, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I understand formal agreements would ensure that standards are 
met, outline responsibilities, and ensure that Saskatchewan 
Health is accountable for the actions of the contractors that it 
deals with. In this respect, Madam Deputy Speaker, this type of 
agreements are overdue. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has asked that RHAs [regional health 
authority] comply with this recommendation for many years. 
And so it is appropriate that we see a Bill in front of us, the 
details of which may need some work. 
 
We’ve found that . . . You know, as an official opposition, part 
of our duty is to consult with the stakeholders in these 
situations. And as a result of those consultations, we’ve 
discovered that the Saskatchewan emergency measures services 
association, SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 
Services Association] has some concerns with this Bill. And we 
understand that negotiations are . . . and at least discussions are 
ongoing and that’s great. We would expect however that some 
agreement would be arrived at between the parties before 
passage of this Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And given this government’s history with The Ambulance Act 
where it failed to duly consult with ambulance operators, it 
seems appropriate that the discussions continue and that an 
agreement be arrived at. 
 
SEMSA’s concerns are threefold. Number one, they are 
concerned about the provision that allows for one year’s notice 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

that can be given without cause. That’s a major concern to 
operators and a serious impediment for them to secure 
financing. Bankers would obviously see that there’s no 
long-term business plan to warrant a loan. And it certainly 
affects the establishment of these businesses and the expansion 
of them and long-term planning within those businesses. 
 
Their second concern, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that once 
notice is served to terminate a contract, there are provisions for 
the RHA [regional health authority] to buy out the operator at 
so-called fair market value. However ambulance operators 
suggest that with only one-year contracts in place, the fair 
market value of their business is greatly diminished. 
 
And thirdly, Madam Deputy Speaker, the third concern on this 
Bill is that this provision gives 14 days notice to remedy any 
service disputes, followed by cessation of payment. And that’s a 
serious problem for these people as well. Operators feel that 
there needs to be a longer period to resolve disputes. 
 
And you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, we understand that 
discussions are moving ahead and that work is in progress, but 
we expect that those discussions should bear fruit and an 
agreement should be arrived at before any serious attempt is 
made to pass this Bill. And accordingly, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I move to adjourn this item until such time as 
stakeholders have been consulted and accommodated in that 
fashion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 28 — The 
Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. When 
you get up to talk on The Cities Amendment Act, it’s funny. 
My constituency is about 4,500 square miles, and I don’t have a 
city in it. And I think it’s due, unfortunately, to this present 
government that nothing’s growing out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. I should have some cities by now. 
 
You know, over the number of years there should have been 
cities like, or towns like Watrous and Wynyard, they should be 
the size of small cities right now. You know, if they’d have 
been in Alberta they’d be the size of a small city right now, 
growing. Instead if you checked the latest census population 
you know they’re just barely hanging on or shrinking. In fact 
most of my towns under this present government have shrunk, 
especially the RMs [rural municipalities]. You know, if you’ve 
check the RMs they’ve all shrunk under the watch of this NDP 

government, but with that. 
 
Dealing with this particular Bill No. 28, The Cities Amendment 
Act, going through it here I can see where the cities would want 
to have a little more power when they’re governing and not to 
be always be looking over the shoulder or having almost like 
Big Brother running them. 
 
I’m surprised at some of the things that they’ve had to come to 
the legislature or come to the government if they want to 
change things. I think at one time it was if you wanted to 
change your street address — not street address, change the 
name of a street — I think it had to actually go through the 
legislature or through the minister. I shouldn’t say through the 
legislature. It had to go through the minister for his approval to 
change the name of a street at that. I don’t know where the 
government always thought that they had to take the powers 
away from some of these cities. 
 
Like I say we’ve met with big-city mayors over a number of 
years and they say, you know, their jurisdiction has changed 
over a number of years. They’re looking after so much more 
now than just at one time a mayor, the council, just looked after 
infrastructure, just looked after streets. Now they have to 
provide . . . They’re into health care, providing that for citizens. 
They’re into providing affordable housing for their citizens. 
They’re into recreation events and facilities and sporting events 
and numerous things that one time that was basically just the 
role of the government. 
 
And you know at one time towns, cities, or villages, you know 
they just, their role was just to, you know, provide sewer and 
water, garbage removal. But now as you talk to the cities you 
know they’re into much more. Transit is to be a huge problem 
as most cities are facing the movement of people throughout the 
city. And I know our cities you don’t notice it quite as much, 
but yet at 5 o’clock, and 8 o’clock in the morning, and 5 in the 
afternoon, you know it’s busy on your major streets and it’s 
getting close to being a traffic jam. Saskatoon right now is in 
the boom of a mini-boom. 
 
You look at the way Alberta is growing and some of the 
problems that their cities are facing. The cities are growing so 
huge there that the infrastructure is having a hard time 
following and growing with them. So I could see where they 
need more, you know, more resources or more freedom to act 
quickly on things as they grow and the cities are growing very 
fast throughout Canada. 
 
And unfortunately, they’re not growing as fast here in 
Saskatchewan as they should under this present government but 
with a change in government I believe that they will start to 
grow a lot faster and a lot quicker over the next number of 
years. For, you know, this province has a huge, huge potential 
which all the province is going to enjoy — the cities and rural 
Saskatchewan. All it needs is the right government. 
 
So I could see where the cities want to be a little more 
independent, want to have a little more flexibility in taxation, a 
little more flexibility in some of the rules and regulations and 
financing and dealing with the present government. I know 
when we’d met with big-city mayors, you know, they’d made 
some very, very valid points on the future of their cities. And 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

they’re concerned of a lot of the issues that they have to face. 
 
And one of them is, you know, like you say, some of the issues 
that they’ve had to take over, downloading from this present 
government. I can relate to that as being a councillor even in 
our small little town. The downloading that’s come from this 
provincial government, when I was a councillor I think we were 
getting around $13,000 in grant money coming back and when I 
left we were down to below 6, I think. And if I talked to the 
present mayor now, we’re at 5, almost $4,000. 
 
And yet this government keeps bringing in new rules and 
regulations for safety and they keep passing that on. One of 
them is water testing. I mean, it’s good. It needs to be done but 
the towns have to pay for it, you know. The government wants 
that test sent in every week, but you also better send a cheque 
with it every week too along with it. You pay for it. 
 
You have to pay to meet all the rules and regulations. There’s 
very little help coming from this government to any town, 
village, city. So I can see why the cities are getting very 
frustrated with this present government. And they raised that 
with us. 
 
We met with them and they are frustrated with this government 
and so are their citizens, Madam Deputy Speaker. It showed in 
the last two by-elections; the one just outside of Saskatoon 
which is Martensville, Warman, two major towns in that 
constituency, very close to Saskatoon. I mean, probably some 
day they may even be joined. Basically the people that live in 
Warman or Martensville, they work in the city. They moved out 
of the city. They’re working there. You could class them as 
urban. 
 
And the talk when I was there door knocking was, you know, 
they weren’t happy with this present government and a lot of it 
dealt with the way that they were being treated in the cities, that 
they felt that this government was not providing fair funding to 
their cities, to the RMs, to the small towns — weren’t basically 
picking up their share. This government is dealing with more 
money. It is dealing with a little bit of a mini-boom. Are the 
citizens of Saskatchewan any better? No they’re not. When I go 
door to door that’s one of the questions I ask. Do you think 
you’re any better than you were five years ago? And the answer 
I always got was no, no I’m not; if anything, I think things are 
worse out there. 
 
That’s what we were getting at the doorstep. We got that in 
Weyburn. We got that in the by-election in Martensville. And it 
translated into the way the people voted and it’s going to 
translate into the way they vote this fall when the election’s 
going to be called in October probably of this fall coming up. 
 
[15:15] 
 
It’s going to translate into that, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
because the people of the cities are dissatisfied with rural 
Saskatchewan at that end of it. They’re, I mean, they’re . . . 
Sorry, they’re dissatisfied with this government along with rural 
Saskatchewan. And that’s going to translate into votes for our 
party, the party that only really cares about people, only cares 
about people in cities, cares about people in rural 
Saskatchewan. They’re actually trying to . . . They know that 

we’re the only party that’s probably going to help them out 
there. They’re not happy with what’s been happening with this 
present government over the last number of years at that end of 
it. 
 
And one of it is cities amendment Act . This was driven, I 
would imagine, from the big cities’ mayors. They’ve driven 
this, which is good. They know that they need changes. One of 
them is they have to provide a lot of health care. They’re 
providing some of the clinics out in their cities. Their citizens 
are looking to them to provide some of this stuff because 
they’re not getting it from their government. You have long 
waiting lists. Very hard to get into a hospital right now. They’re 
looking for them to provide little clinics, little health clinics. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask that the member would speak 
to the amendment before the Assembly within The Cities Act. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Sorry about that, Madam Deputy Speaker, but 
when I start talking about this government I guess I digress into 
all the problems that it’s presented over it. But I will get back to 
The Cities Amendment Act. At that, I apologize to the 
legislature for straying from this particular Bill at that end of it. 
 
But dealing with the legislation before this with The Cities 
Amendment Act, I would just . . . bringing forth some of the 
reasons why this particular piece of legislation is on here 
because it was brought forward by the cities — that they felt 
they’re not being treated fairly by this government. And when I 
met with them, that is what they told me — that they feel 
they’re not being treated fairly by this government. That was 
their exact words. And that is why this piece of legislation is on 
here. So I was just giving, Madam Deputy Speaker, and to the 
House, some of the reasons why this particular piece of 
legislation was brought forward at that end of it. 
 
Dealing with some of the issues, some of it’s taxation. They’re 
looking for more, being able to have more freedom to tax their 
citizens to provide some of these services that aren’t being 
provided by this present government any more. They need more 
funding to provide some of these services. So that some of them 
is looking at more share of a gas tax, of a hotel tax, of part of 
the oil and gas revenue. 
 
I know that on this side we’ve talked about, as the province 
booms, as the economy does good, as more money comes in to 
the coffers, we’ve made the statement, our leader Brad Wall has 
made the statement that we would share that. We would share 
revenue sharing as things go up. And if revenues go down, well 
then so does your revenue sharing with it. But if revenues are 
going up, we share them with municipalities. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I know the member’s enthusiasm to 
speak about cities in general, and The Cities Act in general. I 
believe that has been debated before the Assembly. There are 
certain amendments here within the Bill that we would ask the 
member to address in speaking to the amendments before the 
House. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Dealing 
with the amendments, you know, this government didn’t do its 
homework again, didn’t deal with the cities at that . . . That’s 
why some of the amendments had to come. They didn’t do the 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

legislation right the first time at that end of it, and that’s why 
some of these amendments, some of it deals with the general 
legislation of the taxation at that. 
 
But getting back to this government did not do its homework. 
And that is why this particular Act is being amended right now 
and before the legislature at that, dealing with some of the 
amendments. And some of it, you know, talks about, allow city 
to finance public improvements in a designated area. You 
know, being allowed the freedom to be able to . . . that’s what 
some of these amendments deal with, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
at that end of it. 
 
So when I talk about taxation, it’s dealing here with some of the 
amendments at that end of it. But that is some of the reasons 
why this Bill was here. And the main reason why the 
amendments are here, because the government didn’t do its 
homework again. It did not consult with them and I think that 
was raised last session or the session before that — that it was 
not, did not do its particular homework. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with that, I know that there’s a 
few other members who want to raise some points, so I will 
adjourn debate on Bill 28, The Cities Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 28, The Cities Amendment Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to speak on Bill No. 9, the Human Rights Code 
amendment Act. And of course the reason why it’s a pleasure to 
speak on this Bill is because it’s an idea that was generated by 
the Saskatchewan Party and copied by the NDP. And it’s 
always more fun to talk about your own ideas than have to 
criticize the weak legislation that comes from the NDP. 
 
There’s several reasons, Madam Speaker, why we can support 
this legislation, but I want to talk about two ideas. And I think 
the Justice minister has forgotten that the Saskatchewan Party 
suggested this in its 100 Ideas a year or so ago. Obviously one 
of his staffers must have found the idea and maybe passed it on 
to the minister, and the minister didn’t even realize it was a 
Sask Party idea. I’m not sure what the problem is. 
 
But I think, Madam Speaker, the reason why we are debating 
this Bill today — which is a Saskatchewan Party idea — is 
because the NDP is so low in the polls. In fact I saw a national 
poll that showed the NDP were in third place in Saskatchewan 

and Manitoba. And we’ve just gone through two by-elections, 
Madam Speaker, where the NDP were either third or a whisker 
away from being in third place. 
 
So hence they have to bring forward some good legislation to 
try to blunt some of the criticism and lack of support they’re 
experiencing. And thus we have Saskatchewan Party idea . . . 
and I can’t remember what number it is, Madam Speaker, but 
the Saskatchewan Party idea, 1 of 100, that says that we should 
discontinue the mandatory retirement age of 65 in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about two reasons why this 
is a piece of legislation that I will support. First of all, Madam 
Speaker, I support human rights. And, Madam Speaker, I 
support the right of people to work regardless of their age. 
 
Now it may come as a bit of a shock for some of the NDP 
members that there are actually people who like to work. And 
actually, Madam Speaker, there are people who like to continue 
to work, and they don’t just look forward to the day that they 
are 65 and can grab their retirement slip and enjoy their 
pension. I think that might be the mindset of the NDP — do as 
little as possible, quit as soon as you can, get as big a pension as 
you possibly can, and live a life of luxury. 
 
And actually, Madam Speaker, we’ve seen some of the retired 
NDPers. When they do retire from Saskatchewan, they can’t 
wait to get out of the province. And of course they spend these 
retirement dollars in Alberta or in Victoria or — who knows? 
— maybe the Turks and Caicos Islands. I’m not sure, Madam 
Speaker, where all these NDPers go, but obviously if you’re not 
interested in working and you don’t believe in the right to work, 
you’re just happy to support mandatory retirement. Obviously 
the lack of support for the NDP has caused them to change their 
mind. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, my father always said that he would 
rather wear out than rust out — and I kind of like that 
statement— and he worked as long as he could. Now he could 
do that because he was self-employed. There was no regulation 
telling him that when he reached 65 years of age, he had to 
hang up his work clothes and put on his retirement garb and 
take it easy. And he enjoyed work, Madam Speaker. And he 
worked as long as he could into his 70s before he actually 
slowed down and he left the farm. 
 
And that’s of course the case for all self-employed people. 
There’s no mandatory retirement age for them. And there are 
people in many professions that aren’t self-employed where 
there isn’t a mandatory retirement. So what we have without 
this legislation of course is discrimination. We have some 
people who are forced to retire at a certain age and others that 
can continue to work, and that inequity is not acceptable. And 
so therefore it’s very easy to support a piece of legislation that 
would end the discrimination against people who pass the 
mandatory retirement age and still want to work. 
 
There’s nothing in this Bill . . . Of course there’s nothing but 
age that impedes employment. If there are other circumstances 
like health requirements or whatever, you know, for people who 
fly airplanes and drive buses, that’s a whole different matter. 
But nobody should be impeded from working on the basis of 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

their age and their age alone. 
 
Madam Speaker, another, of course, issue of human rights is the 
fact that many women leave the workforce for a few years to 
raise children. The number of women who leave the workforce 
to raise children is significant. And if mandatory retirement is in 
place when they rejoin the workforce, oftentimes they are 
discriminated against and don’t have the same access to pension 
and other benefits that they would have had they been able to 
remain in the workforce without interruption. And so therefore 
it’s easy to support this legislation on that basis. 
 
And again this is another issue where we’ve seen the NDP fall 
short. They have come up short in supporting women’s rights 
and in protecting women. We’ve seen that in the Murdoch 
Carriere case, just blatant disregard for women’s rights and the 
protection of women. 
 
So I’m happy to be coming from a different point of view and 
supporting this legislation because it is friendly to women in the 
workplace and others who, for reasons often beyond their 
control, have to leave the workforce for a period of time, could 
be to care for the elderly parents or it could be because of health 
reasons. And of course that’s not even a gender issue. That 
could be male or female that have to leave the workplace 
because of interruptions in their work because of health. And 
obviously this legislation provides them with the human rights 
that they deserve. 
 
Now the other issue of course that I think . . . The other 
qualification that makes this legislation supportable and the 
reason why it was a good Saskatchewan Party idea in the first 
place is that we are faced in Saskatchewan with a labour 
shortage. I happen to be right in the middle of the baby boom 
generation. All those of you who are a few years older or a few 
years younger than me are baby boomers. And we’re the 
majority. We’re a disproportional amount of the workforce, and 
we’re reaching retirement age. 
 
And we’re already seeing, Madam Speaker, not only in Alberta 
and Ontario where they have stronger economies because of a 
non-NDP government, but even here in NDP Saskatchewan 
with a much weaker economy, we’re seeing a labour shortage. 
We’re seeing it in the case of health care professionals because 
of lack of foresight by the NDP to train health care 
professionals. We have to encourage health care professionals 
to stay in their profession longer than might otherwise be the 
case, particularly if there was a mandatory retirement clause in 
their particular profession. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, the short-sightedness of the NDP and the 
way they have governed the province of Saskatchewan is 
another reason why we should pass Bill No. 9 and discontinue 
the mandatory retirement age and in fact strengthen the Human 
Rights Code with this amendment. 
 
Madam Speaker, one question that I would have for the minister 
and any members opposite who could answer that is, why does 
this Act only come into force on its first anniversary? There are 
already people that have contacted us and they’re concerned, 
Madam Speaker, because in this interim of a year from when 
this legislation is passed until it comes into effect, they will be 
forced to retire. If it’s a good idea, why isn’t it a good idea to 

implement sooner? 
 
This isn’t a surprise. This legislation has been passed in other 
jurisdictions. And of course it’s been discussed in 
Saskatchewan. People know it’s coming. People know that both 
the governing party and the official opposition are speaking in 
favour of the legislation, so why should it take an entire year to 
come into force? What’s the reason of putting some people at a 
disadvantage for a whole extra 12 months? Certainly it could be 
done sooner. Why doesn’t the NDP become a little more 
aggressive, a little more positive? Why don’t they get their act 
together? Why don’t they in fact do a little bit of work and 
make this thing work sooner? It’s just a matter of changing the 
last clause of the Bill so that it comes into effect on 
proclamation or at some time in the near future rather than the 
distant future. 
 
One good thing, Madam Speaker, about the fact that this Bill 
will come into effect on the first anniversary of its passing is of 
course that the Saskatchewan Party will then be the 
government. And obviously the Saskatchewan Party will get the 
credit for this legislation, which it should because it was a 
Saskatchewan Party idea in the first place. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, let’s call a good idea a good idea. But let’s 
also be clear about where the idea came from. And, Madam 
Speaker, I think some other people, particularly at least on this 
side, want to speak to this particular Bill, so at this time I would 
ask that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Rosetown-Elrose 
has asked to move to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 14 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to enter into the debate with regards to The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to look at 
some of the significant portions of this Bill, and it deals with the 
government’s obligation to acquire permits and to register on 
land so that landowners know how things are going to be 
affected. And when I look back at the government’s record in 
some of these things, it’s somewhat problematic and certainly 
troubling. They do not have a good record on environmental 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

management. 
 
And strangely enough, for people on this side of the House to 
be quoting David Suzuki, not only does Saskatchewan have the 
. . . According to David Suzuki, Saskatchewan not only has the 
highest emissions of greenhouse gases, but it has also the 
highest level of increase in emissions. And while that doesn’t 
directly affect the things that this Bill is going to address, it’s 
certainly an indication of how poorly this government deals 
with environmental matters and how little that they can be 
trusted to deal with . . . or how little they should be trusted as 
stewards of the environment. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill will require some significant 
consultation from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association], SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], the chamber of commerce, and the various 
businesses that have to deal with the government entities. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I always have approached this 
type of thing where the government is introducing Bills under 
the auspices of it being a mere housekeeping thing . . . This one 
deals with regulatory process, who’s required to obtain permits, 
how do permits affect land that’s adjacent to or on where these 
works are to be done. So it will be with a significant amount of 
care that we want to proceed with this Bill, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And we’ll certainly want to ensure that the 
consultation that we have is done in a meaningful manner and 
that we invite those people to make representation to the 
various committees as this Bill proceeds through. 
 
Having said that, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re prepared now 
to allow this Bill to go to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 14, 
the environmental management and protection amendment be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? Recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that the 
Bill No. 14, The Environmental Management and Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that Bill No. 14, The Environmental 
Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 — The Fuel 
Tax Accountability Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join into the debate on Bill 
No. 3, an Act to amend The Financial Administration Act. It’s a 
theme that we’ve been seeing in this legislative session. I would 
say it goes back to about a year ago or so when the budget was 
delivered, and we’ve seen some Sask Party ideas adopted by 
this government. They clearly ran out of their own ideas a long, 
long time ago. And they made the decision as they were 
dropping in the polls that it’s time to address some 
Saskatchewan Party ideas. 
 
This is legislation that makes sense. It mandates that taxes be 
spent on what they were actually collected for. It’s something 
that we’ve been talking about in the Saskatchewan Party for a 
long period of time. And I know that the members opposite, 
they sometimes dispute that, but I just happen to, I just happen 
to have with me today a copy of the 100 Ideas, the 100 ideas 
that the Sask Party presented to get Saskatchewan ready for the 
next 100 years, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I bet, just by that alone, you will know when this was 
presented to this legislature and to this House, to the people of 
Saskatchewan — in the spring of 2005. Now, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, 100 ideas that were well thought out . . . They weren’t 
just ideas that came from people on this side of the House. We 
actually consulted with individuals across Saskatchewan to 
come up with 100 ideas. 
 
The need, the need was there, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 
at the time a reporter asked the House Leader at the time, is 
there anything that stands out in this legislative session. And he 
says, and I quote, “Nothing really comes to mind.” That was 
from February 25, 2005. So being a responsible opposition, we 
felt that it was incumbent upon us to fill that vacuum, to come 
up with these ideas, and to bring them to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I know members opposite, 
some of them probably have copies of this very document that 
I’m quoting from in their desk. If they would like to turn to item 
no. 33 — because this pertains specifically to this legislation — 
and I quote, Madam Deputy Speaker: “Commit all provincial 
fuel tax revenue as a minimum annual investment in provincial 
and municipal transportation construction and renewal.”  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — A good idea, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Idea no. 33 out of 100 that were presented . . . and presented. 
And I know it’s not the only one that was adopted by members 
opposite. They’ve worked their way through I think a colleague 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

of mine says about 39 of them, so there’s 61 more to go. And 
I’m sure that members opposite are thankful for that because 
they will have very little time left to come up with legislation to 
ensure that the whole program is adopted. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this legislation is something that is 
long overdue but, you know, when we look at the financial 
numbers that are in place right now, the government still has a 
ways to go. If we look at the third quarter report and the money 
that was collected from fuel in the province, $376 million and 
about 85 additional million dollars comes through from the 
federal government. So we’re talking about 450, $460 million 
that should be the budget of the Department of Highways. 
 
Now when we look at what money is spent by that department, 
it totals up to about $410 million, which is a significant amount 
of money, and it’s something that’s necessary. But when we see 
big announcements that are made by members opposite — you 
know, they’re dreaming a little bit thinking that they will have 
the opportunity to enact legislation from 10 years from now — 
we see that $410 million of the budget now just with an 
inflationary index of 2 to 3 per cent, we would be at $500 
million a year just with the legislation that’s in place now, the 
money that’s put forward right now. 
 
They have a long way to go, but this legislation is a step in the 
right direction. It will ensure that they at least take the time to 
look at the numbers, and the Finance minister when he delivers 
his budget will have to follow this legislation. If not, members 
here or members across, people across the Saskatchewan will 
ensure that they hold him to account for not following his own 
legislation even though it originally came from the 
Saskatchewan Party. We congratulate the minister for taking the 
time to look through our document, to pick some of those that 
they could adopt, and to bring this legislation forward. 
 
There’s a lot more to be said on this legislation; the details go 
on and on. It’s just that it’s too bad that it took the government 
this long to adopt this legislation. It’s something that I think a 
new government maybe back in the 1990s would have had the 
forethought to implement. But that being said, it took them a 
long, long time to do it, and it sure is something that we support 
at this time. But we will also — and I caution the members 
opposite — we will be holding them to account to ensure that 
every dollar collected from taxes will indeed go back into the 
infrastructure that is so badly needed in this province. 
 
And I would encourage the members opposite that, you know, 
item no. 33 here, that this idea was adopted, and there’s other 
ideas that were adopted as well. And I think that it’s important 
that the government take the time to look through this document 
and make sure that they do things like item no. 68, “Establish 
set provincial election dates every four years.” That’s 
something that Saskatchewan people are looking for. 
 
Item no. 96, it’s similar to no. 93 . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We’re talking about a specific 
Bill before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As 
item no. 33 says we should “Commit all provincial fuel tax 
revenue as a minimum annual investment in provincial and 

municipal transportation construction and renewal.” 
 
And that’s the very Bill that we’re talking about today. And I 
would say that it’s time for this Bill to go to committee so the 
government can have more time to adopt other ideas, like idea 
no. 9: “Establish a Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon utilizing an 
existing acute care facility.” 
 
Again, it’s our role as government . . . as opposition — I may 
be foreshadowing there — but it’s our role as opposition to 
come forward with these ideas. And we will at this time, at this 
time we will allow the government to put this Bill to committee 
so they do have the time, so they do have the time to look at 
other ideas. And you know, thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
That’s all I have at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 3, The Fuel 
Tax Accountability Act be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, although it’s 
no. 33 on the opposition’s list, I would move that Bill No. 3 be 
moved to the Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 3, The Fuel Tax Accountability Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act is an interesting 
amalgamation of various Acts that deal with somewhat a similar 
issue, which is property taxation. But it comes under a number 
of different headings or a number of different statutes, such as 
The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act, the northern municipal 
Act, etc., Madam Deputy Speaker. And they are all being 
lumped together in this particular piece of legislation in sort of a 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

mini-omnibus Bill to deal with some changes that the 
government is making in a band-aid-like manner to try and 
correct a problem that has existed in the collection of property 
taxes because the government doesn’t want to actually deal with 
the problem of property taxes. 
 
So they’re trying to put forward miniscule measures to deal 
with the symptoms of the problem rather than actually dealing 
with the problem, the problem itself, which is that education 
property taxes are too high. In Saskatchewan we have the 
highest education property taxes in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bar none. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Bar none as my colleague says, Madam 
Deputy Chair. And yet this government, rather than deal with 
that particular issue — even though the person they look up to 
for their entire inspiration, Tommy Douglas, said about 50 years 
ago that property taxes for education were too high in the 
province of Saskatchewan — this government continues to do 
nothing about reducing those property taxes. Instead, puts in 
place measures like this miscellaneous statutes (municipal 
collection of other taxes) Act to try and band-aid over the 
problem. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So what is this Act doing? This Act is telling municipalities that 
if you don’t collect the taxes, if you don’t remit the taxes in a 
timely fashion, you’re going to have to pay interest on those 
taxes that you have not either collected or remitted to the other 
institution involved in the tax collection. 
 
So this is directing and forcing the municipalities, the cities, the 
northern municipalities to continue to collect the education 
property taxes for the school boards and remit that in the 
manner prescribed by the government. If they fail to do that, 
they are going to be charged interest on the money or — I 
shouldn’t say or because it’s not an option — it also could mean 
that any provincial grants going to that city or municipality 
would be cancelled and would not be remitted to the 
municipality. I know of a number of municipalities across the 
province that would look at that as being a benefit, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They would gladly make that trade-off. 
 
You know, even the city of Regina, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
has been coming to this legislature for approximately 15 years 
asking this government to increase the amount of grants in lieu 
that it receives from the Crown corporations, from the 
government for the buildings that it owns and operates in 
Regina but that it doesn’t pay property taxes on and just simply 
the transfers to municipalities that have been greatly reduced 
since this government came to power. 
 
They dramatically reduced those grants, have slowly increased 
them up a little bit, but I think the last time the cities were in 
they were looking for somewheres in the neighbourhood of 12 
to $20 million. I think it was 20 million, and the government 
finally gave them 12 million in transfers to all of the cities in 
the province, Madam Deputy Speaker. And they were looking 
for something in the neighbourhood, I believe, of 9 to $10 
million for grants in lieu based on the buildings and the 
properties that the government operates in Regina and they 

received, I believe, it was about 6 million. 
 
So even in the city of Regina or the city of Saskatoon, they 
might look at that as not being that harsh of a penalty. 
 
I do know that across rural Saskatchewan a good many of the 
RMs would not look at that as a harsh penalty in the sense that 
if they got to retain those dollars they had collected and forego 
any grants because this government gives very, very few grants 
. . . And the fact is even the school boards in my area, the 
previous minister of Education, the current Minister of Finance, 
changed the whole school structure, forced school boards to 
amalgamate into 12 or 13 school boards with the excuse that it 
was going to save money and it was going to get rid of zero 
grant boards. 
 
Well in talking to the boards today they say that there is no 
savings to be had. And at least in our area, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, next year our board will again be a zero grant board. 
They will receive no funding from the provincial government 
for education, yet our property taxes across the division, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, have risen dramatically in some of the 
areas. So what the minister said, when he said that there was 
going to be a cost reduction, didn’t occur. And so it falls back to 
the property taxes, which this statute is dealing with, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Although I have to say I’m amazed that one small school 
division in northern Saskatchewan — which would be into the 
northern municipal district — when asked in committee why 
that individual school board was not being amalgamated into 
the Northern Lights School Board, the minister said, well I 
guess there’s no savings. So in one small school board with 
about 500 students, with all of the attendant bureaucracy, there 
was no savings to be had. And yet across the province in the 
other school divisions, the minister was saying that there was 
savings to be had. I think there was something hugely 
inconsistent with that argument, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And anybody who’s interested just has to look at the list of the 
school boards in northern Saskatchewan. There’s one that 
stands out as being inconsistent with the other in that area, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And that inconsistency does not lie 
with the Northern Lights School Division. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act goes on to tell councils how 
they can collect their taxes. And it goes on to tell them, explain 
to them in those circumstances where tax collection may be 
abated, where there may be discounts, where the tax collection 
may be falling into arrears, what needs to happen. 
 
My question will be, Madam Deputy Speaker, is what happens 
in those cases that a piece of property falls into arrears? Is it 
incumbent on the city or the municipality that is currently in the 
. . . collects the taxes, do they still have to remit that tax to the 
school board even though it was never collected? Or if they 
don’t submit that tax to the school board, are they charged 
interest on the uncollectable taxes? 
 
Because when you look across my constituency and most of 
rural Saskatchewan, and I suspect a fair number of pieces of 
property even in the urban centres, it’s not possible to collect 
taxes on those properties. So while those taxes are in arrears, 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

they are in an uncollectible position. 
 
I recollect before I was elected, I had an opportunity to work 
with the school board on some of the issues dealing with 
education, and we had a chance to review the budgets. And the 
entire reserve of that particular school division, which looked 
like a significant amount of money, was actually uncollectible 
taxes on properties that . . . in some cases property taxes hadn’t 
been collected there, not for years, Madam Deputy Speaker, but 
rather decades. 
 
You know, when I look down the list of communities that used 
to exist in my constituency, in which there is still properties 
there, some of those have been turned over to the local 
municipality in lieu of taxes but yet there is still a number of 
properties in those areas that have taxes. 
 
I look at like a community like Winlaw, south of Gainsborough. 
Winlaw has one building left. It has a United Church, which I 
believe they hold a service in once a year. And one historical 
note with the community of Winlaw, when the survey came 
through — the border survey in I believe 1874 — they actually 
stopped and overnighted at Winlaw. And when they had the 
re-enactment here about 10 years ago; they stopped and again 
overnighted at Winlaw. 
 
So Winlaw is a historical community in my constituency. It has 
property on the books as far as the tax rolls are concerned, and 
yet I doubt very much that many, if any, of those properties are 
currently paying taxes. 
 
I guess there is one other piece of property in the community of 
Winlaw that is certainly of interest to the residents of that area 
and that’s the cemetery. Because I know they go down and they 
make sure that the grounds in that cemetery are properly looked 
after throughout the summertime, that the fences are fixed, and 
that the grass is cut. 
 
So you look at those properties in the community of Winlaw, 
and the collection of the taxes, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 
there. And how does that either . . . I don’t know that it was 
ever an incorporated hamlet, so it’s probably part of the 
municipality. How do they collect the taxes and remit those 
taxes that have not been collected to the school board? 
 
Now I read in the Act that if there is going to be any 
cancellation of taxes, if there’s going to be any refunds or 
reductions in arrears, that the councils — either the city council 
or the municipal council or the northern municipal council — 
have to go to the other taxing authority which is the school 
board, have to go to the school board to get an agreement for 
each of these properties. 
 
So in the case of Winlaw, as an example, they live on the very, 
very, very southeast corner of the province. They are about two 
miles from the Manitoba border and would maybe be ten miles, 
if that — probably not even that far — from the US [United 
States] border, and yet they’re going to have to . . . the council 
there is going to have to travel to Weyburn to make a 
submission to get the school board to agree to allow for the 
writeoff of these arrears or the cancellation of the taxes. 
 
So are they going to have to do that, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 

every case for every property? Are they going to have to go to 
the school board to make a submission for each and every one 
of these properties? It doesn’t say how this is to happen, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It doesn’t explain who pays the costs 
for these calculations, for the meetings if meetings are needed, 
for the approvals of the forms if that’s needed. 
 
One of the other aspects of this Bill that the Act talks about is 
that a report, a financial report has to be submitted by each city 
or each municipality by the 10th day of each month. So the 
municipal manager, the city manager is going to have to prepare 
a document, a financial document, every month not to be 
submitted to his or her council; they’re going to have to prepare 
this document to be submitted to the school board. 
 
Now I know in my area a lot of the councils don’t meet 
necessarily within the first 10 days of the month. They meet 
throughout the month. And so the manager is going to have to 
submit a report to the school board which has not yet even been 
seen by the council for whom he or she works, is going to have 
to submit a document that has not had the approval of that 
council to the school board. So where does the authorities lie? 
Where does the responsibilities lie to ensure that that council 
has approved of those reports? They could approve them a 
month later but they’ve already been submitted. 
 
So I think, in this particular area, the government is pushing this 
too far and too soon. They should have been at least giving the 
councils and the city councils, either the city or municipal 
councils, the opportunity to meet and to review and approve 
that report before it’s submitted to another agency. Clearly, I 
would believe that’s within their jurisdiction to manage their 
affairs properly in that manner, and the government is denying 
them that opportunity. And there are . . . If they fail to do so 
there are consequences. In fact the consequences are that the 
minister can establish regulations on how to do this and how the 
taxes are going to be taken from the collection agency which is 
the city or municipality and transmitted to the city. 
 
One of the other areas, Madam Deputy Speaker, which is being 
changed in this Bill also deals with municipal hail insurance. 
It’s setting out how Municipal Hail, which is owned and 
controlled by the rural municipalities, will deal with the 
submissions of their premiums to the insurance agency. So it’s 
how the premiums collected by the rural municipality will be 
submitted to their own incorporated insurance agency, 
Municipal Hail. And the government is intervening and setting 
the financial terms and the discount terms which can be applied 
to those funds. 
 
In every one of these cases, both on the school board side and 
on the Municipal Hail side, those entities have a long history of 
how much discount is utilized every year. They know that 
historically a certain percentage of the taxes are paid in 
September and October and November and December, and how 
many are not paid at all or fall into arrears. So they’ve built that 
into their budget process. They know that those things are 
historically going to happen. 
 
What happened here in the recent couple of years is that I 
believe over 100 municipalities, in an attempt to get the 
government’s attention to the huge burden of education 
property taxes, refused to remit the education property taxes by 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

January 1 which is when the taxes become due. Not that the 
individual landowner hadn’t necessarily paid those taxes — 
they had probably in most cases paid them in the proper manner 
in the proper time and received, if there were any discounts to 
be received, had received those discounts — but that the 
municipalities had not remitted them in the normal fashion that 
they had previously been doing say 10 or 20 years ago. To 
make a point, they did it differently. 
 
And the result of which is this piece of legislation with the 
government coming down with the heavy hammer of 
government and the courts to force the issue, going through 
various gyrations and contortions on this piece of legislation 
dealing with three different Acts to try and force their will on 
the municipalities to not complain so much and not emphasize 
the issue of property taxes so much. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I don’t think that they’re going to be successful in this. I 
mean people are very inventive. And every time the government 
has changed the rules — and I know that since I’ve been in here 
dealing with property taxes, the government has made a least 
two previous changes to the municipal Acts in the collection of 
school taxes by the municipalities. And this is the third iteration 
of those gyrations, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I’m sure that 
there are a number of inventive people who are in the process of 
being forced to collect taxes for the school boards, and they will 
find, if they desire, other means by which to make their 
unhappiness known to this government about the level of 
property taxes that are being collected. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I only commented on one of those 
small communities in my constituency that has property that 
would potentially fall under this piece of legislation and the 
arrears and the failure to pay taxes. You know, I’ve got 
communities like Souris Flats and Alcott and Fertile and 
Nottingham and Auburnton, and I’ve just covered, you know, 
not even three municipalities in mentioning that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And a good many of these communities actually had people 
living in those communities when this government took over. 
And most of them or a good many of them are no longer there. 
And fact is, Alcott, the railroad used to go there when this 
government first got elected and they pulled up the tracks since 
then, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that explains how much interest and concern that this 
government has had for the people of rural Saskatchewan. And 
yet in the community of Alcott, in all likelihood, there are still 
individual names on various parcels of property within that old 
hamlet that have not been turned over to the municipality for 
the tax arrears. And so they will still now have to go to the 
school board in Weyburn to get approval to either write off 
those arrears or make some other arrangements. 
 
You know, you take a look at a place where I went to school as 
a young guy only five or six years ago, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I took my grade 1 and 2, I took up to grade 8 there, 
Madam Deputy Speaker — the community of Cantal. The 
community of Cantal, Madam Deputy Speaker, has a church. It 
has a parsonage in which nobody lives anymore, and it has one 

farmyard. But I know that, when I was there, there were four 
families living there. There was a store there. There was a gas 
station. And so those pieces of property are owned by 
somebody. Now whether they’ve been turned over to RM 32 or 
not, I don’t know. But in all likelihood, if they have not been 
turned over, those families that were living there are long gone. 
I know that some of them are deceased. And so who would be 
paying those taxes? In all likelihood no one is paying the taxes 
on those properties and so they’re in arrears. 
 
Now when RM 32 is asked by the southeast school board to 
remit the taxes for those properties, what are they going to do? 
You know, they’re not collecting any money. So do they have 
to turn around and stroke the cheque to the school board for that 
amount of money and try and collect it from somebody who . . . 
they don’t even know where they live? Or do they have to drive 
to Weyburn and sit down with the school board there and . . . 
trying to strike an agreement to cancel those taxes or to just 
leave them sitting on the books as arrears? Or how do they do 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
So I think this Bill adds a huge amount of cost both to the 
municipalities, the cities, the rural municipalities, and the 
northern municipalities in administration, in reporting, in 
reaching agreements, and it’s going to cause problems as well 
for the school boards because they’re going to have the stacks 
of paper coming . . . these reports coming in every month. 
 
I think in my area, Madam Deputy Speaker, I have 12 
municipalities and 30-some existing communities that are either 
towns or villages or hamlets, Madam Deputy Speaker. So right 
there you’ve got about 50 reports a month that the school board 
is going to have to be filing from all of these different entities. 
 
And what are they going to do with them all? I mean the 
government across the way likes to think of themselves as being 
ecologically sensitive — the green government. How many 
trees are we going to have to cut down in this province just to 
fill the demands for this government’s financial reports to the 
school boards? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
government is using this tool to duck and to avoid the real issue 
which is that Minister of Finance’s failure to deal with the 
education property tax issue in this province . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance has had a 
couple of opportunities now — he will soon have another 
opportunity — to correct the situation of the high education 
property taxes. 
 
I mean I can remember years ago his party talking about the 
need to go to 40 per cent property taxes and 60 per cent 
government. Well unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
have gone the other way and the education property taxes 
continue to increase while the government’s percentage portion 
continues to reduce. And all the changes that they made, all the 
changes with the amalgamations haven’t fixed that problem, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. In fact is they even had the Boughen 
report that was to try and deal with property taxes, which is 
what this piece of legislation is trying to deal with, but the 
Boughen report presented solutions where this piece of 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

legislation is simply a band-aid on top of . . . to disguise the 
problem. 
 
The Minister of Finance said that the Boughen Commission 
called for an increase in property taxes. It did indeed. Not 
property taxes — education taxes, sales tax. Sorry, it was sales 
tax. And so what did the minister do? He listened to that portion 
of the Boughen Commission and threw out the rest. He raised 
the taxes and left the education property tax the same, which in 
fact ended up costing ratepayers more because now they had to 
pay more PST [provincial sales tax] on all of their purchases at 
the school boards. So in the end of the day it ended up costing 
people more money. The government collected and they threw 
out the rest of the Boughen report other than that small piece 
they wanted to . . . which was increase taxes. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you talk to people around 
Saskatchewan and particular in rural Saskatchewan — and 
being a rural representative, I hear it mentioned a number of 
times in my constituency — that, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
if the school boards want to keep raising their property taxes 
because the minister opposite is not funding them properly, that 
they should start collecting their own taxes. That the 
municipalities are tired of getting all the flak that, the 
municipalities are tired of hearing the flak of having their 
administrators berated because of the high tax load when the 
property tax payers come in to pay those taxes. Their suggestion 
is that if the school boards want to operate in this manner, then 
they should collect their own taxes and face the wrath of the 
taxpayers themselves rather than downloading that on to the 
municipalities. 
 
Now if that was to happen there would be additional costs 
certainly involved in that. It’s not necessarily all that efficient 
but I think it would give some personal satisfaction to the 
municipalities that they no longer have to face the wrath of the 
ratepayers when they have no control over that situation, when 
they have no control over the established level of those taxes 
and the mill rates. 
 
And a mill rate is, basically what it is . . . One of the former 
ministers of Education didn’t understand what a mill rate was. 
Well a mill rate is one one-thousandth of the entire value of the 
property. So if you have a mill rate of 10, that’s 10 
one-thousandths of the value of that property . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. My colleague points out that 10 
one-thousandths would equal one one-hundredth. And that is 
indeed correct. And obviously that member has been a 
beneficiary of the education system of Saskatchewan because 
he’s very quick on the math. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe that there are a number 
of issues here that this government needs to address, that has 
failed to address on the property tax issue, that they need further 
time to consider this issue. And while I have a good many other 
names on my list of communities that I know that are affected, I 
also have my grid road map that lists a good number of 
communities here such as Willmar and Browning and Forget 
and Dumas and Kelso and Walpole and Ryerson and 
Handsworth — just to name a few — that could potentially 
have properties that are in arrears. 
 
I would like to give some opportunity to some of my other 

colleagues to enter into this debate at a later date. Therefore I 
would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 33 — The 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege for me to stand and participate in the debate here this 
afternoon, particularly on this piece of legislation because it 
pertains to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology], the technical and vocational institution that 
people of Saskatchewan are so familiar with and proud of and 
who look to this particular institution to provide the vast 
majority of technical people who are trained in the province. 
 
The institution known as SIAST now was known by the names 
of the individual campuses around the province previously. And 
I guess that was my first introduction to SIAST, when the 
campus in Moose Jaw was still known as Palliser. 
 
And a friend I met in Calgary, working there one summer, was 
a recent graduate of that school’s program in geotechnical 
engineering. He had come to Calgary and had got a job even in 
those days which would . . . well I don’t know if I dare say. I 
think it was back about 1965. He came to Calgary with his 
certificate in hand and had a job in the engineering profession in 
virtually no time at all. And his skills were such, as a result of 
his training at that time, that he was readily picked up and 
assigned to virtually a supervisory position in no time and was 
one of the individuals who oversaw the geotechnical 
engineering aspects of the new University of Lethbridge when it 
was being built a few years later. 
 
So the quality of training at SIAST has been well-founded, 
well-recognized by industry and other business leaders for a 
long time. 
 
And for that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think a lot of the credit 
needs to go to not just the administrative people who built the 
organization over the years and who look after the day-to-day 
operations of the schools — various campuses now — but to 
the instructors who give yeoman service to the training of 
young people in such a wide variety of technical and vocational 
areas that we’re all familiar with as part of the SIAST mandate. 
 
And of course we need to recognize the students who attend 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

SIAST. The quality of young people coming out of our schools 
in Saskatchewan who regularly apply to SIAST, who wait 
faithfully in spite of long waiting lists to get into the programs 
at SIAST, who commit their time and their energy to 
succeeding in their programs, and who come out and contribute 
their capability, their knowledge, and their desire to the success 
of a career and which in turn contributes significantly to the 
economy of this province. So SIAST’s place in the educational 
and economic history of this province is pretty prevalent and 
well-regarded. 
 
And I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the privileges of 
speaking to this particular piece of legislation is to be able to 
say again how important that particular institution is, not just to 
the current crop of young people in the province, but how 
important its role has been in educating young people in years 
past — considerable years past — and how we expect it to 
contribute in even greater ways in the years ahead as we move 
forward in this province in a more dynamic and exciting way. 
 
Not all of SIAST’s experience however has been without some 
criticism or some controversy. There have been issues in the 
recent past, particularly pertaining to waiting lists and the 
extensive number of years that some of the young people were 
being asked to wait in terms of achieving admittance to various 
programs. And that was particularly acute in medical programs 
— medical technology programs, dental assistants programs, 
x-ray technician programs; those types of programs. 
 
And if you’ll recall, Madam Deputy Speaker, it became such an 
issue about two and a half years ago that we were bringing 
cases of individual students to the legislature, individuals who 
were being asked to wait as much as 10 years in one instance 
and ridiculously as long as 16 years in another specific instance. 
And the reason that I’m reminded of that is that one of the 
individuals who was on that 10-year waiting list was from the 
constituency of Cypress Hills. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, 
while it doesn’t borrow directly from the Saskatchewan Party 
policy book — which is one of the few that we’ve talked about 
in Bills and other pieces of legislation before us here — this one 
does recognize some existing realities and instead of being 
really forward looking, what it does is tries to clean up some 
existing arrangements that have been undertaken at SIAST as a 
matter of their regular governance procedures. And this 
legislation in particular addresses a few areas where SIAST had 
actually moved ahead of where they were expected to be by 
legislation in terms of how they conducted their affairs. And 
this legislation recognizes that reality and addresses it in a 
number of ways. 
 
I will talk about that a little later on. But one of the first things, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that caught my eye when this 
particular piece of legislation came to us was, early on in the 
amendment it talks about SIAST being able to deliver programs 
in Saskatchewan and elsewhere. And I guess it’s common 
knowledge that SIAST has some flexibility in that regard. And I 
assume that individuals would know that SIAST could work 
co-operatively with other institutions around the province and 
maybe even on occasion outside the province. 

But I wasn’t aware, and I don’t think many people in the 
province who are familiar with SIAST’s mandate would 
recognize that over the last number of years — I think the last 
15 years or so — SIAST has actually been delivering technical 
and vocational education programs and training services in 
some 33 countries around the world. I don’t know if any of my 
colleagues were aware of that. I’m not sure that many people 
who follow post-secondary educational issues in the province 
were aware of that, unless of course they were among the 
faculty, staff, the students, and graduates who were the 
beneficiaries of this international effort by SIAST. 
 
I noticed, and I found this rather curious, that in the explanation 
given as part of these changes being introduced as part of this 
particular piece of legislation, that it says these activities 
provide international working opportunities for these various 
individuals, and kind of stops there. 
 
And while I suppose that providing those opportunities for the 
individuals involved is laudable and is even acceptable in some 
respects, I’m surprised that the explanatory notes didn’t speak 
more specifically and directly to the fact that these programs are 
being undertaken for humanitarian purposes, for reasons of 
helping impoverished third world countries improve the 
circumstances of their people. That they’re being undertaken to 
help other people; that they’re being undertaken to improve the 
lives of people who might otherwise not benefit from clean 
water or electricity or maybe even the delivery of telephone 
services, maybe road construction. 
 
Whatever the programs might be that SIAST is taking to these 
international countries has got to be of benefit to those 
recipients in at least as great a measure as it is to the people 
who are providing the capability, or I think that we would see 
this whole exercise as one-sided and really only clearly of 
benefit to our own people. 
 
And I think the real purpose of this type of activity 
internationally is to benefit those who receive the added 
capabilities of SIAST professionals, as instructors or as 
graduates, and some of the students and staff that also attend. 
 
So having made that comment, I think that if we’ve got that 
capability in the province to better the lives of people around 
the world, we need to be continuing that effort; undertaking 
regular excursions to countries where we can in effect be a very 
positive influence and provide needed services. But if we’re 
only doing it for our benefit, that would be a mistake. And I 
don’t want to read too much into it but I found the explanation 
of this particular provision a little remiss in detail and its 
application. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as we go through this particular piece 
of legislation, one of the issues that is addressed is the 
composition of the board of SIAST. We have provision in the 
legislation now that SIAST’s board can be a minimum of 10 
persons, as many as 20, and that these people are appointed by 
order in council. But we are providing in this particular 
amendment to the Act an opportunity for three different 
appointments to the board that have not been recognized 
previously. 
 
And I suppose the most significant of these particular 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

appointees will be now the appointee that is recommended as a 
student representative to the board of governors. 
 
The tradition of post-secondary institutions — particularly at 
the university level for at least 30 years or more now — has 
been to have a student representative at that very senior level of 
governance. And I’m surprised that this kind of representation 
has not occurred previously on the SIAST board. 
 
I had representation made to me by a member of the student 
government at one of the SIAST campuses, some time ago, 
complaining about this and saying that they had urged that this 
now become part of the governance structure. And I’m glad to 
see that the government has responded to that requirement and 
that desire of students to have at least one SIAST student as a 
member of the board. I think it’s a move that is appropriate and 
much past due, and I think the student body will appreciate the 
fact that they are going to be given this opportunity. 
 
I guess the fact that there are so many separate campuses for 
SIAST, having just one representative on the board might be a 
bit problematic, but nevertheless this is certainly an 
improvement over what existed previously. 
 
We also are going to see the addition of one member from the 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission as part of 
the board at SIAST, and again I think that that’s an idea that is 
probably appropriate and again past due. 
 
As we know the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission plays a very important role in preparing qualified 
technicians for various industries in our economy. And because 
SIAST is the training ground, the academic opportunity for 
most of the people who end up in the apprenticeship program, 
it’s appropriate that the commission should play a role in the 
decision-making capacity of SIAST’s board. And so again I 
think this is a good measure. 
 
We also see that one member from a regional college’s board 
will participate through appointment on the SIAST board of 
governors. And this I think is an indication that the government 
is aware that there is more requirement for interaction and 
complementary training opportunities between SIAST and the 
regional colleges that are sprinkled throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have, you know, a whole number of regional colleges 
in the province but just one representative will now be sitting on 
the board. Again it’s a tentative first step, an appropriate first 
step, but again they might have some concerns about the 
limitation of their representation given the number of regional 
college campuses there are around the province. However you 
know I think it’s important that we make these steps, that we 
make these first steps and see how they work and look at the 
benefits to the structure of SIAST and the ability of SIAST to 
work co-operatively with other institutions and other players 
with whom they partner on a variety of training programs 
throughout the communities of the province. 
 
One of the other areas that we need to look at are the changes to 
the governance and reporting structures of the board as they are 
addressed in this particular piece of legislation. The new Act 
requires that the SIAST board hold eight meetings per year, as 

opposed to the 10 per year that are now in effect. And I think 
the changes reflect, as has been indicated by the explanatory 
notes, the best practices of governance that is accepted in the 
business world today and in the academic world as well. 
 
I know that when you’re sitting as a member of a board — this 
is a pretty significant board; it has a large budget to deal with, a 
lot of people are involved, a lot of issues, many campuses and 
so forth — it’s tempting, I suppose, to meet more often than 
less. However 10 meetings a year is a pretty onerous 
requirement. And even though there is some opportunity for 
expenses to be recovered by the members of the board, a 
meeting every month on a required basis would be seen as 
pretty onerous. And it might be enough to discourage some very 
suitable candidates for these positions from taking on that role 
if they are asked to do so. 
 
And so I think we’re seeing boards of this type and boards in 
voluntary agencies generally reducing the numbers of meetings 
per year to address that minimum requirement of their 
membership because we have found in boards that I have 
participated on in years past, we’ve found that sometimes less 
meetings can be more productive meetings. And you can 
actually get a much better job out of the volunteers — you can 
get more effectiveness out of them and a greater willingness to 
participate — if the obligations on their time are a little less 
than 10 meetings per year or one per month, as the case may be. 
So moving the requirement for meetings to eight from the 
current 10 is again another appropriate measure that is reflected 
in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
A couple of other changes that do come into effect as a result of 
this is the ratification of committee meeting minutes. Now as I 
understand it, the meetings are minuted. The board will have an 
opportunity to ratify those minutes at the subsequent board 
meeting, and then the ratified minutes will be forwarded to the 
minister. And interestingly enough, that’s written into the Act 
as a requirement now, but that’s what SIAST has been doing for 
the last number of years. So this change really only reflects the 
current practice of the SIAST board. 
 
And the other thing that is similar is the requirement in this 
legislation for the SIAST board not to just produce a budget for 
the millions of dollars they are going to spend every year, but 
they actually are being required to present a business plan. 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, when I saw that in this piece of 
legislation, I was kind of surprised because I was almost certain 
that an institution of the size and capacity and professionalism 
of SIAST would have been doing that. And when I read the 
explanatory notes, it said that this has been a practice of SIAST 
since the fiscal year 1999-2000. 
 
So in effect we’ve had SIAST presenting, or preparing a 
budget, rather, and a business plan and presenting it to the 
minister for the last seven years, and the legislation is just 
catching up to that reality. So I think that too is appropriate, and 
it’s also an appropriate recognition of the kind of governance 
that the SIAST board has been moving toward for some time. 
 
We’ve got one other situation in this particular piece of 
legislation where a new provision will enable the board of 
SIAST to establish committees in addition to the existing 
executive committee. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, anybody 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

with experience on boards will know that when you have the 
kinds of budgets, the huge inflow and outflow of dollars, the 
obligation to provide thorough oversight — a duty of care, as 
you might say, of these institutions — having committees other 
than the executive committee to do the work is not only 
appropriate; it’s absolutely necessary. There is so much legality, 
so much paperwork, so many requirements of these boards and 
agencies now that having one committee oversee it all and 
attend to the details would be just too onerous for anybody. And 
it’s not uncommon now in these kind of instances, these types 
of circumstances, to have three or four committees operating on 
any given board. 
 
[16:30] 
 
An audit committee is almost required these days because of 
financial issues that attend the expense associated with 
operating these large boards. And I guess we could name three 
or four different types of committees, but certainly having that 
ability now, that capability as a result of this legislation is 
appropriate in the face of the requirements of good governance. 
And we would respect and appreciate this being included in this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
The next item I’d like to deal with this afternoon as part of Bill 
33, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the issue of mandated review. 
As I understand it, SIAST legislation has up to this point 
required a mandatory review every five years. And I think that 
this has been seen in the past as an appropriate measure, and I 
do understand that that might be a time frame that is pretty 
restrictive when you compare it to other post-secondary 
institutions. This is not as common now as it maybe once was. 
And the provision in the legislation is going to be changed so 
that the review of the mandate of SIAST will be undertaken at 
the call of the minister, at the discretion of the minister; that if 
there does not seem to be any issues regarding the operation and 
the programming and the activities at SIAST, there is no 
automatic requirement for a review. 
 
If however something comes up, some issue arises that is 
problematic for the operation of the institution, for the people of 
the province, for any number of reasons the minister can move 
to call a review and undertake a study of the mandate and report 
back to the minister. 
 
Now previously the report had been required within a six-month 
time frame, and that now also is being removed as part of this 
legislation and will be extended at the minister’s discretion, 
basically, to allow for a longer reporting period in the hopes, I 
assume, ostensibly with the hope of getting a better report. 
 
And if that in fact is the case, I suppose that is acceptable. But 
I’m not necessarily convinced that giving them a longer period 
of time to study the mandate will produce better results. It 
might in fact give a minister an opportunity to obfuscate or 
skate around the issues or hide behind the review that is 
underway without addressing the problem. So I am 
unconvinced that the changing of that particular review period 
and the reporting period is necessarily going to be good. But I 
think we will wait to see how that unfolds and whether or not 
changes should be made in the future to address that particular 
issue. 
 

We don’t see, Madam Deputy Speaker, a lot of problem with 
the changes being introduced with this piece of legislation. We 
think by and large they’re appropriate and, in several instances, 
they’re certainly overdue. And as I indicated in many instances, 
the changes just reflect the current reality, the practices of 
governance that exist today at SIAST. 
 
So having recognized that reality, I think the government 
moved appropriately with this particular piece of legislation. 
And having indicated that, I would say, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that the official opposition Saskatchewan Party is 
prepared to move this particular Bill to committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. The question before the 
Assembly is Bill No. 33, The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology Amendment Act, and that it now be 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
. . . ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the minister of Post-Secondary Education 
And Skills Training. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill No. 33, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 33, The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology Amendment Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 30 — The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to rise in the debate today. I’ve heard my two 
colleagues that have preceded me today, and I want to 
commend them on their brevity, and unfortunately I won’t be 
quite as brief as they are. I’ve got some considerable comments 
to make on this Bill, and we’ll probably not be able to compress 
them as much as they have. I’m not quite as succinct as they 
have demonstrated in the past. So given the hour of the day, I 
have some concern as to whether we’ll be able to get finished 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’ll certainly work towards that 
end. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill allows for a relaxation of some of 
the requirements to become a licensed land surveyor. What it 
does in summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it allows for the two 
years of academic requirements to be done at the same time as 
the practise component of the training. So in summary a person 
would in effect be like an apprentice rather than completing 
their schooling first and going on with an internship afterwards. 
 
The idea for this came from the land surveyors themselves who 
recognized that they have a shortage of people practising in that 
profession. And what they’re trying to do is bridge the process 
to allow more people to enter into the profession without going 
to school, and it recognizes the significant out-migration of 
young people and professionals in this province. 
 
Had the members opposite addressed that earlier and been 
somewhat more focused on employment, out-migration, and the 
issues with the citizens in this province over the last decade or 
more, we wouldn’t be facing this type of an issue. 
 
Having said that, you know, this is a good idea. It recognizes 
something that takes place in a lot of other trades and 
professions. And what’s somewhat distressing for me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is this is an idea that came from the trade. It 
was not an idea that came from the members opposite or came 
from anyone in government, and it’s a common sense idea. 
Why wouldn’t you let somebody work in a trade under the 
supervision of somebody that is an experienced, licensed 
professional; learn both on the job and do the academic work as 
well. It’s common sense. It makes it equivalent to an 
apprenticeship or some kind of a training program. And 
considering that the idea came from there I would have thought 
the members opposite, when they received that idea, they would 
have thought whoa, what a clever idea. We should look at this 
with a variety of other trades and professions similar to an 
apprenticeship or some other, you know, any kind of medical 
profession or anything else. 
 
We’ve got significant labour shortage with trained 
professionals. In our province right now there are only 72 
licensed surveyors left in the province right now. Many of them 
are aging baby boomers and will want to withdraw from the 
workforce so in theory this addresses some of them. 
 
But, Deputy Speaker, we should be looking at that in the 
context of a number of other trades and professions. And 
frankly I’m somewhat disappointed and discouraged that the 
members opposite hadn’t put that forward in the context of 
other professions and other trades. 
 
We are losing people for out-migration. We should also be 

looking at methods of bringing people into the province through 
in-migration from other jurisdictions. We should be looking at 
how we standardize professional requirements and criteria to try 
and improve people as they come into the province. And there’s 
not a reason in the world why we couldn’t do on-the-job 
training as we have in this one. 
 
We also want to deal with new immigrants to Canada and could 
be dealt with in a similar fashion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think it would be only common sense that the model that they 
propose for this profession be one that we should look at in a 
number of other professions and trades as well, and I want to 
encourage government to try and address that on a long-term 
basis as well. 
 
We’ve also seen some opposition by the members opposite to 
the TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 
Agreement] agreement which would allow for the flow between 
our jurisdictions of trained professionals. If we have a 
competitive tax environment and if we have a good standard of 
living and a number of good qualities that this province has to 
offer, once we replace the members opposite I think we can 
have agreements with other jurisdictions that it would allow for 
the flow of workers to our province. 
 
Because I think once the members opposite have been moved 
out of their positions, they may be part of the out-migration out 
of the province. But that would leave room for other people to 
move into the province, positive people that would want to do 
something to add to the economy, grow the economy, grow the 
province, because our province is a wonderful province that has 
enormous potential. That is something that’s happening in spite 
of and not because of this NDP government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So we want to ensure that that happens. 
 
The land surveyors Act is a small amendment to one piece of 
legislation that it would allow one profession to try and retain 
and attract some young people. Let’s start looking at it in the 
context of what happens if the myriad of other professions and 
other trades across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I 
know as I look at the time of the day and look at the members 
opposite, I don’t see them taking a lot of notes because of the 
comments that I’m making. So what I probably will have to do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when Hansard comes out I should 
probably mail a copy of it to each one of them so that they will 
have the opportunity to review and analyze it. I know that 
Hansard is available online for each and every one of them, but 
I suspect that when we make comments here they don’t spend 
nearly enough time looking at them. 
 
Although I know from some of the things they did and they 
certainly look at some of the proposals that we put forward and 
they’re certainly not adverse to borrowing some of the good 
ideas. I heard the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
speaking earlier about the 100 good ideas, and one of the 100 
good ideas would be things that we would find similar to the 
land surveyors Act to allow for the free trade of employment 
and labour to flow in and out of our province, because more of 
it will flow in with the new government than certainly will flow 
out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So having said all of that, I want to put the members . . . I want 
them to be watching their mailboxes for when I send over that 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

copy of Hansard for them to read. I’ll certainly include some of 
the other things in Hansard that were provided by the member 
from Cypress Hills, the member from Cannington, and the 
member from Silver Springs because it was one of the 
afternoons in this House where I thought there was a lot of very 
valuable information that the members opposite could benefit 
from. And I would certainly want them to have their own copy 
of it if they would like to, you know, have discussion or further 
information provided to them. We’d certainly be glad to sit 
down with them and give them a bit of guidance and direction. 
Certainly between now and the election we want them to 
govern as well as they possibly can during that period of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill could certainly be moved to 
committee at this time. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The question before 
the Assembly is a motion by the Minister of Industry and 
Resources that Bill No. 30, The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is agreed. It’s 
carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — To which committee 
shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
30, The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It has been moved by 
the Minister of Industry and Resources that Bill No. 30, The 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
Bill stands referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. Thank you. 
 
[16:45] 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a 
second time.] 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, mister deputy deputy speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to speak to Bill No. 37, 
The Court of Appeal Amendment Act. I note, mister deputy 
deputy speaker — and you probably note as well — that this is 
actually a fairly short Act, however it has some fairly 
significant implications in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Minister of Justice gave his second reading speech, 
it’s probably one of the shortest ones he ever made in the 
Assembly in regards — a second reading speech — to a Bill 
before the House. But he pointed out the fact that they’ve 
decided that maybe the province at this time doesn’t need a 
Court of Appeal that composes nine judges. Maybe they’ll just 
reduce it by two, to seven judges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now 
one might argue, well that maybe is not a bad thing. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about reducing 
the Court of Appeal, I think there is an issue that we certainly 
are aware of, that came to light yesterday and certainly has hit 
the papers, hit the headlines in the province of Saskatchewan — 
and not just Saskatchewan, but across the nation — when we 
talk about population and the Stats Canada report that was just 
released yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this report, we’re 
very well aware of the fact that across Canada every province 
increased in population size. In some provinces it increased 
quite dramatically. And no doubt we all expected that the 
province of Alberta would dramatically increase in population. 
 
And when you look at this Bill before us, the minister’s own 
comments were, given the size of the province of Saskatchewan 
or the population of Saskatchewan, that maybe the current 
Court of Appeal of nine members was not necessary. And I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the part that bothers me in relation 
to the Stats Canada report that came out is, if you will, a very 
negative view as to the ability of the province of Saskatchewan 
to grow. 
 
And when I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t say that in 
view of the fact that we’re anticipating that as population grows 
we’re going to need a larger Court of Appeal or need the Court 
of Appeal as it currently exists today. I believe every effort 
should be made as we see population growth coming into the 
province of Saskatchewan, which we hope will come, which we 
look forward to coming in, because a population that is actually 
lower than it was in 1976 isn’t something to brag about. And I 
believe the statement by the minister in regards to the 
legislation and why we should possibly reduce the Court of 
Appeal from nine members down to seven kind of leaves a 
negative message in the public’s mind, in the fact that we do not 
have the ability to grow this province. 
 
And I think we were all disturbed by the numbers that came out 
yesterday in regards to the population of this province. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think what we would like to see, we 
would like to see growth in the province. We would like to see 
this province grow substantially. And when I say we’re talking 
of growing the province, I’m not necessarily talking about the 
fact that maybe the minister should have been expanding the 
court. I’m not saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What I’m 
saying is it’s very interesting that the government would choose 



March 14, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

this time to send that negative message rather than focusing on 
the fact of growing the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And how do we grow this province? We don’t necessarily grow 
the province by growing the Court of Appeal. There’s no doubt 
that’s just a no-brainer. But we grow the province by creating a 
positive economic influence in the province that encourages 
people to look at Saskatchewan as a place to come home to. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just got off the phone this 
afternoon with a former resident, a young gentleman who is 
currently employed in the province of Alberta. And he indicated 
to me that he would certainly like to come back to the province 
of Saskatchewan and raised some questions which I will be 
raising with the appropriate minister down the road. But I think 
that is part of growing our province. 
 
So does it impact the Court of Appeal? Does it suggest that the 
population loss . . . because of population loss we should reduce 
the number of members on the Court of Appeal? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think we need to broaden our horizons. We need to 
look in a much broader focus at the province of Saskatchewan 
and the potential we have in this province. We’re all aware of, 
and as everyone in this Assembly is . . . I’m certainly including 
the members from Saskatoon as well. And in fact probably the 
members from Saskatoon would be even more aware of the fact 
of population growth as I noticed Saskatoon is one of the cities 
that experienced a significant growth. 
 
One of the problems I think though, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about reducing the Court of Appeal is the fact that does that 
reduce the ability of people who may find themselves or 
individuals or corporations of having to deal with the court by 
reducing it from nine members to seven members. Does that 
indicate, does that indicate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s the 
reason why we should reduce that Court of Appeal? 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we should be very 
somewhat careful before we move forward to reduce services 
that are currently in place. And I know that we have . . . over 
the past number of years there’s been significant complaints 
about the number of cases that continue to come before the 
courts and that end up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being delayed 
because of the reductions on the bench and not enough 
individuals on the bench and court times to deal with matters in 
an appropriate time period, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I guess that’s one of the major concerns that I 
have with this piece of legislation. 
 
The other major concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, is I find 
it very interesting that the government would move forward 
with a recommendation of this nature, especially at a time when 
it appears that this government has lost its way. This 
government has lost its vision for the province. This 
government has become somewhat tired and old and may not 
have the influence that . . . down the road as members of the 
Court of Appeal retire and the replacements are brought 
forward. 
 
And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is a process that’s 
followed. But I’m also aware of the fact that there is a 
committee in the province of Saskatchewan that gives 
recommendations, and I believe government as well has given 

. . . asked for some suggestions or ideas that they would have in 
regards to individuals that would be appropriate to sit on the 
bench, and then a decision is made at the federal level as to who 
sits on that court. 
 
And one is asking, was the minister concerned that this current 
government may not have that ability to offer some 
encouragement in regards to certain members? That’s a good 
question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s a question, I think, 
that many people would be asking right now. When you’re 
coming to what may be your final moments in office, why then 
make such a significant change? And that I think may be part of 
what’s leading to what is actually a fairly short and brief piece 
of legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there are . . . While the 
legislation is fairly short and straightforward and direct, there 
certainly is a lot that can be tied into this short piece of 
legislation. And I know that other members would like to enter 
into the debate as well and raise some of the concerns that I 
haven’t had the opportunity to raise at this time. But at this time 
I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The member for 
Moosomin has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 37. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour today to stand and give my view and points of interest 
on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I believe the purpose of this Bill is to put new 
bodies of land into habitat protection in order to replace the land 
that was taken out of the 2005 amendment to the same Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act, I remember, I believe it was in the mid ’80s 
when this Act was introduced and at that time I believe it was 
known as the critical habitat wildlife land. Then sometime later 
it was changed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why was this wildlife habitat 
protection land introduced back in the ’80s? Well it was good 
reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was a group of people. 
There was a biologist, there was the wildlife federation was 
very involved in this Act, SERM [Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management] officials, government officials, a 
lot of Environment people were also involved in this Act. And 
why did they bring forth this Act at that time? The critical 
wildlife habitat Act was the preservation of wildlife, and also 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2007 

the land which the wildlife was on. 
 
I know there was many hours spent, countless hours looking at 
different parcels of land all over Saskatchewan, into where this 
land needed to be protected for, and why it was protected. And I 
remember at that time I was a member of the Witchekan 
Wildlife Federation and when this came to be we had many 
meetings in regarding this, and we thought it was a great idea. 
The government of the day finally had put aside some land for 
wildlife and for environment, which we needed. And there was 
good reason. 
 
Over time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has changed. As you 
know, in I believe it was 2001-2002, it was estimates and I was 
doing estimates with the minister then. And I don’t recall who 
the minister was. But I mentioned about the critical habitat 
wildlife land and how many acres at that time was in the Act. 
And it was resounding that the minister at that time said that 
there was something like 776,000 acres that had been removed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nobody to then had heard of that 
land being removed — nobody. And I remember getting a 
phone call from the wildlife federation saying, what kind of an 
answer was that? Is that true? Is there 776,000 acres being taken 
out, and if so, why? 
 
So I posed questions as why it was taken out. And there was 
different reasons, but one of the main reasons was to satisfy 
TLE [treaty land entitlement] claims. And we know at that time 
we needed to satisfy treaty land entitlements. But the amount of 
land coming out at that present time with not a whisper to 
anybody in the province . . . And the wildlife federation and 
many people in the province of Saskatchewan were very uptight 
and very upset as to why this was happening. And the 
government never even whispered a word to anybody regarding 
it. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that took place there was lots 
of criticism as why it’s doing it. And I just want to go down the 
road a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in some of the problems 
that contributed to having some of this land under the critical 
habitat wildlife plan removed and the problems that have 
mushroomed from that. And farmers especially, private 
landowners are feeling the brunt of this decision made some 
time ago. 
 
And I’m going to give you a good example, and that’s in an 
area just south of my hometown of Spiritwood. That area has an 
abundance of critical, or at that time critical habitat wildlife 
land, and now it’s been changed to wildlife habitat protection 
land. Now there was a parcel of land there — it was many 
quarters — that was under that jurisdiction, and it was sold or 
transferred. I shouldn’t say sold. It was transferred to satisfy a 
TLE claim. 
 
Now to most hunters, wildlife people, they know that this land 
is protection land for the animals. Now in that protected area 
there was elk; there was deer; there was moose. There was also 
predator animals, predator animals like wolves, cougars, 
coyotes, whatever. One goes hand in hand. Where the animals 
are, that’s where the predators are. But the issue with that is it 
was protected land, and that’s where those animals stayed. 
 

Now the land has been transferred to settle TLE. And now with 
hunting pressures on that said land where it was protected for 
those animals, those animals have now moved from that area, 
and they’ve come out to the farm land. And this is the real 
problem that we have in the area now. The privately owned 
farmers that have crops, bales, or whatever are experiencing 
great amount of damage done to their feed and to their land by 
these wild animals. Why? Because that land was transferred 
over, and it’s driven the animals out of that area into the private 
land. 
 
So now the farmers not only contribute with the animal damage 
from the wildlife on that land, but they’re also contributing to 
the problems with the predators that come with those animals to 
this private land. 
 
And I remember just last year having meetings with the new 
Minister of Environment regarding the predator problem. And 
we had meetings in Shellbrook. We had meetings in Mayfair. 
And I have to admit they were good meetings. The people of 
the area were complaining about a predator problem where the 
wolves, the cougars, the coyotes were killing livestock. 
 
Now last year there wasn’t a lot of snow, and so when these 
wild animals come to this area and start feeding on the land, the 
bales and whatever have you, the predators follow. But last year 
being that there wasn’t a lot of snow, the wild animals found it 
a lot easier to feed on domestic animals and that’s why the 
numbers of domestic animals were substantially higher than any 
other year. 
 
This year there’s a lot of snow out there. Those same animals 
are still there. They’re still doing the same damage. But at least 
some of the changes made by the Environment in regards to the 
predator problems as a result from the wildlife land, critical 
habitat wildlife land, they’ve been directed. And some of those 
problems have gone away. 
 
But the main point of my talk, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact that when biologists, environmentalists, wildlife federation 
members years ago decided to look at this land and keep it for 
the preservation of wildlife and wildlife habitat, it was good 
reason to keep it like that. But over time that has changed. And 
now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the animals have come out and 
they’re causing supreme problems. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I see my time is running out and I 
definitely want to continue next time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, I would move 
that this House does stand adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................818 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................818 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................819 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................819 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Farm Safety Week 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Saskatoon Grandmothers for Grandmothers Organization 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Northern Youths Participate in Canada Winter Games 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................820 
 Jim Kook Citizen of the Year Award 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................820 
 Saskatchewan Youth Award 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................820 
 Citizen’s Response to Carriere Settlement 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................821 
 Opposition Policy Development Process 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................821 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Population and Education Policies 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................821 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................822 
 Government’s Settlement with Complainants in the Carriere Case 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................823 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................824 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................826 
 Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................826 
 Bill No. 51 — The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................827 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Expansion of Digital Cellular Coverage 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................829 
 Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................831 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................828 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................828 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................833 
 Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................834 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................836 
 Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................837 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ..................................................................................................................................................838 
 Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................838 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................839 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................839 
 Bill No. 33 — The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................843 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................846 
 Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................847 
  Cline (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................................848 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................848 
 Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................849 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


