


















































Hansard: March 29, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 39A  THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1085 
 March 29, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure again to present more petitions in the Assembly 
regarding the availability of dialysis units in the province of 
Saskatchewan and in particular to the community of Broadview 
and the surrounding area. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is coming from the 
communities, signed by people from the communities of 
Whitewood, Broadview, Winnipeg, Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
one day away from the planned closure of the SaskPower office 
in Shaunavon. I have a petition on behalf of constituents of 
Cypress Hills with that closure in mind. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have another four pages of signatures here, most 
of them coming from the community of Shaunavon but some 
from outlying communities. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of citizens concerned about 
their schools. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of the 

community of Fairlight. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about another one of the 
deplorable highways in my constituency, Highway No. 49. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
People who have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Okla, Preeceville, Lintlaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to present another petition by people who want to maintain full 
service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, 
these constituents are concerned that if the office closes there 
will not be immediate receipt of payment for customers. The 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are three pages of signatures on this petition. 
And I believe every one of the signatures come from the fine 
community of Rosetown. I’m pleased to present this petition on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
while on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise 
with petitions with citizens concerned about safety when 
driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Colonsay, Saskatoon, 
Sunset Estates, Meacham, Lloydminster, Kelvington, Quill 
Lake, Bruno, St. Gregor, and Spalding. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 
18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18, so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Weyburn and 
Lake Alma. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens opposed to possible reduction of 
health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, and 
Sonningdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition surrounding the truly tragic circumstances 
around the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of acceptance 
of responsibility by this NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government. I will read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family 
for out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 

communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners today come from the communities of Tisdale, 
Watson, and Naicam. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very concerned if the 
lab services are withdrawn from the Lafleche and District 
Health Centre, the undue hardships it would cause, especially 
seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Fir 
Mountain, Gravelbourg, Lafleche, Woodrow, and Meyronne. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to bring forward a petition signed 
by citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with rural 
school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are all from 
Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
with a petition concerning Highway 368. And it’s concerned 
with the 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. 
Brieux. And they have seriously declined and they are 
endangering the safety of drivers and it harms the economic 
growth of the area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repair to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Humboldt 
and Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 
20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
of the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen, Wynyard, Lanigan, and Lockwood, and Wilkie. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order a certain petition regarding Piapot School presented on 
March 28, 2007, has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) 
is found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and 
received. 
 
According to order the petitions received at the last sitting have 
been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 44 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
what is the winning percentage range for non-lottery 
retailers? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 44 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
what percentage of lottery winners do lottery retailers 
represent? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 44 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
what percentage of lottery players do lottery retailers 
represent? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 44 ask the government the 
following question: 

To the Minister for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
what percentage of the general population do lottery 
retailers represent? 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of 
the legislature 23 students from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. 
This is the grade 10 social studies class, and their teacher is 
Delaine Anderson; she accompanies them. I ask all members to 
welcome them here. 
 
I also ask all members to acknowledge the good work that 
Sheldon-Williams has done in raising funds for the Wilma 
Downing scholarship which is at their school. Last night they 
had an event which I think raised thousands of dollars for the 
scholarship fund in honour of Wilma Downing. Their high 
school basketball team beat the Roughrider basketball team, and 
I think that we need to congratulate Sheldon-Williams both on 
winning the provincial championships for basketball and for 
football for the men. And they came in second for the women in 
basketball. So I ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased today to stand and introduce to you and, through you, to 
all members of the House a friend of mine, Bob Bymoen, who 
is sitting in the west gallery. I think he’s here today to buy me 
lunch — I’m not sure — or it could be to collect the $20 I 
probably owe him. But one way or the other, he’s here to watch 
question period today, and I’d like to introduce him to all 
members. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Outstanding Events in the World of Politics 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last 
couple of days there’s been two outstanding events happening 
in the world of politics. One is the leader’s dinner in North 
Battleford on Tuesday evening. It was a huge success. There 
was at least twice the number of people that were there from 
previous years. And especially noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, was 
the number of young people in the community anxious to see a 
change both in the leadership and in the direction of this 
province. 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

Our leader didn’t disappoint them, Mr. Speaker, giving them a 
message of hope and vision, not only for these young people 
that are in our province but for all those who have and continue 
to be the strength of our province. 
 
Now the second event was held in Saskatoon last evening, the 
North Saskatoon Business Association banquet and awards of 
distinction presentation. A room was full of about 700 people, 
all part of the sector that actually continues to make the 
potential of this province come alive, and that’s the business 
sector. Congratulations to all the winners and of particular note 
was the introduction of the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] members, with polite applause for the NDP 
colleagues compared to a wild ovation given to our leader. Well 
done and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Population Increase in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party likes to talk population. The numbers they 
use aren’t particularly accurate but they do like to talk. 
 
A couple of weeks ago, the members opposite were 
complaining loudly about Saskatchewan’s population and 
basing their complaints on last year’s stats even though they 
knew full well they were no longer accurate. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
true. Good news for Saskatchewan is bad news for the 
Saskatchewan Party, and so they used outdated numbers to 
make their case. 
 
Two weeks ago they said the province’s population was 
968,157. Well, Mr. Speaker, the real number is just a tad shy of 
988,000 — 987,939 to be exact, a difference of about 20,000 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth quarter of 2006 saw Saskatchewan’s 
largest population increase since 1986. And the fourth quarter 
of 2006 also saw Saskatchewan’s largest net interprovincial 
migration gain since 1983. For the first time in over 10 years, 
in-migration from Alberta exceeded provincial out-migration to 
Alberta. And we also made gains from BC [British Columbia], 
Manitoba and Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population numbers are up and 
job numbers are up. So are manufacturing shipments, oil 
production, urban housing starts, international exports of goods, 
value of building permits, retail sales, and average weekly 
earnings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Pretty much everything in Saskatchewan’s up, Mr. Speaker, 
except . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Saskatchewan Party Nominates Two Candidates 
 
Ms. Draude: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last night the Saskatchewan Party nominated two new 
candidates. Former Saskatchewan Party MLA Arlene Julé was 
nominated in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — We are very excited to have Arlene back on 
the team. Mr. Speaker, while she was an MLA, Arlene Julé 
fought on behalf of children who were being exploited in the 
sex trade. She was also the first MLA to take this government to 
task for its decision to keep Murdoch Carriere on the job, 
despite several complaints of harassment that had been lodged 
against him. I think it’s only fitting that she challenges the 
Minister for the Public Service Commission for her seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night we also nominated realtor, Laura Ross 
in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Laura is 
actively involved in a number of women’s organizations, 
including the Canadian Federation of University Women, the 
Regina women’s council, and provincial women’s council. 
 
In the release announcing her candidacy, Laura said and I 
quote: 
 

I think all women of Saskatchewan have been done a 
disservice by the current NDP government. I expect the 
government to stand up for what is fair and what is right. 
The women . . . had to go through this ordeal and they 
must feel completely betrayed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I are very excited to have these 
two dynamic and vivacious women on the Sask Party team. 
Their wealth of knowledge and experience will be a huge asset 
in a Sask Party government. I’d like to ask all members to join 
me in congratulating these two women on their nominations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

First Nations and Métis Juno Awards Nominees 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, a ceremony honouring First 
Nations and Métis nominees has become a part of the Juno 
Awards. Last evening I, along with some of my caucus 
colleagues, attended the Aboriginal honouring ceremony at the 
Saskatoon Indian and Métis Friendship Centre. 
 
I was very pleased to be part of this event recognizing the 
achievements of outstanding artists like Northern Cree, Digging 
Roots, Susan Aglukark, Jason Burnstick, and Leela Gilday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis artists and musicians play 
an important role in the Canadian music industry, not only 
because of the cultural perspective that informs their work but 
also because they serve as very visible role models. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two other events will showcase First Nations and 
Métis musicians at this year’s Juno Award celebrations. One 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

Show in Two Cities will be held tonight in Prince Albert and 
tomorrow night in Saskatoon. Tonight’s show will be hosted by 
local actors, Gordon Tootoosis and Tantoo Cardinal, and 
tomorrow’s show is hosted by Billy Joe Green and Tantoo 
Cardinal again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these shows will feature 2007 Juno Award 
nominees and also includes performances by 
Saskatchewan-based artists. Mr. Speaker, First Nations and 
Métis musicians, performers, and artists contribute so much to 
the cultural fabric of this country; I am pleased to see these 
contributions recognized at the 2007 Juno Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Highway 32 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week I 
was cc’d on a letter to the Premier and the Minister of 
Highways on the status of Highway 32 from Sister Rosetta 
Reiniger, the executive director of St. Angela’s Academy in 
Prelate. 
 
Sister Rosetta has written “Highway 32: a petition in the ‘Key 
of P’ from Prelate,” part of which I would like to share with the 
Assembly today and I quote: 
 

The path to Prelate from places like Pennant is positively a 
perilous pilgrimage. In the present paper a phenomenon of 
four people playing poker on 32 was pictures and that 
personified the personalities of the pundits pressing to 
prevail on the personages in the provincial precincts to put 
their philosophical pathos to peace and perform 
purposefully, and not with perfunctory plans. 
 
It perplexes the people from these picturesque places that 
the principle path that permits purposeful and pleasant 
pursuits is punctured with so many pathetic patches of 
potholes. Potholes are reverse pyramids protruding 
perpendicularly, penetrating into the pits, and providing 
punishment to all who plunge through. 
 
Please, parliamentarians promise to promptly protect the 
psyche of this population by pursuing the prestigious 
principle to proclaim that pavement will be procured and 
placed properly with particular purpose on pathway 32. 
 
We posit our poignant “please” with our premier not to put 
off, nor prolong, the prospect of peacefully punishing piles 
of pavement, otherwise we will not be placated, and your 
election plans may not be pleasing to you. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
 

The Arts’ Role in a Healthy Community 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One of 
the reasons this government worked so hard in investing to 
bring the Junos to Saskatchewan was that we know the 
important role the arts play in creating and maintaining a 
healthy community. Mr. Speaker, the music industry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. The member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Contrary 
to popular belief, the party this weekend is in Saskatoon not on 
the floor of the legislature here this morning. 
 
The music industry contributes significantly both to the quality 
of life and to our economy. Hosting events like the Juno 
Awards provides an opportunity to showcase Saskatchewan’s 
incredibly talented and vibrant artistic community. Mr. Speaker, 
the excitement generated by the Junos and the other award 
shows being held in the province this year is translating into 
opportunities for Saskatchewan musicians. I hear that people in 
Saskatoon have gone without sleep for three nights now to be 
out listening. 
 
A recommendation in the Music Industry Review that I 
submitted in January to the Premier was to create a school tour 
and to connect students to opportunities in the music and other 
cultural industries. 
 
Thanks to quick action from the Department of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation and Saskatchewan Creative Music Inc. 2007, 
these school tours are a reality today. Over 70 Saskatchewan 
schools have subscribed to the program, and I’m happy to 
inform the Assembly that these tours are fully subscribed and 
operating with fantastic initial feedback. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tour is having a profound effect on 
communities around the province, I might say, reminding us of 
the vibrancy of people expressing themselves. So it’s one more 
reason that Saskatchewan is the best place to live, work, and 
raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Agriculture Week 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week is Saskatchewan Agriculture Week, a week in which we 
recognize the many contributions of farm families, producers, 
and the agriculture industry that make our province grow. 
 
It’s really interesting though, Mr. Speaker, that I heard on the 
radio this morning that the Saskatchewan Ag minister is 
threatening to take the federal government to court over the 
barley vote — so much for respecting the will and wishes of 
Saskatchewan producers. For the minister to say the question 
wasn’t clear is simply an insult to farmers’ intelligence. 
 
I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

willing to go to court over the results of a democratic vote. Yet 
the same government refused to go to court to stand up on 
behalf of nine female victims in the Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Especially given the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
the former Justice minister, the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place said the following in the legislature in 2003, and I quote: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was 
justified. We will defend that position vigorously in the 
courts. And in due course, Mr. Speaker, the courts will 
make the determination. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear this government doesn’t have its 
priorities straight and has lost its moral compass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Tabling of Legal Opinion Regarding 
Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
continues to hide behind its secret legal opinion with respect to 
the Carriere scandal where the government paid $275,000 to 
someone who was convicted of assault and fired for 
harassment. The NDP is refusing to release that secret legal 
opinion to answer some questions for taxpayers. And yesterday 
the minister said, and I quote, “I don’t recall any government 
ever tabling a Justice opinion . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me refresh the minister and the Premier’s 
memory. On April 8, 1998, this Assembly passed a motion 
calling on the government to release all legal opinions related to 
the Channel Lake scandal presided over by the member for 
Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Those legal opinions were then tabled in the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations, and they were released to 
the public. There has been a precedent for legal opinions to be 
tabled in the matter of an NDP scandal. Will they do that with 
this case, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall any Justice 
opinion from the Department of Justice being tabled. Now I 
may be incorrect. I know that there may have been some private 
sector legal opinions that the member may be referring to. But I 
don’t recall a Department of Justice legal opinion, advice given 
to the Government of Saskatchewan, ever having been tabled in 
this Legislative Assembly. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here are the 19 legal opinions tabled 
in this Legislative Assembly as a result of the Channel Lake 
investigation. Nine of them are from the Department of Justice, 
Mr. Speaker — nine of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so we ask again the minister or maybe the 
Premier — if he wants to weigh in on this issue — why will he 
not table the legal opinion that led this government to pay 
$275,000 to someone, Mr. Speaker, who was fired for 
harassment and convicted of assault? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that there was a 
special committee that was struck to look into Channel Lake, as 
I recall, through the Crown Corporations Committee. They 
were looking at a specific issue. But I do not ever recall a legal 
opinion from the Department of Justice being tabled on the 
floor of this Legislative Assembly. Now I may be wrong. My 
understanding, those legal opinions were tabled in a Crown 
Corporations Committee. I do not recall them ever having been 
tabled on the floor of the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what a weak, what a lame answer to 
the people of this province on an issue for which they want 
some answers from that minister and this government. They say 
they have a legal opinion that justifies why they would spend, 
pay $275,000 to Mr. Carriere. There is precedent for the 
government releasing Justice legal opinions. We made that very 
clear today. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: in light of what the minister 
has answered, will he ensure that that legal opinion in the 
Carriere scandal case is tabled in the appropriate committee of 
the legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have stated in this Legislative Assembly that we were advised 
by the Department of Justice to settle a statement of claim with 
Mr. Carriere. We were advised . . . For a number of reasons, 
Mr. Speaker. We were advised because the personnel file, the 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

contents of the personnel file had been made public, Mr. 
Speaker. And as the members will know, that when there are 
allegations of harassment, both the complainant and the alleged 
harasser are entitled to have confidentiality. That did not 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of issues around 
defamation of character because at that time Mr. Carriere had 
not been convicted of any alleged sexual assault, Mr. Speaker. 
And in fact he was never convicted of sexual assault. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, there was a view . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Results of Joint Job Evaluation Process 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Minister of Finance gave the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan the bill for the next election. However I read on 
the front page of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix today that the 
taxpayers and our health care professionals are still paying the 
bills for the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government slapped together an 
agreement five days before the last election in a crass attempt to 
buy the votes of some health care workers. Now the human 
wreckage continues. Some workers are saying they may be 
thrown into bankruptcy as a result of this politically motivated 
and completely flawed process. Mr. Speaker, why did this NDP 
government fail to follow the proper collective bargaining 
process for joint job evaluation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
questions asked opposite have been answered on numerous 
occasions in this House and I will repeat what has been said 
previously, Mr. Speaker. This government entered into the joint 
job evaluation process and, Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to 
support the joint job evaluation process. 
 
It is interesting to note today, Mr. Speaker, that on a day when 
the opposition members’ single biggest issue for the last few 
months — the number of people in this province, the population 
of this province, Mr. Speaker — the number one issue that 
they’ve been talking about in the last year and a half, today, Mr. 
Speaker, they are strangely silent and going back on old news, 
questions that have been asked and answered. Instead of 
coming to the people of Saskatchewan and saying, by golly, this 
government is doing the right thing, at the right time, in the 
right place. Population numbers are up, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
very proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
the Minister of Health doesn’t recognize is that people are being 
punished and it’s all because of politics. This deal was signed 
five days before the last election but the interference, the 
interference didn’t stop there. The Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations, SAHO, was directed by this NDP 
government to begin payments before the job classification 
process was complete. Mr. Speaker, that’s a rush job and now 
some health care workers are suffering the consequences 
because this NDP government didn’t follow the proper process. 
Mr. Speaker, why did the government order SAHO to start 
paying out money before the classification process was 
complete? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
process was anything but rushed, Mr. Speaker. The record is 
very clear. 1997, Mr. Speaker, this government committed to 
deal with equal pay for work of equal value. 1999, Mr. Speaker, 
we entered into a joint agreement with the unions and the health 
care sector in order to deal with equal pay for work of equal 
value. 
 
By 2003, Mr. Speaker, there had been money committed by 
government into the pool for the joint job evaluation outcome. 
It was not complete at that time, Mr. Speaker. There was an 
agreement between union members and the government to 
proceed. Mr. Speaker, that’s what took place. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, today the government is responding to 
grievances, to matters in front of the Labour Relations Board. 
Mr. Speaker, this case is continuing to go through the normal 
channels. We’re committed, as we’ve always been, Mr. 
Speaker, to the joint . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how 
the Minister of Health has a limited memory. And I want to 
quote one line that I have put on the record before, Mr. Speaker, 
and this is from the dispute resolution tribunal that dealt with 
this issue between SAHO and the three different unions. And 
this is a quote on page 1, and it says this: 
 

This document . . . was hurriedly put together, and not 
actually negotiated, was signed by the parties on October 
[the] 3rd, 2003. 

 
Rushed, hurried, not put together by the proper process. This 
government didn’t follow the rules. Payments were pushed out 
before the process was complete. That resulted in some people 
being overpaid. Then the department was told, collect that 
money. And now health districts are being told not to collect 
that money. It’s a gong show, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

On October 4, 2006, the Premier ordered a moratorium on 
collection of those overpayments. Mr. Speaker, why is the 
Premier continuing to interfere in this process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair . . . Order. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
from a party whose campaign platform was to freeze the health 
care budget and today indicates that their health human resource 
plan is to hire auditors, Mr. Speaker. Auditors — not nurses, not 
technologists, not physicians . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Members on 
both sides of the House. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So at 
a time when they’re talking about the workforce in 
Saskatchewan Health, the joint job evaluation process, Mr. 
Speaker, affected 25,000 workers in 12 health regions through 
three different unions. Mr. Speaker, this was a long and 
complex process that unfolded by agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are asked to answer questions that we 
have asked and answered on numerous occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
We are committed to the joint job . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Times for Medical Treatment 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Health said that he’d be making an 
announcement today on guaranteed wait times with the federal 
government — something that he said a couple weeks ago was 
an absolutely silly idea. 
 
Federal funds will be allocated to provinces that outline a plan 
in one of the five priority areas: cancer treatment, cardiac 
procedures, diagnostic imaging, joint replacement, or sight 
restoration. I think the people will be very interested to know 
that the only area that Saskatchewan actually meets the 
benchmarks is in cardiac care. According to the Wait Time 
Alliance report card last year, Saskatchewan received an A in 
cardiac care, but failures in the other four areas. Given this 
government’s poor track record on wait times, which of the five 
areas will he be allotting this money to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, an interesting day. The member’s leader, just the other 
night in North Battleford, said, we don’t just criticize; we 
provide alternatives. Mr. Speaker, in the health care field, since 

I’ve been in this House, not one alternative idea’s been 
suggested from the other side on health care. Mr. Speaker, the 
opportunity for the members opposite to stand up and offer 
alternatives . . . Instead what do they say about health care? No 
to seniors . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I invite the 
Minister of Health to complete his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 
while we are committed to health care professionals in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the members opposite are 
committed only to auditors in the health care field, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s shameful. 
 
And the member opposite continues to read accurate media 
reports incorrectly, Mr. Speaker. The process that the federal 
government engaged in, in this wait time guarantee, Mr. 
Speaker, I said was a silly idea. Mr. Speaker, the advancing of 
money to assist Saskatchewan to enhance its wait time 
reduction process is not a silly idea, Mr. Speaker. We’re happy 
to work with our partners in the federal government to further 
our work in reducing waiting times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday Adeline Gagnon came to the legislature to ask this 
Health minister why Saskatchewan had the longest waiting list 
in the country for orthopedic surgery. Unfortunately she got 
absolutely no results from this minister. 
 
Today I want to raise the issue of an 81-year-old man, William 
Ermel from Cupar. His tear ducts are blocked and he can’t see. 
He requires sight restoration surgery and he is being told that 
he’ll have to wait up to two years for this procedure. He’s 
already waited a year and a half to see the ophthalmologist and 
for x-rays. Will the minister start targeting sight restoration as 
part of the guaranteed wait time announcement so that people 
like William Ermel do not have to wait three and a half years to 
have his sight restored? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has been committed in all fields, Mr. Speaker. We 
have been committed to reducing waiting times and increasing 
access. And, Mr. Speaker, other provinces are looking to the 
work being done in Saskatchewan in terms of the leadership 
that we are provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the federal government will provide the 
province of Saskatchewan with additional resources to allow us 
to continue our work. Mr. Speaker, the federal government is 
asking us to target one area with guarantees attached to it. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we aren’t committed to one area where there’ll 
only be one guarantee. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to 
reducing waiting times throughout the whole system of 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

Saskatchewan health. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been doing that 
on our own up to this point with dollars negotiated by 
agreements by the premiers three years ago, Mr. Speaker. And 
we are going to continue to do this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — . . . time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, out of the five areas, we are 
reaching the benchmarks in cardiac care. The other four we 
received a failing grade — such as sight restoration. William 
Ermel’s quality of life is severely affected. His son insists that 
they should look at going out of the province for care. His son 
lives in Ottawa. Listen to the wait time in Ottawa for sight 
restoration. This procedure would be six weeks. If he happened 
to be in Quebec, it would be six months. But because he lives in 
Saskatchewan, it’s two to three years for this procedure. 
 
Does the minister think that is acceptable in Saskatchewan? 
How have we fallen so far behind all the other provinces? Is 
two to three years for sight restoration acceptable under his 
watch? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Across Canada over the course of the next three years various 
provinces are going to address the issue of waiting times within 
their provinces. Mr. Speaker, a number of provinces will choose 
to provide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will come to order. 
Order, order. Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
this budget this government has committed to provide 
additional resources in the Department of Health for a number 
of things including support for seniors. Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite have said on numerous occasions in their 
speeches that they do not support the efforts that this 
government is doing in health in the area of seniors and the 
seniors’ drug plan. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to assist 
seniors in this province. We will continue to be committed. We 
will reduce waiting lists, we will improve access, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will reduce the cost of prescription drugs for 
seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Compensation to Forestry Secretariat Executive 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this has 

become a tired, old NDP government but what they don’t seem 
to get tired of is looking after their NDP buddies. And some of 
the best NDP buddies are in the law firm of Olive Waller 
Zinkhan & Waller. Wil Olive was the Chair of Crop Insurance 
at the same time his firm was billing Crop Insurance for 
hundreds of thousands of dollars. Zinkhan was the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] lawyer 
and we all know how that turned out. And now, Mr. Speaker, 
now we have Tom Waller who’s been given a huge sweetheart 
contract to run a five-person Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tom Waller’s original contract paid him $200 an 
hour which worked out to $180,000 in total for six months 
work. He then got a contract extension which bumped his pay 
to, Mr. Speaker, $300 an hour and that put another $230,000 in 
his pocket for seven months work. That’s $410,000 for 13 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is Tom Waller being paid twice as much as 
the highest paid deputy minister? Why is the NDP breaking the 
rules for their NDP buddy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again the members 
opposite will put forward numbers that will have to be 
double-checked because they do have a history of the facts 
being somewhat inconsistent with what they report to this 
House. 
 
Yesterday that member was making an accusation that 
$180,000 contract was overextended to the point where 278,000 
was paid out. Mr. Speaker, she had the correct information in 
her hands when she laid those figures out, and I contend, Mr. 
Speaker, she knew it. If she didn’t know it, what she should 
have done was she should have had her researchers explain to 
her what she was saying in this House. The facts are that the 
278,000 were for two separate contracts. The $188,000 contract 
was in fact expended in the way that it was designed to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well I’m really glad that the minister in his 
answers brought up that issue, and I value my researcher a great 
deal. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here’s another way that the NDP is breaking 
the rules for their buddy, Tom Waller. The Crown employees 
contract Act requires that the head of every department, Crown 
agency, or secretariat to file his or her contract with the Clerk of 
Executive Council within 14 days of the contract being signed. 
 
There was a problem, Mr. Speaker. Tom Waller started his new 
contract on September 1, 2006 but it was not filed with the 
Clerk of Executive Council until three days ago, on March 26. 
 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

So NDP lawyer Tom Waller is being paid over $30,000 a 
month. That’s twice as much as the highest paid deputy 
minister, and he gets to file his sweetheart deal six months late. 
Why is there one set of rules for the NDP’s friends and another 
set of rules for everyone else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell that member 
that the contract she referred to yesterday had been tabled with 
the Clerk. I will check the facts, Mr. Speaker, as one would 
want to do when their allegation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Members will 
come to order. The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will check the facts, 
and I will check the allegations. And then I, sir, will report to 
the general public. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. That opposition Saskatchewan 
Party has maligned more professional people of this province 
than I think is acceptable — from the former president of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to Mr. Waller, who is a 
well-respected professional in this province, who has served as 
president of Crown Investments Corporation, and who is well 
respected within the legal community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, shame. We are 
getting our value for our money on the contract that Mr. Waller 
has assumed. He is doing a good job in keeping . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t even know how the 
minister can justify this exorbitant amount of money that’s 
being paid for a short period of time of work. The minister 
keeps telling us that Tom Waller is worth more because he’s a 
lawyer. Well I believe the deputy minister of Justice is a lawyer, 
and he has to follow the salary grid of deputy ministers. So why 
does Tom Waller get to break the rules? 
 
Why does NDP lawyer Tom Waller get a sweetheart deal from 
this NDP government — $410,000 for 13 months work to run 
the Forestry Secretariat? And, Mr. Speaker, the last time I 
checked, the P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp mill is still closed. Mr. 
Speaker, $410,000 to run a five-person office. Why on earth 
should the taxpayers be shelling out that kind of money to look 
after one of this government’s buddies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite asks if we’re getting value for the money. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
asks if we’re getting value for our money. I want to tell you that 
we’re getting value for every nickel that we’re spending on a 
contract, and on a consulting contract. I want to ask the 
members opposite if they think they’re getting value for the 
money that they spent on Conservative Stephen Harper 
members of parliament. 
 
The member from Silver Springs, $500 to Brad Trost. Do you 
think you got value for your money? What did you get on 
equalization? You got nothing. A bad investment for that 
member and all the rest of you who have been supporting them. 
And I want to say as it relates to forestry, on equalization this 
province got took to the cleaners by your federal counterpart 
and you said nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, the House will come to order. And why 
is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle has requested leave for introductions. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the members of the House for granting leave. It is with 
pleasure that I would like to introduce a long-time friend, Kim 
Tucker, who is in the west gallery. Kim’s family had a farm just 
north of North Battleford when I was a teenager and that’s 
where I kept my horse when I first got it. We’ve been very good 
friends over many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re farming north of North Battleford at this point. Kim is 
very involved in her community and I’m very happy to 
welcome her here to the legislature and I ask all other members 
to welcome Kim to the legislature as well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 

Charitable Gaming Grant Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m happy to rise today to tell you that the cheque is in 
the mail. And not just one cheque, Mr. Speaker, but 
approximately 2,000 cheques will be in the mail starting next 
week on their way to groups and organizations from across 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

Saskatchewan as part of the first grant payment from the 
province’s charitable gaming grant program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the charitable gaming grant program gives groups 
and organizations licensed by the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority a grant equal to 25 per cent of the net 
revenues they raise from charitable gaming activities. These 
activities include bingo, break-open ticket sales, raffles, Texas 
hold’em poker tournaments, and Monte Carlo events. This first 
round of payments is based on all licensed charitable gaming 
that has taken place between April 1, 2006 and December 31, 
2006. 
 
After the first payment, charities will receive grants every 
quarter in which they report their net proceeds. Mr. Speaker, the 
first grant payment will see approximately $2.4 million paid to 
more than 2,000 groups and organizations throughout 
Saskatchewan. The lists of beneficiaries include friendship 
centres, cadets, Scouts, Girl Guides, 4-H clubs, community 
associations, service clubs, hospital foundations, volunteer fire 
departments, and on and on. 
 
All of these groups, Mr. Speaker — big or small, in urban or 
rural areas — do much work to make their communities and 
province a better place to live. We are proud with the work they 
do and proud to be able to provide them with this grant to allow 
them to continue to support the many worthwhile projects and 
services they provide in communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
These charitable gaming grants are just another way that our 
government is making Saskatchewan the best place to live, 
work, and raise a family. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington on the ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister for sending the statement over in a good time 
so that I could take a look at it. 
 
The community organizations that will be receiving these funds 
are the backbone of our communities, both rural and urban, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re what make the community a community. 
They’re the glue that holds the communities together. They’re 
the ones that keep the rink open. They’re the ones that provide 
the additional support to our school kids, so they have the 
proper uniforms and can travel to the various sporting events. 
They’re the ones that provide the training to our young people 
such as 4-H and Boy Scouts and Girl Guides, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when I listen to the minister talk about this and she says the 
cheque is in the mail . . . There’s another saying that goes along 
with that, and that’s, I’m from the government and I’m here to 
help you. When people across Saskatchewan hear that, the first 
thing they do is clamp their hands over their wallet because 
whenever the government is there to help you, you know it’s 
going to cost you money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has been promising support 
to communities from the lottery funds ever since they got into 
electronic gaming more than a decade ago, Mr. Speaker. And 
fact is, the member from Regina Rosemont was the minister at 
the time that promised 10 per cent of the lottery funds would be 

distributed back to the communities. It was just before an 
election. Mr. Speaker, it never happened. 
 
Then the next promise from that same minister of the day was 
that the money from the lotteries that was supposed to be going 
to the communities was going to be used for the 911 with 
SaskTel. Well, Mr. Speaker, that gets paid every month on 
everybody’s telephone bill by the telephone subscriber, not the 
money that was supposed to go to the communities. 
 
[11:00] 
 
So again just as we go into an election campaign, this 
government is now promising to provide lottery fund monies to 
communities, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, across 
Saskatchewan, people have no confidence that this payment 
will continue. Yes, the cheques are going to come out now prior 
to the election. But like so many other things — like the joint 
job evaluation in 2003, promised before the election, paid out 
before the election, and then the bill comes due and the 
government is asking for money to be sent back — there is no 
confidence, Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan that this 
program will continue if the NDP win the next election. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Meadow Lake on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For a ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] on a 
ministerial statement. 
 

Office of the Treaty Commissioner 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to draw the attention of the members of the Assembly 
and the people of Saskatchewan to the impending last official 
day on the job for Judge David Arnot, Treaty Commissioner. 
Saturday, March 31 will mark the end of more than 10 years in 
this position. 
 
And the Office of the Treaty Commission or the OTC, as we 
often refer to it as, was established in 1989 by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the Government of Canada to 
review treaty land entitlement and education. The mandate was 
later revised, as many will know, to focus on the nature of the 
treaty relationship and the specific treaty issues, including 
education and justice, and to explore the requirements and 
implications of treaty implementation. 
 
Judge Arnot’s position involved facilitating treaty discussions 
between the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 
and the Government of Canada. The provincial government sits 
as an observer at the exploratory treaty discussions out of 
respect for the special treaty relationship between First Nations 
and Canada, and because the province could be impacted by 
those discussions. 
 
In January of 1997, Judge Arnot was first appointed as Treaty 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

Commissioner in Saskatchewan. Since then, he has played an 
integral role in raising awareness about First Nations issues and 
treaties. The OTC has done excellent work with a range of 
parties, including work in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
public school system in partnership with Saskatchewan 
Learning to educate children, young and teachers and . . . youth 
and teachers, I should say, about treaties and treaty 
relationships. 
 
During his tenure, he has also written several important reports, 
media opinion items, delivered lectures, and worked tirelessly 
to increase public understanding of the importance of treaties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly will recall that exactly 
a year ago today, actually, in these legislative chambers, a 
historic event took place to honour the important foundation of 
Saskatchewan and the enduring treaty relationship between 
First Nations and the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
Judge Arnot and his office helped to organize that event, and he 
spoke eloquently at the ceremony, stressing then as he does 
today that all Saskatchewan residents are in fact treaty people. 
 
He talked about his own ancestors who, as newcomers, settled 
into this territory as a direct result of a treaty that had been 
made with the First Nations who occupied the land before their 
arrival. This is the important message Judge Arnot never grew 
tired of delivering and one I am sure he will continue to deliver 
no matter what lies in his future. 
 
As the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, Mr. 
Speaker, I thank Judge Arnot for his 10 years of superb service 
to the people of Saskatchewan as the Treaty Commissioner in 
our province. I believe that through his leadership, the Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner has provided valuable services to all 
of us. Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Treaty Commissioner has 
made a significant contribution to improving relationships 
between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal individuals and 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is concerning to this government that the federal 
government has allowed the Office of the Treaty Commissioner 
to cease operations. It is my hope that the federal government 
will recognize the valuable work of the OTC and ensure the 
office and the position of Treaty Commissioner continues in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to thank Judge Arnot and wish him all the best in 
his future endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank 
the minister for sending a copy of the statement regarding 
outgoing Treaty Commissioner, Judge Arnot. 
 
Our leader, my colleagues, and I have the utmost respect for the 
gentleman who has worked tirelessly for the past 10 years to 
educate both First Nations and non-First Nations on our treaty 
relationship. A decade ago I daresay the majority of people in 
Saskatchewan knew little, if anything, about the treaty in their 

area. Too many people believe that the treaty is a document that 
benefits only First Nations people. 
 
Now, 10 years later, there is a growing number of people who 
realize the treaty is more. It is a sacred contract that is the basis 
for our land ownership in this province. The history of our 
province is rich because of the diverse background of our 
citizens. And all of these citizens are fortunate to have had the 
First Nations to help them build our province. 
 
Last year, through Judge Arnot’s efforts, we had the honour of 
celebrating in this legislature the historic relationship between 
First Nations and the Legislative Assembly. We believe that the 
OTC, through Judge Arnot, has been successful in helping the 
people of Saskatchewan understand the history of 
Saskatchewan through treaties. The Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner is essential in continuing the education. We are 
hopeful that the efforts of Judge Arnot will be continued and 
expanded in the future through the OTC. 
 
On a personal note, we the official opposition would like to 
send our best wishes to Judge Arnot. All people in 
Saskatchewan have benefited from his dedication to the 
province, and we wish him personal happiness that reflects his 
dedication to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling responses to written questions no. 851 through 
885 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 851 to 885 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed an 
honour and a pleasure to stand today to respond to the budget. 
 
Prior to my comments I would like to thank the people in 
Saskatoon Northwest for their confidence in sending me to this 
House to represent all people in the constituency of Saskatoon 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

Northwest. 
 
I’d like to also congratulate my new colleagues — my 
colleague from Martensville who won in a landslide by-election 
just recently, as well as my candidate from Weyburn. You 
know, it’s been very fascinating since they both had the 
opportunity to enter our caucus to see new and vibrant young 
people who bring a new vision of this province — a vision as 
they understand it, a vision as they can see from the young 
people in this province. 
 
You know, the Finance minister’s already starting to beak and 
his arrogance is only exceeded by his rudeness. 
 
You know the vision that these young people bring to this 
province, into our caucus, and to the Saskatchewan Party is a 
great opportunity. It’s an opportunity for us to learn, to learn 
from them what the young people in this province truly want. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the budget and I 
saw the presentation, what I didn’t see was a vision, a vision 
that was delivered from this government on how they would 
enhance the lives of people in this province. Not only did I not 
see a vision; I saw no plan. I saw no plans that incorporated into 
there how this money was to be utilized. 
 
In the housing program is an example. We’re putting 110 
million into housing of which 50 million come from the federal 
government. And yet when were questioned in the estimates 
portion of it, they demonstrated absolutely no plan or no vision 
on how this could be done. 
 
The plan that they had was to go out and seek consultation from 
the community which means . . . when questioning that this 
plan is really to be over the next three years. There was no plan 
consisted in there for seniors’ housing. There was limited plans 
in there on looking after the 37,000 homes that this government 
has in its current portfolio. 
 
In any . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, we will and we’ll get 
to that right in a minute. We’ll get back to the Finance minister. 
We certainly will because you know where it’s going, is in the 
Premier’s riding and since this man, the Premier, who was in 
Saskatoon at the high school saying that “I’ve waited 21 years 
to make this announcement,” who has been the Social Service 
critic, the Health critic and the Premier of this province. And 
what’s he done for his riding of Riversdale? He built a liquor 
store with a heart on it. Well isn’t that just terrific. Waited 21 
years to make this announcement. He had the ability to do it. If 
they hadn’t wasted the $50 million they spend annually on 
missed business adventures, what could that $50 million done 
in our inner cities in this province of Saskatchewan? 
 
So when they say what have they done, for 14 years they’ve 
done nothing — absolutely nothing. And then they come out 
with a plan of $60 million from them and $50 million from the 
federal government . . . what has no vision, no plan, and if it 
was taken to a bank in that format wouldn’t get past first base. 
 
You know, Madam Speaker, they can say what they want on 
this issue, but we know for a fact that they are talking with 
groups in Saskatoon to develop a plan. There was no plan in the 
beginning, and there was no vision. And this still will never be 
done in 21 years from now if this Premier is still there. 

You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you see a plan and 
you have no vision of where you’re going, it’s not really a plan. 
This government has not had a plan or a vision since its 
inception. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or an idea. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Or an idea. You know, they came along and 
they gave seniors a drug plan. And then what did they do? They 
turned around and they raised SaskEnergy rates. They’re about 
to raise SaskPower rates. Then it’ll be SaskTel rates. And where 
will we be at the end? The seniors will be no further ahead, not 
one nickel ahead. Not one dime will they gain by the end of this 
calendar year when they’re finished increasing the utility rates 
that’ll take the money back right out of their pocket. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . You know, sharp businessman. I can absolutely say I’ve 
signed paycheques in my life, which is a lot more than most 
people on the other side of the thing. You know, money spent 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would remind all members 
there’s an opportunity to enter into debate. The member has the 
floor right now, would like to continue with his address. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. You 
know, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Community 
Resources launched a program a while ago on the advertising 
for foster families in this province. And the net effect of all of 
that advertising showed no increase. But what it did show in the 
new plan that came out, with everything this government does, 
is no consultation. They had absolutely no consultation with 
foster families’ associations or other groups associated. And 
this is systematic throughout everything they do. 
 
The Minister for Healthy Living is looking at, through the 
Health department, building a new detox centre, Calder Centre, 
in the city of Saskatoon. No consultation with the community. 
And where do they decide to put this? Right next to a grade 
school. Right next to a grade school, of all the locations. Now 
he’ll hide behind the guise that this was the health district. 
 
When I’ve talked to the parents that have called our offices, 
they said there was no consultation prior to this going on. And 
this is systematic with this government — no consultation. No 
consultation on the budget. No consultation on a vision. No 
consultation on a dream. 
 
You know, the Minister of Community Resources got up and 
promised that we would have a report on the Red Willow 
facility, which we questioned in this House in December, and 
we still haven’t got that. And the reason we don’t have these 
things that we bring up in the House is that there is no plan. 
There is no concept within this organization to provide a vision 
and a plan that can be financed, can be created, and can show 
results. 
 
[11:15] 
 
In all the questions we ask, whether it be in this House or 
whether it be in committee, to show us the measurable goals 
and objectives that they’ve created or achieved over the time — 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

they don’t have them. And why wouldn’t you keep measurable 
goals and objectives so that you can know whether you’re 
succeeding or not succeeding? Very evident why they don’t — 
because they’re not succeeding, and they don’t want to show 
that. No matter what questions I asked in the estimates, of 
measurable goals and objectives, there wasn’t one answer. 
There’s never an answer on that. 
 
Any business person that’s successful in the province or in this 
country will tell you, you need measurable goals and objectives 
so that not only can you look at the critics to say what you’re 
doing, but so you can garner the program for yourself whether 
it’s successful. Not once in any question that I’ve asked has this 
government been able to say, we have a measurable goal and 
objective. 
 
I heard the Minister of Health say, we’re going to study a new 
. . . and put in $1 million through a new health facility in North 
Battleford. Well I applaud him for the study. I wish it had 
happened a while ago, and it wasn’t just an election ploy to put 
the study money in. 
 
But I also heard him say — which triggered my ear — they 
were going to have two psychiatric nurse bases. Well if you’re 
building a new facility and you’re planning to have two 
psychiatric nurse facilities, how many years is it going to take 
to fully staff that facility? Once again, where’s the plan? 
Where’s the vision? And where’s the tie-in . . . be training the 
professionals to fulfill that facility’s dream of being a fully 
funded, fully operational, fully staffed facility. Two psych 
nurses a year. I don’t get it. I just don’t see how it can be done. 
 
I also noticed that there was 250,000 for the Saskatoon Food 
Bank. And I’d just like to explain a little bit about that one. Last 
year the Regina Food Bank got $500,000 for capital project on 
theirs. And the reason they got it was because of their head of 
their fundraising committee was from the firm, from the firm 
Olive Waller, the firm. 
 
Saskatoon was there, and they got nothing. Not a cent. Other 
food banks didn’t get a cent until we complained, until they 
started raising a . . . [inaudible] . . . for this. And the reason that 
they did was because there was no consultation — no 
consultation whatsoever. 
 
You know, if you’re going to do it for one food bank, do it for 
across the province. Why should one be different than the 
other? Where is the need greater? And why do we have such a 
great need in this province for food banks? Why do we have in 
the city of Saskatoon 1,200 young people from the university 
using the food bank? Why is that happening? Why do we have 
so many families? It is a growth industry in this province in a 
boom. And why is that? Why can that possibly happen that we 
have so many of our young people need to go to a food bank for 
assistance? 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s very disappointing to 
sit and listen to a budget that provides dollars with no plans, for 
a budget that has no vision on how to create a society that we 
all want. 
 
You know, this government has done very well in losing money 
in business ventures — $50 million a year. Can you imagine 

over the last four years of this Premier’s reign what that $200 
million could have done for people who really need that money 
— for the poor, for the elderly? 
 
You know, when I talked about the housing issue, I heard no 
vision in there for housing for seniors, which our demographics 
show that we have the largest senior population coming up. And 
yet of the 110 million, there was no allocation for seniors’ 
housing for those who required it — not one dime. When asked 
about housing for special needs people, what were we going to 
do for them? Are we putting some of that money aside? Well 
you see no questions could be answered because there’s no 
plan. 
 
So how can you possibly answer the question when you don’t 
have a vision of what you’re doing with it? And the answer 
comes, we’re in consultation. You know, when you look at that 
in the consultation side and you say that you’re going to put 110 
million over three years, we know what the rate of inflation is. 
We know. When I ask a simple question: how many units do 
you plan on building with that money? There’s no answer. We 
don’t know. It’s a shame. You know, when we ask the simple 
question: how many seniors will be housed from this? There’s 
no answer. When we ask, how much is going into special needs 
housing? No answer. 
 
There’s no answers because there’s no plan. We have no vision 
on what we’re doing. This government has lost its way. The 
only reason that we’re seeing the numbers in the budget we’re 
seeing today, Madam Deputy Speaker, is because we’re coming 
into an election. You know, and it’s terrible that we would put 
out money into programs where we have no plan or vision 
simply to buy votes. This is a vote-buying budget. It has no 
reality. It has no substance. It would not pass in any financial 
institution as a budget where money should be spent, with no 
plan and no structure. How can you take $100 million for 
housing without a plan? 
 
You know, we talked about the money for highways, you know, 
that we’re giving — $5 million over 10 years. We’re already 
giving 400. It’s an additional $100 million. Well by year seven 
we will be putting less into highways than we are today just due 
to inflation. So what kind of vision is that? Where was the 
escalator in there for inflation so that at least we knew that we 
had the full funding plus escalation into it? Well we don’t. 
 
Where’s the vision on which highways go first? Where’s the 
idea? Where’s the concept? Where’s the time frames? People 
are asking the question. They don’t have it because they don’t 
have a strategy on what to do. They never did have a strategy. 
 
You know, if they stopped flying around the province and 
started driving around the province, they may see what’s going 
on. You know, the Premier in his own riding, which is so 
pleased to make this . . . Well it’s not really his riding because 
he lives in Moose Jaw. But where he’s supposed to live, if he 
were walking around the streets, he would see what is going on 
in his own area. He would see that he has done nothing in that 
area for the last eight years. And now we’re going to have a 
project with no plan. 
 
You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget’s all about 
elections. It is all about elections. It has no vision. It has no 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

plan. It has no strategy, and if left unto its own, it will fail 
dramatically. You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, based on 
this, there is no way that I can support this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Community 
Resources, the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. I just want to point out that I rise in proud support of 
the budget that was tabled in this Assembly last week, and 
there’s a number of reasons why, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 
certainly allude to those reasons why I’ve done so. 
 
And I’ll continue doing so and stand in proud support of this 
government and to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
whatever the doom and gloom that we hear from the members 
opposite, just chalk it up to doom and gloom because that is 
their job, is to bring down Saskatchewan and bring down the 
people of Saskatchewan and call down the province and not 
defend the province. That’s their job, Mr. Speaker, and they do 
their job very well in spite of some of the work that we’re trying 
to do to raise the province to a great province that it is, to a 
level it should stay, and a level it will stay for many, many 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was very happy this morning, Mr. Speaker. I asked a friend of 
mine, Donna Easto, for a quote. And she’d mentioned that she 
had a lot of Native American quotes. And one of the ones that I 
want to use today in response to some of the points raised by 
the opposition — and certainly in support of our budget — and 
it goes . . . It’s a Navajo quote, Madam Speaker. It goes: “You 
cannot wake a person who is pretending to be asleep.” And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s exactly why I think that it’s appropriate that we 
point that quote at the Sask Party opposition because quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, they are trying to get the people of 
Saskatchewan to forget their past and to forget what they may 
have said in the past and really not to pay attention to what they 
are all about, Madam Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out I’m very, very pleased, Madam Speaker, to 
be here on behalf of the constituents of Athabasca to support 
this budget because if not for the people of La Loche, of 
Pinehouse, of Buffalo Narrows, and many communities in my 
region, I would not be here today to support and see the 
progress this government has made and thus certainly benefit 
the North and the province from every corner of this great 
province as possible. The benefits are certainly there. 
 
Madam Speaker, I was very happy to hear the Premier say on 
the radio before this session started that this was going to be a 
session of definition. A session of definition where we point to 
the people of Saskatchewan what exactly those guys across the 
way stand for and what they plan on doing if they ever — and I 
point out if they ever — form government in Saskatchewan, but 
I don’t see that happening at all, Madam Speaker. 
 
And now I think it’s our turn. And I tell my colleagues on the 
table we have been sitting back and watching the manipulation 
from across the way, from the right wingers — their agenda 
manipulation to try and confuse the facts and to try and do all 
they can in their quest for power — to try and achieve power so 

they can go on with their agenda. I remind the people of 
Saskatchewan a number of things as who put this province in 
the mess that it was in when we took over. It was those guys, 
Madam Speaker. It was those guys. And since then we have 
reduced our debt, Madam Speaker. We’ve done a much better 
job than ever, not that there’s much room for improvement from 
those guys. But we have done a much better job at building this 
province, reducing its debt, and providing hope for the people 
of Saskatchewan, not doom and gloom like the members 
opposite often like to preach. 
 
From my perspective I tell the people of Saskatchewan this, and 
the people of Athabasca, don’t buy into their agenda of 
manipulation and mistruths. First of all I look across the way 
and what do I see, Madam Speaker? What do I see? I see people 
out there that are liberals when it’s popular to be liberals. Then I 
see the people across the way that are conservatives when it’s 
popular to be conservatives. I see those guys . . . Whoever is in 
the gallery, that’s who they’ll talk to. That’s what they’ll fight 
for their issue. Whoever’s in the gallery that day, that’s who 
they’ll jump onside, and they’ll play to the crowd as well, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing too . . . Now what they’re 
doing, Madam Speaker, is they’re twisting stories and they’re 
throwing allegations all over the place, Madam Speaker. And 
more so, Mr. Speaker, what is really totally disgusting is that 
they’re promising everything to everybody. They’re promising 
everything to everybody. 
 
And last but not least, Madam Speaker, let’s throw in the name 
change. Let’s throw in a name change. Maybe that’ll confuse 
the people of Saskatchewan because we’re pretending to be 
asleep from our past. Well, Madam Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t buy that agenda, and I urge them to watch 
very carefully because right across the way there’s a party that 
will mutate to anything. They’ll mutate to being Liberals, or 
they’ll mutate to being Conservatives, or they’ll mutate to the 
crowd in the gallery, or they’ll mutate to whatever story’s in the 
paper. They’ll do what they have to do to try and be everything 
to everybody. They’ll throw in allegations and they’ll change 
their name and they’ll do all these things. But, Madam Speaker, 
I tell the people of Saskatchewan, do not buy into that agenda of 
manipulation and mistruths as represented by the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that I think is important as well, when I 
sit here and people ask me, well why do you not support some 
of the positions that the Sask Party has taken on the budget? 
Well first of all, Madam Speaker, they haven’t taken any 
positions. I look at the Finance critic. That’s got to be one of the 
worst Finance critics in the history of this Assembly, and right 
across the country, Madam Speaker. 
 
Because last year I listened to him on the radio — the Finance 
critic — and he says, a mountain of money, we got a mountain 
of money. What are the NDP going to do with it? Well I 
listened to that Finance critic, and he spent $1 billion a block, 
Madam Speaker. I put on the radio and I went one block; he 
spent a billion there. I went the next block, another billion. And 
I went to the third block, another billion. I finally got to the 
fourth block, he spent 4 billion and thank goodness, Madam 
Speaker, I arrived at my destination because he would’ve went 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

on. 
 
And one of the things that’s really important now, is today, is 
today, 12 months later . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right. 
Last week, last year he said, we’ll remove the, we’ll put on PST 
[provincial sales tax] on restaurant meals or we’ll . . . There is 
no PST on restaurant meals. Get with the program. 
 
And now today he says, oh but it’s not sustainable now. Oh 
they’re not sustainable or where are you going to cut? So last 
year they’re spending billions and billions. Today now it’s not 
sustainable. 
 
He wants to raise the SGI Auto Fund. He wants to . . . more 
taxes cut. They’re promising more money to the teachers and to 
the nurses. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to do everything to 
everybody. It depends who walks in the gallery. Next week it 
might be a totally different group. Guess what? Those guys, that 
little puppet will get up and say, well let’s help these people 
out. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Well that’s not leadership, Madam Speaker. That’s not 
leadership. That is just a quest and a hunger for power, and they 
will do anything to try and achieve it. And, Madam Speaker, 
that is why the people of Saskatchewan don’t trust the 
Saskatchewan Party, because the Saskatchewan Party will do 
what’s good for them and not for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other thing that’s really, really difficult, Madam 
Speaker, as I sit in my chair and I listen to what’s happening 
from across the way — and you know what’s happening? — is 
we have this huge fight with Ottawa. They took out 800 million 
bucks from Saskatchewan, $800 million. That could have went 
a long ways, could’ve done a lot of things with 800 million. 
 
What did they do, Madam Speaker? Oh we don’t want to fight. 
We want to sit here, want to be nice little boys and girls. We 
don’t want to fight the hand that pats us on the head, as the 
member from Saskatoon Massey Place pointed out. And that is 
not the Saskatchewan spirit. We’re going to manage our money. 
We’re going to build on our economy. We’re going to make 
great things happen. And we’re fighters. We’re fighters. 
 
They don’t want to fight because why? Now I hear the member, 
the member from . . . the Finance critic, they gave a $500 
donation to one of the PC [Progressive Conservative] federal 
MPs [Member of Parliament]. They’re not only not fighting 
these guys, but they’re helping them win. And when they help 
them win, Saskatchewan loses, Madam Speaker. And we stand 
up to fight for Saskatchewan people. Those guys are fading 
away, fading away. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, where is our fight? 
Where is our fight? Where’s our fight? It’s not across the way. 
It’s in these government benches, and we’ll continue to fight — 
despite dragging a big pile of wasted political fat, if you like, on 
that side — on our way to fight Ottawa to make sure things are 
happening, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I’ll point out as well their agenda, 
their agenda of manipulation, mistruths, allegations — you 
know, promise me everything. And I was just sitting here, and 
there’s about three or four groups that walked into the 
Assembly one day after another. And every group, every group, 
those guys jump to their side promising them everything. 
 
And you know, Madam Speaker, it just totally disgusts me to sit 
here in this Assembly, watch that kind of antics from a party 
that hopes to be government. And I say, no way should we ever 
let those guys back in because they got us to where we’re at in 
the early ’90s, and they want to now come back and finish off 
Saskatchewan. They want to finish their job they started. And 
I’d tell the people of Saskatchewan — I’m going to send them a 
big, loud message — no way. No way are we going back to that 
party ever again, Madam Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out as well if you look at the positive, powerful 
sides, the powerful, positive sides of this government and its 
spending, Madam Speaker, people in Saskatchewan ought to 
know that there’s record spending in health care. And the 
Minister of Health has alluded to all the different surgeries. 
There’s hip and knee replacements, the eye surgeries. There’s 
thousands performed every day, every week, Madam Speaker; 
it’s a wonderful system. And yes, is there challenges and 
problems? Absolutely, absolutely, because we have an aging 
population and it’s always a challenge to make sure we’re able 
to meet all those demands. But is it a good system? Madam 
Speaker, the answer is yes. And this government is putting 
more resources with this budget to make sure we continue 
bringing that level of care as best we can to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The education budget — at one time I was told in this 
Assembly that the interest on our debt when we first assumed 
the government in the early ’90s after those guys were in 
power, it was almost twice as much. The interest on the debt 
was almost twice as much as our provincial education budget 
— isn’t that amazing, isn’t that amazing? — thanks to those 
guys. Today now it is almost three times our provincial interest 
payment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think if you look at the proof, you look at what’s being 
spent, what’s been done, Mr. Speaker, how could you even give 
consideration that the Saskatchewan Party is a successful 
alternative to what this government has done for the people of 
Saskatchewan? It’s just not reasonable at all to think about that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last four years we have cut over a billion dollars from our debt 
— a billion dollars. We could have used that money elsewhere, 
Mr. Speaker, but we cut because we know that saves money for 
Saskatchewan people for years to come. The austerity budgets 
that we had to put in place, whether it is the former minister or 
the minister before him and this current minister, we will 
continue focusing on slaying that PC debt left to us by those 
guys opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the most connected province. Whether 
it’s Internet or whether it’s telephone, cell phone use, we’ve got 
the most connected province in the country. We have an 
ambitious 10-year highways plan. Last four years I think that 
the price is $600 million in tax cuts by this Premier alone. And 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

we mustn’t forget, we mustn’t forget, Mr. Speaker, the 
economy is hot, hot, hot. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at all those good, wonderful 
stories, all the good stuff that’s being done, the only people that 
just don’t get it are the people opposite because they don’t want 
to get it, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to see the good that this 
government is doing because all their agenda is, is not about the 
good of the province but what’s good for the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
So looking at the overview . . . we have good education. We 
have good management. We have a good plan. We have good 
health care. And Mr. Speaker, there’s prosperity and there’s 
hope and there’s vision for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
every time there’s a grey cloud on the horizon, that grey cloud 
across the way is putting that grey cloud over the people of 
Saskatchewan and shame on them, shame on them, shame on 
them. 
 
And I’ll say again, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important that 
this government on this side . . . what I say to the opposition 
and to all those who may be manipulated by them and may be 
somehow convinced by them, it’s time for you to come back to 
reality because now it’s our turn on the government side to tell 
the people the real story behind the Saskatchewan Party and 
what they plan on doing and what their strategy is. 
 
I know and I say it very openly, that in terms of some of the 
agendas that we ask for them to clarify — whether it’s the 
health agenda or the economic agenda, whatever the agenda 
may be — we are asking for clarification, and guess what? They 
are not giving us any clarification because they don’t have a 
plan. 
 
And I tell every Aboriginal person that I meet, don’t buy into 
their agenda because they have no agenda. They have no plan, 
and we’re much smarter than that to simply go to them because 
they want to promise us some great things. And we don’t see 
nothing written down and no commitments. 
 
And I will close, Mr. Speaker, on some very important notes, 
very important notes. In the last 16 years that this opposition 
has told us we’re a tired and old government, the last 16 years 
we have paid, according to my calculations and information I 
received from Finance, over $12 billion in interest alone — $12 
billion in interest alone in the last 16 years, $12 billion in 
interest alone. Imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, what we 
could have done with $12 billion that we had to pay as a 
government. And that’s why many years, the first few years, 10, 
12 years, we were busy cleaning up their mess. 
 
And finally we get a little bit of daylight. We’re starting to do 
some of the things that this budget speaks of, Mr. Speaker. It 
talks about some of the valuable things that we are trying to do, 
and I will point out again some of the valuable things that this 
budget proposes. 
 
Of course there’s a $15 prescription cost for seniors, which is 
going to help a tremendous amount of people. From now on 
you go see your doctor and you got a prescription. It’s not 100, 
300, or $500 a month. It’s $15 per prescription, and it’s covered 
under a drug plan thanks to this government. You look at the 

20,000 over five years for the young kids making their careers 
here. You look at record seats for your people. You look at 
housing in the inner city and the North. And this is a fantastic 
budget. 
 
And finally in my final minute, I’ll basically thank some of the 
folks that have worked with us and continue to work because 
their work will be felt for many years. I thank the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone who has announced that he’s retiring. And 
such a strong human being, very strong, and this party and this 
province benefited from his work. The member from the Regina 
Rosemont who’s done a lot of work and is a champion fighter, 
she will be missed. And Mr. Speaker, I want to thank her for 
her incredible amount of work. As well the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place, there’s no question that some of the 
work in tax cuts and the red-hot economy . . . must be the most 
bored economic minister in the country because the economy’s 
so hot. I want to thank him for his service and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the legacy that all three of these individuals have 
left and something that we’re very proud of as a party. 
 
And I look across the way, there’s nothing there, there never 
was anything there, and there never will be anything there. And, 
Mr. Speaker, come next election — it’s going to come — I tell 
the people of Saskatchewan we’re confident. We’re working 
hard. We’re coming back, and come next election we are going 
to rock them. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was really good to hear the member’s voice from Athabasca. 
We haven’t heard that voice for awhile. We certainly haven’t 
heard it answering questions in question period with the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
And I noticed in his comments today, he has a short memory. 
He forgets that not that many years ago he sat on this side of the 
House and, along with everybody over here, criticized the same 
government he’s sitting with, the same government he’s in bed 
with today, in fact was even more boisterous on this side saying 
that everything that NDP government was doing was hurting 
the North. It’s really surprising how now he’s changed his tune 
when he’s sitting on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as I start I would like to take this opportunity 
to congratulate the new member for Martensville — by the way, 
one of the biggest hammerings the NDP has taken in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s so good to see her in here. 
We miss the former member very, very much, but it’s good to 
see her here, and it’s also good to see her join the member for 
Weyburn. Two young dynamic MLAs, both two by-election 
MLAs that have sent the NDP a very, very strong message: 
what’s to come in the province should they ever get the 
intestinal fortitude built up to call a provincial election. The 
Martensville numbers were astounding, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s why the Premier is already hinting there may be no 
election till the spring of 2008. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking about this budget, the first thing I think 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

that has to be said and re-said, as many of the members on this 
side have talked about, is the $701 million deficit. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s amazing that even the NDP — a government that can 
squander money at a rate faster than any government in this 
country or for that matter probably than any state in the US 
[United States] — can blow money at the speed they can. 
 
How at a time when revenues are higher than they’ve ever been 
in the province’s history — I believe the revenues right now are 
up to about 7.7 billion — how at the same time they can spend 
about 8.4 million in a budget except for the fact that they’re 
trying to buy votes for this election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the Ag budget. But I 
think I would be remiss if I didn’t make a few comments on the 
situation with the Canadian Wheat Board and some of the 
things that the Ag minister has actually been talking about in 
the last few days. And this is the survey or the vote that farmers 
had whether they wanted to keep the barley market under the 
wheat board’s realm or whether they wanted to do away with it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that this morning even 
Ken Ritter from the Canadian Wheat Board — chairman of the 
Canadian Wheat Board — says that these numbers are actually 
consistent with its annual findings, its annual surveys that they 
do. So I got looking at it a little closer in some of their surveys, 
Mr. Speaker. And the question that the Canadian Wheat Board 
has asked in the past number of years has been very much 
identical to what the federal government asked in the barley 
plebiscite that they just did. 
 
So for the Minister of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Minister 
of Agriculture, to be saying in the media that he thinks that he 
will sue the federal government, take them to court, because the 
system is flawed, well it’s the same question that the Canadian 
Wheat Board was asking and the numbers are very . . . 
[inaudible] . . . of what the Canadian Wheat Board has got over 
the last couple of years. 
 
I’ll just give you the Canadian Wheat Board numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, and these are from Saskatchewan. The people that 
voted to keep the barley in the wheat board, 32 per cent; dual 
marketing, 46 per cent; open marketing, 16 per cent. So the 
numbers vary a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But when you add them 
up and tally the total of the number of farmers that want to keep 
barley under the wheat board, it’s about 38 percent. When you 
look at the farmers that want it opened up, and this is what they 
voted was 62 per cent. 
 
So that’s a very clear message from the farmers of 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, saying to this government, 
who has spent taxpayers’ dollars from the province of 
Saskatchewan lobbying to keep it under the wheat board, the 
farmers have sent them a clear message. They’ve sent the 
federal government and Mr. Strahl a clear message — we do 
not want barley under the wheat board. 
 
They haven’t said take it away from the wheat board. They said 
we want our choice. If they keep the wheat . . . barley under the 
wheat board that’s fine with the majority of farmers, but we 
want our choice to market our grain as we see fit, when we 
want to market it, and for how much we want to market. And 
that’s what the whole issue comes down to, Mr. Speaker. 

And I believe down the road that the farmers will be talking 
about wheat in that same type of voice when they find out that 
barley, probably they will get a better return when they can 
market it themselves and not be locked in under the Canadian 
Wheat Board, which I might add, Mr. Speaker, we all know — 
as many of us as farmers in this province — that it’s not really a 
Canadian Wheat Board. It’s a western prairie province wheat 
board. Ontario and Quebec take no part in it, want no part of it, 
and want to market their own grain. And they’re doing very 
well at it. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, and especially in light of the Agriculture 
minister cutting the Ag budget about $67 million this year, that 
even he is optimistic about what’s going to happen with barley 
prices now that it won’t be under the wheat board, because he’s 
estimating that revenues from farm income will be up this year. 
Well probably part of that reason will be because farmers can 
market their own barley and the odds of getting a better price 
are far greater. Even the minister, I think, realizes that. 
Although you certainly won’t hear the minister saying that 
because he wants everything locked under the wheat board and 
keep walls up around Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers as I said before, there was 29,067 
farmers cast votes and of that, 15,327 were from Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan was very similar to the overall trend although the 
numbers were down a bit. I believe it was 45 per cent said they 
want to keep the wheat board in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think surprising to that minister — I’m sure 
surprising to that minister and very disappointing to that 
minister because this was certainly not what he was lobbying 
for — 55 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers said we want the 
choice to market our own grain, grown on our own land, inputs 
paid for by us. We want the right to do that and I think finally 
they’re going to get that right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I might add to that too, before I leave the 
wheat board plebiscite, that where the minister is saying that 
vote was flawed, he might take into consideration how the vote 
. . . the ballots were sent out. You could be a farmer in the 
province of Saskatchewan that had 100 acres of barley in last 
year or the last few years, or you could also be a very big 
farmer; we’re getting many of them in the province today. You 
could have 10,000 acres of barley. And, Mr. Speaker, each of 
those farmers got one vote. 
 
So I don’t know. I can’t even understand how that minister says 
this is flawed in favour of open marketing, when many of the 
big farmers that I talked to in this province want to market their 
own grain. Because number one, they have a great volume of 
barley in this case and they feel that they can get a better price 
for that barley if they have the option to market it on their own. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now with technology as it is, farmers can sit 
at home in their office or their kitchen table, and everyday they 
can check prices for every commodity — be that whether it’s 
barley, wheat, canola, whatever it is. And after barley is 
removed from the monopoly of the wheat board, the only thing 
left will be wheat that’s left that they can’t really go out and 
look for a price that they can receive for their product because 
they’re still locked under the wheat board. 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

And the minister, Mr. Speaker, has said in the past that the 
wheat board is doing such a great job for us. He has also said 
that when the monopoly is taken away from farmers, those 
farmers in Saskatchewan are going to lose $600 million. That’s 
an amazing quote, Mr. Speaker, because no one would know if 
we’re going to gain more, if we’re going to lose, because we’ve 
never been in a situation in this province for the last 60, 70 
years, where we’ve had the right to market our own products at 
a time we want to market them and for the price that we feel is 
the one we want to sell for. 
 
So those numbers that he’s using — and I’ve heard others use 
those numbers — are completely false because there’s nothing 
to compare it to. We will soon know though, Mr. Speaker, as 
farmers start this next fall. After August I believe Mr. Strahl 
said, changes will come. I believe farmers will see and really 
enjoy marketing their own grain for the best price they can 
receive. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if prices go up . . . And I think the minister 
thinks that’s going to happen because why else would he cut the 
agriculture budget in the province of Saskatchewan to the tune 
of $67 million? Mr. Speaker, he’s making those cuts to 
Saskatchewan agriculture budget by saying well last year we 
forecast $264 million for agriculture. Actually we put more in. 
This year we’re estimating 301 million. 
 
What he’s forgetting to tell farmers that Saskatchewan 
Agriculture, Sask Ag and Food last year spent $368 million on 
agriculture. Now that included money for the Northeast for 
flooding — $10 an acre, much appreciated by the farmers in the 
Northeast. But what do we hear on the radio this morning, Mr. 
Speaker? The flooding has started again. And yet in that 
minister and that NDP government’s budget there’s not one red 
cent in this budget allotted for flooding in the Northeast. 
Something that on this side we know is going to happen and 
something very definitely the farmers in the Northeast know 
that’s happening. In fact it’s starting to happen today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where on earth will that Ag minister and that 
government get the money to help those farmers out when this 
flooding really gets to the point where maybe . . . And we hope 
this doesn’t happen but it looks to me like it could happen again 
where thousands of acres cannot be seeded because they’ll be 
under water. Where will that government get the money? 
 
Mr. Speaker, remember that this is a government that’s just 
come out with a budget with $701 million deficit. They already 
have a deficit of $701 million, and should they have to put 
money in . . . And I believe they’re going to have to put money 
into disaster assistance like the Northeast, like the Southwest 
for drought. Mr. Speaker, actually $701 million is not the actual 
number. That number, if you add in what they’re going to have 
to put in for agriculture — we’re very sure they’re going to — 
the deficit will actually be bigger. 
 
In fact if you added the amount they spent last year on 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan they’d have to add 
another 67 million to that deficit. Now we’re up to almost $800 
million deficit in the province of Saskatchewan at a time when 
we have an oil and gas windfall money coming in. And this 
government, because there’s an election may be coming if the 
Premier screws up the courage to call one, we want to buy votes 

so let’s blow the bank. And that’s exactly what they’ve done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are the first ones to criticize the ’80s and criticize the past 
Devine government and guess what that government’s doing 
today, Mr. Speaker. They’re doing exactly what happened in 
the ’80s, in fact actually at a higher rate, a faster speed that 
they’re putting this province back into debt. I heard one of the 
members — I believe it was the member for Athabasca — 
talked about, talked about, Mr. Speaker, lowering the debt for 
Saskatchewan. Well when it comes to believing that Finance 
minister or believing the member for Athabasca, I will believe 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And you know what he says, Mr. Speaker? The Provincial 
Auditor last year said that the debt, the debt for Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I needed that 
break. Mr. Speaker, when we come to talk about the debt for 
Saskatchewan, before I will believe that Finance minister or the 
member for Athabasca who was talking about it, the Provincial 
Auditor last year said, I believe, the number was $12.1 billion 
debt in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s not the number 
they’re telling anybody. In fact in this budget they’re spinning 
that they’re paying the debt down. 
 
If they’re paying the debt down and have been paying the debt 
down, why in 1991 was the debt about 12.1 billion, and the 
auditor, the Provincial Auditor says that’s what the debt was 
last year? That debt has gone down by nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
And if you add in 700 million more that they’re taking now, 
some out of the rainy day fund, but as that rate of spending 
continues into the next few years, Mr. Speaker, the next 
government in this province is going to have to start cleaning up 
the mess that these people are making, that Finance minister’s 
making, and that Premier is making in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a big job to do on this side of the 
House, and we’re preparing for that job. And I just wish the 
government would call the election before they create any more 
misery in the province, dig us into a bigger hole than we’re 
already in, and we have to do even more than we know we do 
now to clean up the mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about our municipalities. 
And I was up at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 
come up there and the Minister for Government Relations come 
up there, just beaming, Mr. Speaker. And they were announcing 
$10 million for RMs. 
 
And I thought, you know, I was standing at the back of the hall, 
Mr. Speaker, and I thought now this is really going to be a 
positive announcement for the ratepayers, the councillors, the 
reeves from every RM in the province were in the room. The 
hall was packed because they have a lot of concerns with what’s 
happening in the province. 
 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

And do you know, Mr. Speaker, when they made that 
announcement, there was really just a cordial hand for the 
Premier and the Government Relations minister. But they were 
not as enthused as the government had hoped they would be. 
And do you know why that is, Mr. Speaker? Because for the 
last 15, 16 years, this government has been downloading on 
municipalities. 
 
I remember back. I was a reeve and a councillor in an RM in the 
early ’90s when this government helped balance the books on 
the back of municipalities. And that money that they have taken 
away on municipalities in the ’90s has never been returned to 
the extent that it should be. 
 
If you add inflation into the numbers, they should be receiving a 
far higher number of dollars to keep the municipal 
infrastructure up. The same infrastructure that the Premier’s 
talking about when he made his highways announcement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, RMs [rural municipality] out there, us as 
local taxpayers out there with municipal taxes to pay every 
year, have had to carry the load for infrastructure out there and 
try and help keep Saskatchewan from . . . rural Saskatchewan 
from dying out there with very little help from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we would like to see on this side of the 
House is a formula for revenue-sharing for municipalities. And 
we’ve been saying this for a number of years. We would like to 
see a revenue-sharing formula that’s tied to the income for the 
province of Saskatchewan so that when the revenues are up like 
they are now, municipalities would have that benefit — whether 
you’re a city, a town, or RM. And when they go down, the 
revenue-sharing would go accordingly. From what I hear from 
reeves and councillors and mayors and aldermen, at least then 
they would be able to plan over long-term and know exactly 
where they stand and be able to provide the infrastructure that 
they have to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we get to be government — whether 
it’s this spring, this fall, next spring — we will certainly be 
working with municipalities and again towns, villages, cities, 
RMs, everybody out there to grow the economy. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, we know when we get to be government, this province 
is actually really going to start to grow. And we have to provide 
the infrastructure dollars for that increased volume of traffic and 
people and businesses that are going to come to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the Ag budget is cut for this year 
in this budget and I find that amazing. But I guess the question 
then to the minister is: what programs will not be funded by the 
NDP government this year that they funded last year? Mr. 
Speaker, as we know, the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program was not fully funded to start with last 
year and they had to put it in. So I guess it’s either run a $67 
million deficit on top of what they already have or funding cuts 
to programs out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about education tax on property 
and especially when it comes to farm land. But really when you 
look at the education tax, Mr. Speaker, all across this province 
— whether you’re a young family trying to buy your home, first 
home — the education tax on properties is a big expense. I also 

get calls from seniors out there, Mr. Speaker, where possibly 
one of the husband or the wife has passed away and the widow 
is trying to stay in her own home, but when it comes to the 
education tax part, she cannot afford to stay in her own home. I 
go back to young families out there, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
biggest handicaps to owning their own home is the cost of 
education tax. And it can be in the city of Regina. It can be any 
one of our towns out there. 
 
Or it can be on the farm out there. Because a farm out there 
right now, Mr. Speaker, if they have 10 quarters of land, five, 
five fifty a quarter just in education tax, are looking at a bill of 
probably 5,500, $6,000 in education tax. And at a time when 
we’ve gone through in agriculture . . . Times haven’t been all 
that great. That’s a big expense for many out there in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So we would like to see that 
addressed and not, Mr. Speaker, as the government has done. 
 
We’ll have . . . I think four years ago they had $25 million a 
year for two years, then a year ago they put in $55 million. But 
people out there that are paying taxes have no idea where 
they’re going with this. They do with education tax; they deal 
with education tax, the NDP do, as they do with everything 
else. Let’s fly by the seat of our pants. Let’s deal with it for one 
year and then, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see what happens down the 
road. 
 
Actually what we’re seeing this year in many areas — not just 
with education tax but many others — it looks to me like 
they’re dealing with the problems they have today with no 
vision what’s to come down the road. And we hope to get by 
the next election and then you know what we’ll do, Mr. 
Speaker? As they’ve done in the past, I believe it was the last 
election where they said no new taxes. And then as soon as they 
got elected they raised taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’re going to see the same thing happen 
again, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on here for 
hours. I have a lot more to say and I’m sure the members 
opposite would like me to go on but I’d like to let some of my 
colleagues take part in the debate. So thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
for the opportunity to speak my support. And I support the 
amendment, and I will not be supporting the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place, the Minister for Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise and participate in the budget debate. 
And I’d like to thank my constituents in Saskatoon Massey 
Place for providing me with the opportunity to do so. And I’d 
also like to say how much I consider it to be a privilege and an 
honour to serve them in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have announced of course that I’m not seeking re-election in 
the next election after four terms here. And I certainly have 
enjoyed my time here and I have found it to be most rewarding. 
And mainly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve found the opportunity to serve 
the public and to devote part of my life to public service to be 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

very rewarding and I certainly encourage others to do so. 
 
I’d like to thank my wife, Pauline, and my family for all the 
support I’ve had over the years doing this job. I’d like to thank 
my constituency assistants, Treena Dobson, Donna Rederburg, 
and Lynda MacPherson, who have done such a good job for me 
helping me in my constituency. Certainly my supporters and the 
members of the New Democratic Party in Massey Place. I also 
am very thankful to the staff of this Legislative Building, Mr. 
Speaker, and also my ministerial staff who have served me very 
well, and also the public service with whom I’ve had a good 
relationship and certainly enjoyed working over the years. 
 
[12:00] 
 
I also would like to say that I’ve enjoyed meeting so many 
colleagues on both sides of the House. Even though we have a 
lot of debates, Mr. Speaker, and have differences of opinion, I 
do have many friends on both sides of the House and I certainly 
will miss them as I move on to other challenges. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to concentrate my remarks today on the 
question of equalization and the response of the federal 
government to the equalization question and the request by the 
province of Saskatchewan through our Premier and other 
ministers, like the Minister of Finance, the Minister of 
Government Relations, that the Prime Minister keep his 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan and the promise that 
was made to the people of Saskatchewan by the 12 
Conservative members of parliament that were elected from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am just a very simple 
prairie lawyer and I don’t always understand all the nuances of 
the arrangements between the Saskatchewan Party and the 
Conservatives, and the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime 
Minister, and so on. It all gets a bit confusing for me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know that there may be things that I don’t know about and 
maybe the Leader of the Opposition could help me. And the 
Saskatchewan Party, who support the Conservative members of 
parliament we have, could help me understand. Because I think 
the Leader of the Opposition is a good friend of Prime Minister 
Harper, who is a good friend of the Premier of Ontario, Dalton 
McGuinty. And I think he’s a good friend of Jean Charest, the 
Premier of Quebec — and I’m going to have more to say about 
that, Mr. Speaker — and then of course Mario Dumont in 
Quebec who’s like-minded conservatively. And so I think, you 
know, the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister and 
the Premier of Ontario and Jean Charest and Mario Dumont, 
they have an understanding of things that I may not understand, 
Mr. Speaker, and maybe they could probably help me. 
 
I mean, the question I would want to put to them is fairly simple 
and I’ll elaborate why I would ask that question and that is . . . 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is: why is Saskatchewan so different 
from other provinces in the eyes of the Conservative 
government, Mr. Speaker? Why are we so different? And, you 
know, we could start with, we could start with reference to the 
province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one thing that people may not know, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when Alberta became a have province — like Saskatchewan is 
— because of oil revenue, the federal government allowed the 
province of Alberta to keep its revenues from natural resources 
for seven years so that they could build up their economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m going to repeat that because the members of the opposition 
— even though they say they support our government and the 
people of Saskatchewan on the equalization question — they 
continue to yell and heckle me as I try to hold Ottawa and the 
Conservatives to account. And I think that’s telling, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m going to repeat. Alberta was given seven years 
to keep their revenue from natural resources as they were 
becoming a have province. Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is not 
given the same deal. 
 
And my question is, why? Why is there one rule for Alberta and 
another rule for Saskatchewan? And why does the Conservative 
government and the Conservative Party and the 12 members 
that represent us in Ottawa that are Conservatives, why do they 
treat Saskatchewan differently than Alberta? Why is that? 
 
Now I want to say a few words about Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
Manitoba, which is a similar province to Saskatchewan, will 
this year and every year — and I have nothing against the 
people of Alberta or Manitoba — but they will receive from 
Ottawa in equalization, Mr. Speaker, close to $2 billion a year. 
Two billion dollars a year, Mr. Speaker. And what will 
Saskatchewan receive? Next year, Mr. Speaker, zero. 
 
People should know this, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba, 2 billion. 
Same economy, same population basically. Saskatchewan, zero. 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons is Manitoba has a 
renewable resource which we know is hydroelectric power that 
they make a lot of money from. That is not counted as income 
to Manitoba. Yet in Saskatchewan where we have 
non-renewable resources like oil and gas, uranium, potash, 
those are counted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one rule for Manitoba: you don’t count their revenues. 
Another rule for Saskatchewan. Now why a different rule? And 
why, Mr. Speaker, does the Conservative government in Ottawa 
— with the support of the Saskatchewan Party and their 
Conservative friends — have one rule for Manitoba and a 
different rule for Saskatchewan? The question again is, why is 
Saskatchewan treated differently by the Conservatives? Why is 
that? 
 
Now we move on, moving east to the province of Ontario, Mr. 
Speaker. And here, here, Mr. Speaker, what do the 
Conservatives tell us in their budget? This is what they tell us. 
They said we cannot have the deal we promised for the people 
of Saskatchewan because it would make them better off than 
people in Ontario. I’m going to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, 
because it’s almost unbelievable. The federal government said, 
in their response and their denial of their promise on 
equalization, the people of Saskatchewan could not have a new 
deal on equalization because they might become better off than 
people in Ontario. 
 
Now why, Mr. Speaker, is there one rule for Ontario people and 
another rule for Saskatchewan people, just like we see in 
Alberta, just like we see in Manitoba? 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, in the eyes of the Conservative 
Party, Saskatchewan is treated differently and not equally with 
other parts of the country. And that’s a serious issue. And the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are going to have to 
seriously examine whether they want to keep traipsing to the 
polls and loyally electing Conservatives to Ottawa who, when 
they get there, turn their backs on the people of Saskatchewan. 
That is a question that has to be asked — and notwithstanding 
the protestations of the Saskatchewan Party over there, Mr. 
Speaker, that somehow they’re not supporting the 
Conservatives in Ottawa. There isn’t a thinking person in this 
province that doesn’t know that they support the Conservative 
government in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. There isn’t a thinking 
person that doesn’t know that. 
 
Now we move on, moving west to the province of Quebec. We 
all . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s east, Eric. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — East. East. That’s right. The member from 
the opposition points out that it’s east. It depends which way 
you’re going around the world, Mr. Speaker. But the closest 
way is east. 
 
Now we saw that Alberta had a seven-year holiday from 
counting their royalty revenues. What holiday did 
Saskatchewan get? Zero years. We saw, Mr. Speaker, that 
Manitoba gets exclusion of some of their revenues and they get 
$2 billion. What do we get, Mr. Speaker? Zero. We saw the 
Conservatives say that the people of Saskatchewan could never 
be allowed to be better off than the people of Ontario. So from 
their point of view, next year we get zero. 
 
Now moving east into Quebec. You know, I’m looking at an 
article from the Edmonton Sun, dated Sunday, March 25 — that 
was just the day before the Quebec election. And Greg Weston 
is writing there on national affairs. And he says this, Mr. 
Speaker, he says: 
 

Stephen Harper’s clever attempt to cook up a federalist 
victory in tomorrow’s Quebec election . . . 
 

And note his words: 
 

. . . with gluttonous servings of political pork . . . 
 

Gluttonous servings of political pork to whom, Mr. Speaker? To 
the people of the province of Quebec through Jean Charest, 
because that is what the Conservatives see as in their political 
interests. They are trying to get more seats in Quebec and 
Ontario and everybody knows that. And if they have to forget 
about Saskatchewan, notwithstanding our 12 Conservative 
MPs, they’re prepared to do so. 
 
Now unfortunately, from the Conservatives’ point of view, their 
attempt to buy the Quebec election did not work — although 
they have two allies, Jean Charest and Mario Dumont, leading 
large contingents in the Quebec National Assembly. But, Mr. 
Speaker, what is clear about this is, just as the Conservatives 
turned their backs on Saskatchewan people, contrary to what 
they did in Alberta, contrary to what they did in Manitoba, 
contrary to what they’re doing in Ontario — which was a big 

winner in the budget also — Quebec was a big winner too. 
Because while they were catering to Central Canada and trying 
to get the votes and the seats in Central Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
they turned their backs on the people of this province. That is 
what they have done. 
 
And the member from Wood River says, am I going to get to 
this budget.? Mr. Speaker, there is nothing more relevant to this 
budget and the people of Saskatchewan than the taking away of 
$800 million by Ottawa and putting that money in the province 
of Quebec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is nothing more relevant to this 
budget than that question. And what I find most amusing here, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the member from Wood River and other 
members are yelling from their seats because they’re upset that 
I am pointing out what the Conservatives in Ottawa are doing. 
And they don’t want to have it discussed because they are 
complicit. Because who put the Conservatives in power in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker? They did. And they don’t want to be held 
to account for the fact that our 12 Conservative members of 
parliament have turned their backs on the people of 
Saskatchewan, people that they elected, Mr. Speaker. So they 
don’t want me to talk about it but I’m going to talk about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And so Mr. Weston points out that Quebec, 
which has 25 per cent of the population of this country, before 
the Conservative budget, Mr. Speaker . . . after the Liberals they 
had 49 per cent of the federal transfer payments for 
equalization. Now they have 56 per cent. And do you know 
where that other 7 per cent came from, Mr. Speaker? It came 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that’s where it came from. And if 
anybody doesn’t want to believe that, Mr. Speaker, let me quote 
the Prime Minister before he was elected prime minister, and 
this is what he had to say. He said, and I’m quoting, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The Prime Minister [he was referring to Paul Martin then] 
is also failing Saskatchewan on equalization. The 
government promised to reform the equalization program 
in 2004 . . . The government now says it will not get to 
that until at least 2006 [well we’re past that], costing 
Saskatchewan over $750 million in lost revenue. 
 
When will the Prime Minister overrule his finance 
minister and make the changes necessary, so 
Saskatchewan does not lose this money? 

 
He said before the election. Now others said, and this is 
interesting because the MP from Regina, Tom Lukiwski, has a 
letter in the Leader-Post today where he talks about how 
Saskatchewan shouldn’t be complaining because we didn’t get 
our equalization money. 
 
This is what he said before the election. On January 12, 2006 he 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

said, Mr. Speaker, and I’m quoting: 
 

We would withdraw the non-renewable natural resources 
from the equalization formula, thus allowing the province 
[Saskatchewan] to retain 100 per cent of its oil and gas 
revenues. And that would also trigger equalization 
payments. The end result would be simply this, under our 
formula, [he says] once we change it, it would mean an 
additional 2 to $2.5-billion in revenue for the province. A 
Conservative government is committed to that change. 
And a Conservative government will make the proper 
changes. 
 

That’s what he said before the election. And I could go on, Mr. 
Speaker, with quotes from Brad Trost, who’s now a 
Conservative MP; Dave Batters, who’s now a Conservative 
MP; and Carol Skelton, our cabinet minister in the federal 
government whose name the Prime Minister did not know and 
could not remember when he made his agriculture 
announcement in Saskatoon. That’s how much influence 
Conservative MPs have in Ottawa on the Conservative Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then what did Carol Skelton say? She said this. She said 
this before the election: we want a fair . . . 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. This business of 
shouting out and trying to shout down the person who is in the 
chair is patently unfair, and I ask members to restrain their 
heckling so that the member who is on his chair can be heard. 
The Chair recognizes . . . Order. The Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, they are yelling 
from their seats because they do not want this to be heard. They 
do not want the people of this province, over 40 per cent of 
whom they convinced to support the Conservatives in the last 
federal election, to hear the truth. And the truth is, Mr. Speaker, 
that we were sold a bill of goods. We were given a promise by 
the Prime Minister. We were given a promise by each one of 
those 12 Conservative MPs that they were going to honour our 
request for a fair equalization deal. And now they have betrayed 
the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. And I am not going to 
be shouted down in this House when I point that out, regardless 
of how much they yell, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We were not sent by the people of this 
province to this legislature to go cap in hand to Ottawa or to get 
down on our knees to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. We were sent here 
to stand up for the people of this province, and that is what we 
are going to continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I have heard the members opposite 
suggest in this House, and everyone else has too, that the reason 
they’re breaking their promise to us is — there are a variety of 
ways they put it — but basically that we are not as nice to 
Stephen Harper as we should be. That’s what they say. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a nation. It is a nation in a federal 
system, with a government in Ottawa and provinces, that should 
be based upon principles — not personalities, Mr. Speaker. And 
if they are right that the reason that the Conservatives had 
broken their promise to the people of Saskatchewan is because 
somehow somebody personally offended the Prime Minister, if 
that was true, Mr. Speaker, that would mean that the Prime 
Minister was a bully. That’s what it would mean. Because you 
cannot operate a country on the basis of your personal or 
political preferences about the political party in office in a 
particular province. That is not how a country operates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Newfoundland and Labrador, referring to the broken promises 
of the Conservative Party and the Prime Minister, asks this 
question. They say, “Is this what Canada stands for now?” By 
which they mean that you can’t take the word of the Prime 
Minister. You cannot take the word of members of parliament. 
He’s saying, “Is this what Canada stands for now?” 
 
But I would add this for the benefit of those members who just 
two days ago in this House were telling me that we would get 
our money if we would be nicer to Stephen Harper. And I said, 
no. We have to stand up as proud Saskatchewan people, stand 
up for our province, not get down on our knees to Stephen 
Harper. But I want to say this. If they were right, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Prime Minister was just a bully, if that was correct, we 
also would be asking the question, is this what Canada stands 
for now? And I don’t think it is. I don’t think it is. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I had pointed out how we are 
treated differently than Alberta, differently than Manitoba, 
differently than Ontario, differently than Quebec. And finally I 
want to refer to Newfoundland and Labrador, and Nova Scotia. 
And they’re yelling from their seats trying to drown me out 
again, Mr. Speaker, and I want the people to know that. And we 
are not going to be silenced by any bullies in Ottawa or in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say that a deal was made with 
Newfoundland and Labrador, Mr. Speaker, and Nova Scotia, 
that they could keep, they could keep their revenue from their 
non-renewable natural resources, specifically oil and gas — the 
same deal that Alberta had. Now the Prime Minister said he was 
going to improve on that deal, and he has broken his promise to 
them. 
 
But my question today, Mr. Speaker, is simply this: why is 
there one deal and one rule for Newfoundland and Labrador and 
one deal and one rule for Nova Scotia and another deal for 
Saskatchewan? Why is Saskatchewan different in the eyes of 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker? Is it really, Mr. Speaker, as the 
opposition suggests, because we have a democratically elected 
New Democrat government, and the Prime Minister doesn’t like 
that because we’re not the same party? If that was true, Mr. 
Speaker, then it’s a very sad day for Canada. 
 
And I just want to point out again, because now they’re yelling 
again, Mr. Speaker, that they like to say they support the people 
of Saskatchewan in their effort to have a fair deal from Ottawa. 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

That’s what they like to say. But on the one hand when you 
point out what is actually going on under the Conservatives in 
Ottawa, they want to shout you down and drown you out so that 
the people will not know the truth about what the Conservatives 
are doing there and how the 12 Conservative MPs that we 
elected, with their encouragement, have turned their backs on 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will say this in closing, Mr. Speaker. They can say 
whatever they want. They can yell as loud as they want. But as 
long as I stand in this House and as long as people on this side 
of the House stand in this House, we are going to continue to 
stand up for the ordinary people and the families of this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, the day will come when this dark 
era in Canadian history will end. And that party and its 
philosophy will be rejected federally and provincially, and we 
will once again have a fair, just federal system in this country. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure this afternoon in the last hour of sitting 
on this Thursday that I have the opportunity to put on record 
some comments about the budget that was presented a short 
week ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin my remarks relevant to the budget, 
I do want to indicate that every time that, you know, we rise in 
the Assembly to give a budget address or a Throne Speech 
address and we look back over the course of the last year, a lot 
changes, a lot changes, Mr. Speaker. And this year is no 
exception, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note that as we look around the Assembly today, there are two 
members that are not present today: one on our side, the 
member for Kindersley; and one on the government side, the 
member for Yorkton — both incurring some difficult times in 
their lives. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my personal best 
wishes to both of them so that they can, you know, proceed 
with what they want to do after the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I know my colleague in Yorkton. I’ve known him for probably 
35 years. And I want to wish him all the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I also note, as indicated by 
some of the members in their responses to the budget address, 
that a number will not be seeking re-election on both sides of 
the House. And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that I’ve really 
appreciated this place and working with all individuals. It’s a 
situation where we have different philosophies, whether we’re 
on the opposition side or the government side, but the end result 
is we’re here to work for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to extend, on behalf of the official opposition and 
myself, the best wishes to: the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton, the member of Saskatoon Massey Place, member of 
Saskatoon Greystone, the member for Regina Rosemont, the 

member for Kindersley, the member for Lloydminster, the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose, and the member for Carrot River 
Valley. These individuals have all indicated that they’re not 
seeking re-election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know when the next election will 
be called — that’s up to the Premier — and between now and 
then, there may be others who choose that they do not seek 
re-election. So I want to wish them well as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s much to do outside of this 
Assembly. Life is too short. And I believe very sincerely that 
people who give much of their lives to the people of 
Saskatchewan, who give their time, give their effort, should be 
recognized. And again, I extend my best wishes to those 
individuals who are not seeking re-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this June 2007, June 21 as it is 
for myself and a few other people in this Assembly, this will be 
the 12th year of being the Member of the Legislative Assembly 
for the Canora-Pelly constituency. Mr. Speaker, as my 
colleague from Cannington says, yes that seems like a long time 
ago and maybe we were young pups when we were elected 12 
years ago. But much has occurred in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency that I do want to extend my heartfelt thanks to all 
of the people for their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am served so capably in my office by my 
constituency assistant, Bob Blahay, who is my full-time 
assistant. And I have the capable help of Renee Parsons who 
also works on a part-time basis. And of course we also have 
another individual when we need additional help due to illness 
or other circumstances that come about, holidays. I also call on 
the services of Carol Sleeva to help in the office as well. Those 
three individuals understand rural Saskatchewan. They 
understand Canora-Pelly, and they understand the concerns of 
many, and they solve a lot of problems that are brought in to my 
office, as individuals come in and seek help. So I want to 
extend my thanks to those members as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not mention the addition 
of two new members in this Legislative Assembly, and in this 
instance both happen to be on the opposition side. Last June we 
were very fortunate to elect a very capable young man from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who has shown maturity as he’s moved 
along, and he’s a tremendous asset to our caucus. And, Mr. 
Speaker, of course this spring in March, just before we began 
our session, there was a by-election in the constituency of 
Martensville. Mr. Speaker, we truly miss, we truly miss our 
colleague from Martensville but, Mr. Speaker, we have just a 
fine young lady representing Martensville now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about 
Canora-Pelly constituency in terms of the constituency that we 
find today in 2006 and the constituency demographics of 2001 
because, Mr. Speaker, they’re startling numbers. My colleague 
from Biggar noted yesterday some of the situations in his 
constituency. And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
constituency of Canora-Pelly there are six towns, and there are 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

a number of villages and a number of RMs, probably the same 
kind of demographics that we see in most rural constituencies. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the StatsCan numbers that came out that 
showed the census numbers in the constituency of 
Canora-Pelly, the total amount of population loss for towns was 
663 people, 9.6 per cent down. The total population for villages 
in the Canora-Pelly constituency dropped by 154, 11.1 per cent. 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at those totals, the overall 
totals, we have dropped from around 8,300 people to 7,500 
people, a loss of 817 people just in the urban communities. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the RM loss is also very significant, the RM 
loss across this entire province. If you look at those numbers, 
the populations in RMs has dropped by nearly 13,000 across 
those 298 RMs, I believe . . . 297 I think might be the number. 
But that’s the total number that is declined across this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about a province that needs a 
growth agenda . . . And we campaigned on this back a number 
of years ago where we said there should be no reason why the 
province of Saskatchewan should not be able to grow at at least 
the rate of Canada. And that rate, Mr. Speaker, is 1 per cent; 1 
per cent growth rate is the average across Canada. And 1 per 
cent for the province of Saskatchewan, just under 1 million 
people, that means we’d growing by at least 10,000 people. 
That’s not reality, Mr. Speaker. In fact the numbers that are 
indicated as my colleagues, many of my colleagues have 
pointed out, the total population of Saskatchewan has dropped 
by nearly 11,000 people from 2001 to 2006. 
 
But more startling, Mr. Speaker, more startling when we take a 
look at what has happened in rural Saskatchewan, in rural 
Saskatchewan the population has dropped by nearly 20,000 
individuals, while in the urban part of Saskatchewan in fact — 
as designated by this census — urban Saskatchewan has grown 
by about 9,000. So the result is, Mr. Speaker, that twice the loss 
of people is occurring in rural Saskatchewan than it is in all of 
Saskatchewan on the whole because it’s being balanced off by 
the urban growth. 
 
Now we’re seeing a little bit of growth in some of the urban 
communities like Saskatoon and Regina, but when we take a 
look at rural Saskatchewan . . . And Mr. Speaker we’ve had a 
number of discussions about health care, about schools, about 
the growth of rural Saskatchewan. But when you’re losing 
20,000 people in a short five years, 2006 based on 2001, and 
you see that kind of loss, there are many ramifications, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There will be situations where schools are going to be losing 
significant numbers of students. Mr. Speaker, on the whole in 
the province of Saskatchewan, the decline year-to-year of the K 
to 12 numbers, those students in kindergarten to grade 12 in the 
province of Saskatchewan, still continues to drop between 
3,000 and 3,500 students per year. Now those are staggering 
numbers because, I mean, when you talk to teachers . . . And 
teachers understand that of course pupil/teacher ratios are 
important. That’s what boards of education look at as they plan 
to deliver a program. And as you lose students, it becomes more 
and more difficult to deliver program. And that’s what’s 
occurring in the province of Saskatchewan. But this government 

does not understand that. 
 
We’ve been talking about a growth agenda ever since the 
Saskatchewan Party was formed. And we need to have a growth 
agenda because clearly the development of Saskatchewan is 
dependent upon the North. It’s dependent upon the rural 
Saskatchewan, and it is dependent upon urban Saskatchewan. 
And we’re not getting that kind of growth plan from this 
government. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, we sure don’t see that 
kind of plan in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a bit of time talking about how 
this budget in fact was delivered. There’s no other way to 
describe this budget as, first of all, leaky and, secondly, a deficit 
budget. Those are the two words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest last fall when this session 
began under new guidelines now where the Throne Speech is 
delivered in the fall. And we listened to a Throne Speech 
talking about the Premier’s vision. And it wasn’t more than four 
or five days later when the Minister of Finance suddenly said, 
well you know, we’ve come up with a really great idea. We’re 
going to reduce the provincial sales tax. Not a mention in the 
Throne Speech as far as a vision, as far as a plan, as far as a 
direction that would put Saskatchewan in the situation where 
investors, potential people that are going to return to this 
province, can say, this government has a plan. They’ve got this 
going and this going. 
 
We saw a rushed plan that suddenly said, well now we have to 
look at PST. We looked at PST because, yes — as my colleague 
has indicated — we had an earth shattering experience in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. We recognized that we as a government 
in the heart of Tommy Douglas country have finished third — 
third, Mr. Speaker. So as a result, all of a sudden there had to be 
some additional information put forward. And that was the 2 
per cent cut to the PST. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this budget has been released many times over 
since last fall. We’ve seen announcements of highways last fall. 
We saw announcements throughout the winter in Saskatoon and 
in Regina. There was a buildings initiative, a program. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to make a comment on that buildings 
program. 
 
Many organizations have contacted me and they’ve looked at 
that building program, community buildings program, and they 
note that the minimum project is $1 million. If you don’t have a 
project bigger than $1 million, don’t come to the community 
buildings program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just indicated to you what is really 
occurring in rural Saskatchewan, in my constituency in 
Canora-Pelly, how difficult will it be for those communities to 
maybe do a renovation to an arena or a curling rink or some 
other public facility that needs $500,000 to do an upgrade. But 
that $500,000 isn’t eligible to be even applied for under the 
communities grant program. One million dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
and there are a lot of communities now that are just starting to 
understand that, that in fact their projects who they . . . Initially 
they thought they would qualify. They don’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about health care. Health 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

care is a very, very important issue in my constituency, and I’ve 
raised the concerns about the facilities in Canora-Pelly. There 
are three hospitals in Kamsack, Preeceville, and Canora — and 
they’re on bypass more than once, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
indicate to you that, you know, in 2004 there’s an article here in 
the Canora Courier that says, “Canora without resident doctor 
for two days.” This is May 5, 2004. This one’s October 13, 
2006, Kamsack: the town of Kamsack will now be forced to 
restrict hours for some services. There’s another article that is 
on November 16: Preeceville hospital on emergency bypass. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I was quite disappointed to 
receive a public service announcement this morning. It stated, 
Wednesday, March 28, 2007, for immediate release from the 
Sunrise Health Region and it says this: 
 

Preeceville and Kamsack hospitals to go on reduced 
services . . . due to a lack of physician availability there 
will be no emergency or outpatient services at: The 
Preeceville Hospital from 2 p.m. through 10 p.m. on 
March 29 . . . [and at] The Kamsack Hospital from 5 p.m. 
on March 29 . . . through 8 a.m. on March 30. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I said in this Assembly a number of 
months ago — I said sort of I think tongue-in-cheek — that 
there should be a hospital hotline just like we have a highways 
hotline because people need to know when their facility is 
opened. I have examples of people who have written me at 
different times when the facilities in Preeceville or Kamsack 
were on bypass, and people who incurred a very serious injury 
— a young boy had a very seriously broken arm — could not 
get that attention because the hospital was on bypass. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because of the lack of physicians. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I raised that in an article in the Yorkton 
paper. I raised the fact that the three facilities were under 
closure numerous times. And the heading in the paper at that 
time when I gave my release, it said, “Government ignoring 
hospital closures: Sask Party.” That was the heading. Well you 
know, the response was by the Health minister, and the heading 
on the article in response was “Zero equalization may limit 
money for physicians.” So says the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this article, the Minister of Health clearly said 
that there are seven locums . . . And everyone I think in the 
province, I know on this side of the House, understands what 
the term locum means. Seven locums. These are physicians that 
travel around the province; that these seven locums should be 
able to keep all of our hospitals operating when a doctor wants 
to take a break. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 
different hospitals have had bypass in the last while, but there’s 
been a number. I think we were up around 12 or 14 hospitals in 
various parts. And the Minister of Health, says, well the locums 
can take care of that. That’s not the fault of the system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is the fault of the system. Clearly 
we know that there is a need for additional trained doctors in 
this province. And we have been asking for that. The college 
has been asking for that. I believe that their request was that we 
should be increasing the current 60 seats to as high as . . . by at 
least 20 to go up to 80 seats. And what did the budget say, Mr. 
Speaker? The budget said four — four seats, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was also in attendance at a response that 
was entitled the ethical recruitment of foreign-trained doctors. 
And there was some concern being expressed as to how Canada 
as a nation is recruiting doctors that are foreign trained, whether 
they be South African or from England or Scotland or Wales. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if indeed rural Saskatchewan, which relies on 
foreign-trained doctors to the tune of about 80 per cent . . . And 
we don’t have locally trained doctors because even if we had 
those four spots this fall, we’re not going to see those doctors as 
physicians ready to go into Preeceville Hospital, we’re not 
going to see that until seven years from now. Mr. Speaker, we 
are in dire straits in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Preeceville is very excited for 
the fact that after having their Preeceville project announced 
and reannounced and reannounced I believe seven times, that 
finally there is hope that the Preeceville project is moving 
forward. You know, and I have to be very optimistic, as is the 
administrator of the town of Preeceville who says, right now 
we’re facing a doctor shortage. We understand that. But maybe 
a brand new facility will do that, will encourage doctors. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the cost now after seven years of 
reannouncement after reannouncement is now going to be $10.4 
million. Initially it was announced at about a $4.5 million 
project. So as a result the community is responsible for 35 per 
cent. Now the community was very, very hopeful, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government would recognize that it’s difficult, 
extremely difficult for small communities to come up with 35 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, of a project as large as 10 million, $10.4 
million. But that didn’t happen. 
 
This budget has again said to rural Saskatchewan, sorry. While 
Regina and Saskatoon get dealt with differently, in rural 
Saskatchewan we’re going to wait seven years. We’re going to 
make sure that the costs are up much higher. And now we’re 
going to tell you, you still have to put in your share. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not acceptable. That’s not acceptable because 
it’s not a vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a deficit budget. There’s no question about 
it. It doesn’t matter whether you turn to the summary of debt 
pages or whether you rely on the auditor’s report. When 
expenditures exceed revenue, by all people in the industry — 
whether they be chartered accountants, whether they be the 
Provincial Auditor — you are in a negative position and that 
means that you are in a deficit position. And that is exactly 
where this budget is; it is a deficit. And the people of 
Saskatchewan understand that, Mr. Speaker. They understand 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget but I will be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

rise in the House today and speak in favour of this NDP budget. 
Before I begin my remarks I’d like to extend my sincere 
appreciation to the constituents of Regina Walsh Acres who’ve 
entrusted me with representing their concerns. 
 
I would also like to thank the exceptional work of my 
constituency assistant, Sharon Lindgren, not to mention the 
wonderful support she provides to me personally. I would also 
like to list the NDP caucus staff — Jim Fodey, Gail Fehr, Gina 
Mitchell, James Burton, Tim McCashin, Steven Lloyd, Heath 
Smith, Margaret Hermann, and Val Stevenson — and thank 
them for the tremendous support that they provide to all of us. 
We have two other support people in my constituency office 
who provide support services for the community office, Sherry 
Morin and Lynn Woods-Nordin, and I would like to thank them 
for their capable assistance as well. I would also like to extend 
my sincere concerns and heartfelt wishes to the member from 
Kindersley and also the member from Yorkton and their 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget is a variety of things for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Not only does this continue to build 
upon initiatives that this government has established in the past 
but it also establishes new programs. This budget helps to turn 
new, progressive ideas — ideas that this legislature can only see 
from an NDP government — into a reality. Mr. Speaker, we 
have addressed a number of issues in order to make 
Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to live. I’d like to focus 
my remarks today on three major areas that the 2007 budget 
addresses. 
 
The first of these, Mr. Speaker, is a green and prosperous 
economy. We have this year continued in an NDP tradition of 
environmental responsibility. This government believes, unlike 
the myopic members across the way, that Saskatchewan cannot 
have social progress without economic progress, but also that 
Saskatchewan must not have economic progress without social 
progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Sask Party governing is simple. You simply 
abdicate any social responsibility and hire a group of smart 
people to run the province. This NDP government has a 
different vision, a vision of continued environmental progress 
complementing a strong economy. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan we are enjoying one of the hottest economies in 
Canada. The numbers speak for themselves unless of course 
you are a member of the Sask Party. As the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs has said, their entire purpose is simply 
to oppose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s job numbers have continued to 
sizzle for months. This past February was the best ever for 
employment. We also enjoyed the lowest unemployment rate on 
record for that month. Statistics Canada figures show that 
492,500 people were working in the province last month. That’s 
up over 20,600 people for the figure of February 2006, and 
beats the old record for February set two years ago by 16,200. It 
doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. February was the 11th 
consecutive month of record job numbers for Saskatchewan. 
Full-time jobs in Saskatchewan were up 15,700 over last 
February. Youth employment increased by 10,100 over 
February 2006, and Saskatchewan’s youth unemployment rate 
was the third lowest in the country. 

Mr. Speaker, jobs were up last month in construction, services, 
the oil, gas, and mining industries, trade and finance, and 
insurance and real estate. Oil production, farm cash receipts, 
urban housing starts, international exports, retail sales, building 
permit values, and average weekly earnings are all up. 
 
Saskatchewan had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada in 
February, Mr. Speaker, at 4.2 per cent — down 1.6 percentage 
points from February 2006 and below the national rate of 6.5 
per cent. 
 
The list of positive economic indicators in our province goes on 
and on and on. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate for 
February was the lowest that Statistics Canada has ever reported 
for that month. Our very own city of Saskatoon had the fourth 
lowest unemployment rate among major Canadian cities at 3.9 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s clear to absolutely everyone except the opposition that 
Saskatchewan’s economy is on a roll and this NDP government 
is going to keep it going, Mr. Speaker. And this NDP 
government is going to ensure that it’s done in the context of 
environmental progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — The 2007 budget is a blueprint of just how 
we’re going to do it. Mr. Speaker, this year we’ve committed to 
again fully funding the CAIS program, to providing 5 billion to 
a 10-year plan for Highways and Transportation, and to funding 
a record 128 million in revenue sharing for municipalities. 
 
We have also made changes to allow for pension income 
splitting for seniors, freeing much needed money for those on 
fixed incomes. 
 
This is our first full year at a 5 per cent provincial sales tax, Mr. 
Speaker. It is important to note that this is the lowest rate that 
the PST has been in 20 years. The reduction from 7 per cent to 
5 per cent is expected to save the average family around $300 
annually. It is also important to note that a cut to the PST also 
affects business in Saskatchewan. They too will enjoy the cut in 
2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the measures that this 
government has taken to ensure that our economy stays hot for 
the next fiscal year. But a prosperous economy is not enough. 
This government has also allocated $33 million for cities and 
communities to provide for projects that contribute to clean air, 
clean water, and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve announced $8 million for green and climate 
change initiatives and contribute 152,000 to the Office of 
Energy Conservation to continue climate change activities. 
 
This NDP government takes climate change very seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, and does not believe that the science of greenhouse 
gas emissions is contentious or debatable. This government 
does not pursue ideological agendas at the expense of 
Saskatchewan people. This government acts. 
 
Compare our record to that of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. The 
member for Biggar once said that, quote: 
 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2007 

There’s also a significant debate within the scientific 
community about the validity of the conclusion that made 
greenhouse gas emissions . . . are causing climate change 
to global warming. 

 
The member for Kindersley once positioned that, quote: 
 

. . . volcanic eruption alone can emit more CO2 into the 
atmosphere than the entirety of what human beings have 
done since the industrial revolution. 

 
The member for Estevan went as far to say that, quote, 
“Scientists don’t agree. They can’t assure us that there is a trend 
to global warming.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this NDP government is taking 
steps to address the environment, including climate change. 
 
The 2007 budget also commits $2 million to upgrade 
government facilities for ongoing energy efficiency and 
conservation. It contributes $200,000 for Green Team 
employment to provide students with environmental sector 
summer job opportunities and $400,000 in rebates to customers 
who replace old toilets with new water efficient, low-flow 
models. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also allocated $1 million for SaskPower’s 
new sustainable supply development program and $840,000 for 
SaskEnergy’s environmental stewardship programs and 
$500,000 in rebates to residential, institutional, and commercial 
customers who install solar water heating systems. This 
government is committed to ensuring environmental progress 
accompanies our great economic development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second era of the 2007 budget that I would 
like to discuss today is that affecting working people, youth, 
and families. This government is committed to ensuring that 
Saskatchewan remains the best place to live, work, and raise a 
family. And this year’s budget helps to ensure that our 
commitment is kept. 
 
The 2007 budget allocates a $60 million increase for the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan to provide supplementary 
coverage for individuals and families with low income or a high 
drug cost and $2 million to provide eye care and enhanced 
prescription drug coverage to roughly 30,000 vulnerable 
workers in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Of this we are very, very proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have contributed 1.5 million for additional 
licensed child care spaces and $422,000 to offset the 
child-related costs of working for low-income earners. We care 
about the vulnerable people in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
Initiatives like this ease the cost burden that faces modern 
families. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, that is only the beginning. Families 
will also benefit from the contributions that this NDP 
government has made to education in this province. Education 
is vital to encouraging the innovation, creativity, and quality of 

services that our great province is known for. Because of the 
importance of this issue, we have committed to yet another year 
of a tuition freeze at the universities in Saskatchewan. Students 
will now enjoy 2004 tuition levels until 2008, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has created over 2,000 new 
training spaces in health care, education, and skilled trades, over 
100 new early childhood education training spaces, and 500 
new licensed daycare spaces. 
 
We have also contributed $3 million to literacy funding. Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party may not agree with expenditures on 
literacy — after all conservatives don’t seem to hold much 
values for those sorts of programs, as the member for 
Martensville will well know. The federal cousins to the 
opposition, the Harper Conservatives, made some of the most 
sweeping cuts to literacy programs in the history of this 
country, Mr. Speaker. If the role of the Sask party is simply to 
oppose, as the Finance critic has said, why could they not have 
opposed the cuts to essential programs perpetrated by the 
federal conservatives? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been said that there is no thought without 
language. Literacy is an absolutely essential element of making 
Saskatchewan the best place to live. Being literate is 
fundamental to enjoying a high personal and professional 
standard of living. The work world is changing, Mr. Speaker. 
Workers are increasingly being expected to fill roles that 
require high levels of skill and education. This is not the time to 
allow or force education programs to erode. 
 
This NDP government is committed to ensuring that the people 
of Saskatchewan enjoy every opportunity for education and 
ultimately every opportunity to ensure that this province retains 
the envy of the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2007 budget also presents a plan for a new 
five-year graduate tax exemption. The exemption will make 
Saskatchewan’s first $20,000 tax-free for five years after 
graduation. New grads, and those who emigrate from 
elsewhere, can receive $100,000 of tax-free income, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Not surprisingly, the Sask Party believes that a 
$100,000 tax exemption for students is not a good idea. The 
Leader of the Opposition, in an interview with Craig 
Wallebeck, said that he had gone directly to young people on 
the issue, Mr. Speaker. He said that students weren’t concerned 
with rebates, that $100,000 in tax-free income wasn’t the sort of 
issue that students were interested in, Mr. Speaker. When I read 
the transcript of the interview, I was shocked. Where did the 
Leader of the Opposition find students that didn’t appreciate 
such a large tax incentive? 
 
The Sask Party leader’s peculiar statement did eventually come 
to make some sense, Mr. Speaker. Immediately after saying that 
he went, quote, “directly to young people on the issue,” he 
listed only a single source. That source, Mr. Speaker, was none 
other than the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. It seems that 
when the Leader of the Opposition consulted with the member 
from Weyburn, who is a former student, the member agreed 



March 29, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

with his leader. The student that this Sask Party leader 
consulted with was a member of his own caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising that the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy agreed with his authoritative leader. After 
all, no one wants to suffer the same political fate as Brenda 
Bakken did. No one wants to be ostracized from caucus for the 
simple vice of independent thinking. The Leader of the 
Opposition may have found 100 per cent support for his 
resistance to this tax incentive for students, Mr. Speaker, in a 
very limited sample. But the young people of Saskatchewan say 
otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third area of the budget that I would like to 
address today is health care. This NDP government is 
committed to ensuring quality of health care in Saskatchewan 
that is second to none. To do this, we are shortening wait times 
with more MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scans. 
 
Many more MRIs have been announced over the past several 
weeks and more hip and more knee replacements and more 
surgeries. Four million dollars have been allocated for new 
initiatives to ensure wait time reduction. These initiatives will 
result in 160 additional hip and knee surgeries, 3,117 additional 
MRI scans, and an additional 5,455 additional bone mineral 
density tests per year. 
 
We have committed $80 million to cancer agency funding, 
target children’s dental sealant programs in community schools, 
and expanded health benefits for low-income workers including 
$2 million to provide eye care and enhanced prescription drug 
coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $4 million has been added for new or expanded 
initiatives in the children’s health agenda, and 15 million has 
been allocated for the continued implementation of Project 
Hope, a comprehensive plan to prevent and treat substance 
abuse. Mr. Speaker, all of the health provisions in the 2007 
provincial budget will contribute to allowing Saskatchewan 
people to access the quality health care that they have come to 
expect in this province. 
 
But I would like to suggest that the new prescription drug plan 
for seniors is among our most remarkable. Mr. Speaker, as of 
July 1, 2007 approximately 115,000 senior citizens will be able 
to fill their prescriptions for no more than $15 each. To seniors, 
a segment of our population that relies more greatly on 
accessing health care, this budget is a boon. 
 
Prescription drug costs are increasing by an average of 13 per 
cent per year — much higher than general inflation — making 
it difficult for many senior families to cope with the cost of 
prescription medications. The seniors’ drug plan will save 
seniors approximately $35 million in 2007-2008 and 53 million 
in 2008-2009. Mr. Speaker, the plan should result in a savings 
of roughly $400 for each senior citizen on average. 
 
Today those over 65 years of age account for 15 per cent of the 
population of Saskatchewan. StatsCan estimates that by 2031 
one in four Saskatchewan residents will be over 65. The 
seniors’ drug plan is a program that will directly affect the lives 
of an increasingly large portion of our population, Mr. Speaker, 
and I am proud to say that it will soon be a reality. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the 2007 provincial budget 
establishes effective new programs, as well as expanding and 
continuing these commitments that this NDP government has 
made in the past. We are building on the momentum of a strong 
economy, sound social policy, and fiscal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government year after year and budget after 
budget is helping to make Saskatchewan truly the best place to 
live, work, and raise a family. I am proud to stand in support of 
my constituents, I am proud to stand in support of 
Saskatchewan, and I am therefore proud to stand in support of 
this budget. 
 
I’d like to now at this point, Mr. Speaker, move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to move adjournment. 
But before I do, I would like to point out to members of the 
House on Sunday, April 1 two very profound events will take 
place. One we’re well aware of is the Junos will be here in 
Saskatchewan for the first time ever. 
 
But the other thing that will happen on Sunday, April 1, is that 
it will mark the exact 20th anniversary of the arrival at the 
Table of our Clerk, Greg Putz. And I think all hon. members 
would want to wish him a happy anniversary and celebration 
this weekend on Sunday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1087 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1087 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1094 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Outstanding Events in the World of Politics 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
 Population Increase in Saskatchewan 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
 Saskatchewan Party Nominates Two Candidates 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
 First Nations and Métis Juno Awards Nominees 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
 Highway 32 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
 The Arts’ Role in a Healthy Community 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
 Saskatchewan Agriculture Week 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Tabling of Legal Opinion Regarding Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1090 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1090 
 Results of Joint Job Evaluation Process 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1091 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1091 
 Wait Times for Medical Treatment 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1092 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1092 
 Compensation to Forestry Secretariat Executive 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1093 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1093 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Charitable Gaming Grant Program 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1094 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1095 
 Office of the Treaty Commissioner 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1095 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1096 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1099 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1108 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1110 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


