






















































Hansard: April 16, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 16, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1285 
 April 16, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from North 
Dakota, Saskatoon, Yorkton, Wynyard, Foam Lake, and Quill 
Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of Saskatchewan asking that the 
government maintain full service of the SaskPower office at 
Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Rosetown, and I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I 
present a petition with citizens concerned of the safety when 
driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Watson, Muenster, 
Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Rosenfeld. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 18. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville, Gladmar, 
and Minton. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the Southwest that are very 
concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre would cause undue hardship to 
residents, especially our senior citizens. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of southwest Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the rural school closures. And the 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Lafleche, 
Assiniboia, and Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition from citizens concerned with Highway 
368, starting 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of 
St. Brieux, and it has seriously declined over the last number of 
years and endangers the safety of drivers and harms economic 
growth in the area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake Lenore, St. 
Brieux, and Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
citizens urging government to keep rural schools open: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Drake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the new 
neighbourhood of Stonebridge, a neighbourhood in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. This petition requests an 
allocation of funding for an elementary school in that 
neighbourhood. I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in the Stonebridge neighbourhood. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Stepney 
Crescent in Stonebridge. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today in the Assembly to present a petition 
calling on the government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Weyburn 
and from Radville. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my distinct honour to introduce to you and all members of 
the Legislative Assembly a very large group of 23 public 
service employees who are visiting our legislature today. 
 
These individuals are involved in doing valuable public service 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan and they also assist 
elected officials in moving public policy forward in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re here today to have a look at the behind-the-scenes inner 
workings of the Legislative Assembly, to observe the 
proceedings in the House and to visit with you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to visit with the Government House Leader and myself. 
 
I want to take a moment on behalf of all citizens in our province 
to thank these public servants for the work that they do each 
day in the province of Saskatchewan on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have individuals who are from the 
Departments of the Environment, Government Relations, 
Health, Highways and Transportation, Industry and Resources, 
Justice, Learning, and this Legislative Assembly. I look forward 
to meeting with this group of public servants after question 
period. And I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to welcome the public servants to the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with the 
minister in welcoming this contingent of public servants to their 
legislature this afternoon. I look forward as well to meeting 
with them later on this day to face the scrutiny of the public 
servants which are so integrally important to our province and 
to the delivery of programs in our province. I look forward to 
the opportunity to meet and discuss the role of the official 
opposition with the members of the public service. And I’m 
glad that this program is available to our public servants to 
enlighten them as to what happens in the marble palace. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the House a couple of new constituents who have 
just moved to Regina Qu’Appelle Valley from Saskatoon 
Northwest, Richard and Joanne Lepp. And Richard is a retired 
Saskatoon city police officer and Joanne is a retired RN 
[registered nurse]. And they have come here; they’re 
establishing a house of prayer, and will be keeping members of 
the legislature in their prayers — along with others who are part 
of their community. And so I’d like all of us here to welcome 
them and also to thank them for their prayers. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly my pleasure today to introduce 14 lovely ladies that 
are seated in your gallery. They are the Southey Red Hat 
Beauties. And they’re here with us today to observe the 
proceedings in the House and they will be touring the building 
after they witness our proceedings here. And I will be meeting 
with them later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group initially formed back in September 
2004 with 11 members. They currently tell me they have 20 
members and each month two of the members take on the 
responsibility of coordinating activities. And the two members 
that are responsible for April thought it would be great to come 
and see what their elected members do, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would ask all members to help me welcome them to their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Everybody knows me for prowess in hockey, but today we have 
a very special guest that’s joining with us, who’s also a 

well-known, famous northern hockey player. In the east gallery 
is Louis Gardiner. Mr. Gardiner played many, many years in 
hockey throughout the North and was also a member of the Flin 
Flon Bombers when they were with the Western Hockey 
League. 
 
And Louis, of course I asked him to sit in the Speaker’s gallery, 
but Louis’s so used to being behind me in hockey where I have, 
where I . . . He’s used to my drop passes, Mr. Speaker, so he sat 
behind me. So I just wanted to ask all members to welcome Mr. 
Gardiner to the Assembly today and hope he enjoys the 
proceedings. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 

Yom haShoah 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, today is Yom haShoah, 
the Holocaust Memorial Day in Saskatchewan. This day is 
recognized in provincial statute as a result of legislation I 
introduced on behalf of the Jewish Congress and citizens of this 
province in 2001. 
 
On this day we remember the millions of people whose lives 
were ended by the event of the Holocaust under the Nazis 
during their reign of terror from 1933 to 1945. This is a day for 
all of us to reflect on the systemic destruction of human life 
because of the hatred and the intolerance of the Nazi party, and 
in reflecting on those events, to consider the factors that led to 
such a horrific evil being visited upon humanity. 
 
For those of us who live on these prairies so far from the killing 
camps of Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Majdanek, it’s hard to 
imagine the scale of the inhumanity that wrought itself into our 
civilization. But for those Canadian and Allied soldiers who 
helped liberate the camps and indeed any of us from later 
generations who have stood about the piles of ash and bone, I 
think we will never shed the images of such a despicable act. 
The pure banality of the camps, the simplicity of the plan, the 
ruthlessness of the barbarity belies the fact that these horrors, 
like so many since then, are simply a result of hatred and 
intolerance that today continues to live in the hearts of too many 
people around our world. 
 
I would ask that all of us in the province today take the time to 
remember the 6 million Jews, the Gypsies, the disabled, the 
gays, and others that were killed by the Nazis’ campaign of 
hatred, and reflect on what it is that we can do here at home to 
ensure the values of tolerance, multiculturalism, and freedom 
continue to prevail in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
[13:45] 
 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

Blacksburg Massacre 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was with great shock 
and sadness that all of us have heard on the news today that a 
lone gunman has shot and killed at least 31 students and others 
on the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
campus in the town of Blacksburg. Police are reporting dozens 
of others are injured and the lone gunman is among the dead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although this tragedy has happened in another 
country and a state far from Saskatchewan, I want the people of 
Blacksburg, Virginia to know that our thoughts and prayers are 
with them as they struggle to make sense of this senseless and 
devastating act of violence against so many innocent people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly join me in 
sharing our deepest condolences with the students, professors, 
staff, families, and the citizens of Blacksburg. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Recognition of Saskatchewan Volunteers 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 15 to 21 is 
National Volunteer Week. Volunteers grow community and in 
Saskatchewan that is especially true. As we look back on the 
proud history, we see very clearly that helping others is 
something that just comes naturally to the people of this 
province. 
 
These volunteers are the foundation for more than 5,000 
incorporated charities and 12,000 cultural and recreational 
organizations here in Saskatchewan, and represents over $3 
billion annually in delivery of services and programs to 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, it’s the enthusiasm, energy, 
and commitment of our volunteers that enables these thousands 
of community-based organizations to provide services and 
support to hundreds and thousands of Saskatchewan people. 
 
As Chair of the Premier’s voluntary sector initiative, I am 
extremely proud of the work that has been done by the members 
of the joint steering committee. They are strengthening the 
relationship between government and Saskatchewan’s voluntary 
sector to assist volunteer organizations in effectively fulfilling 
their mandates. By engaging the voluntary sector we lead the 
nation as a provincial example of how to bring government and 
voluntary sectors together. By fostering a greater and richer 
understanding of each other’s processes and challenges, we 
create yet another innovative first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
our volunteers and their enormous contribution in making 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and build a future. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

Panther Drilling Launches New Rig 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday of last week the member from Estevan and myself had 
the pleasure of attending the launch of Panther Drilling rig no. 
2. Mr. Speaker, the opening took place at Panther Drilling’s 
shop yard a few miles east of Weyburn on Highway 39. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Panther Drilling is a locally owned and operated 
drilling company, but what sets Panther apart is the fact that 
they built their rigs at Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, Panther rig no. 1 
is already hard at work in the patch, having been launched last 
October. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Panther is owned by a number of local investors 
and is operated by co-founder and president, Bob Schad. The 
completion of rigs no. 1 and no. 2 speaks to the hard work, 
ingenuity, and entrepreneurial spirit of so many people who call 
Weyburn and area home, and who have for more than a half a 
century worked so hard to develop our oil resources in the 
Southeast. 
 
Rather than wait the 12 to 18 months wait for a rig to be built in 
Alberta, these local investors decided to build locally using 
local workers and suppliers including but not limited to Demby 
Trailers, Southern Industrial & Truck, Myrglod Steel & Metals, 
T S & M Supply, Jerry Mainil Ltd., and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join with me today in 
congratulating Bob Schad, his partners, employees, and 
suppliers of Panther Drilling on the launch of rig no. 2. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday evening I, along 
with my colleagues from Regina Elphinstone-Centre and 
Meadow Lake, had the pleasure and the privilege of attending 
the Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network or SALN 
Spring Gala. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure you’re aware, literacy means much 
more than the ability to read and write. It is the ability to 
understand and to use written information, whether at home, at 
work, or in the community. Literacy helps build a healthy 
province with a skilled workforce and a strong economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all across the province the Saskatchewan 
Aboriginal Literacy Network is enabling literacy programs, 
connecting with decision makers to garner support for literacy, 
and providing new opportunities for learners. Their work is 
exemplary, Mr. Speaker. Through their efforts, the SALN is 
elevating the discussion and activity in First Nations and Métis 
communities across the province. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, cuts to the federal literacy project 
funding have made the future of this valuable organization 
uncertain. For our part, Mr. Speaker, this government 
recognizes the importance of literacy and is working closely 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

together with partners like the SALN to help equip 
Saskatchewan people with the skills and abilities to build strong 
futures here in the province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing the SALN for their 
ongoing dedication to the promotion, development, and delivery 
of literacy programs and services for First Nation and Métis 
people in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a night to polish up your cowboy boots and put on your 
cowboy hat while listening to the best country music west of 
Nashville. I am speaking of course about the 18th annual 
Saskatchewan Country Music Awards that took place last night 
at TCU Place in Saskatoon. I had the privilege of attending the 
event along with the Premier. 
 
The awards provide an opportunity to support the talented 
musicians and performers we have in our great province and 
recognize their achievements. Congratulations to Brad Johner, 
who picked up five Mikees including the Humanitarian Award. 
Donny Parenteau won four categories including Aboriginal 
Artist of the Year. My good friend Jessica Robinson was named 
Female Vocalist of the Year. Rising star was Kal Hourd and 
group of the year, The Poverty Plainsmen. CJWW’s Dawn 
Woroniuk was recognized with the Achievement Award and 
very deserving artists such as Codie Prevost, Blaine Yandt, and 
Bart McKay also took home awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that the Premier was there. I caught 
him singing along to several songs when Jessica Robinson 
played her hit, “Smoke and Mirrors.” I’m sure the Premier was 
thinking of the Finance minister’s budget. When Brad Johner 
played “Hard work [ain’t] never hurt nobody, but I would rather 
be lucky,” I’m sure the Premier thought of the last election. 
 
The sad Dierks Bentley ballad summed up the next election for 
the Premier, “It’s a long . . . [long road] alone,” when he finally 
goes to the Lieutenant Governor to call the election. But that’s 
okay because the Saskatchewan residents singing Paul Brandt’s 
“Alberta Bound,” they will soon be singing Martina McBride’s 
“Independence Day” under a Sask Party government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Premier’s Regina Business Dinner 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday night well over 1,000 
people gathered together to hear the Premier talk about this 
government’s vision for the future of this province. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, it was record-breaking attendance at the Premier’s 
Regina Business Dinner. 

The Premier talked about how exports are up. Oil production is 
up. Capital investment is up. Farm cash receipts are up. Urban 
housing starts are up. Value of building permits are up and 
retail sales are up. He went on to talk about how the average 
weekly earnings of Saskatchewan citizens are up, how jobs are 
way, way up. And of particular note was the fact that youth 
employment is up over 11,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — All of which goes a long way towards explaining 
why Saskatchewan population is going up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was applause from the business community when the 
Premier talked about the business climate here in the province 
with a reduction in PST [provincial sales tax], reduction in 
business taxes, reduction in personal taxes, reductions in 
small-business taxes. Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
business climate that this government has helped to create and 
all the people that are moving here to take advantage of it, the 
room could only nod in agreement when the Premier’s 
statement that the focus of this government was to make 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only thing missing from the great dinner was 
the attendance of the members of the Saskatchewan Party. But 
then again, they wouldn’t have liked the menu. They are only 
hungry for power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Former Minister’s Relationship with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from one of the 
victims of the Murdoch Carriere case, and it’s dated April 13, 
2007. The letter describes first-hand knowledge of a close 
relationship between Murdoch Carriere and the former minister 
of the Environment. And I quote, “. . . the relationship between 
Mr. Belanger and Murdoch Carriere was clearly a close 
friendship.” 
 
The letter says the former minister was a frequent visitor to Mr. 
Carriere’s office and that the two of them had frequent 
conversations about personal topics. The letter states that many 
others besides the victims were aware of this close friendship. 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister for PSC [Public Service 
Commission] repeatedly deny this close, personal friendship? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I have said in this Legislative Assembly, ministers of the Crown 
come to know the public service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. You come to know people who work at senior 
levels of your department, and you do have conversations with 
them about various public policy issues. Now does that mean 
you have a close, personal friendship? It does not. What it 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

means is that you have a professional relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have tried consistently to 
indicate that Mr. Carriere was some sort of NDP [New 
Democratic Party] insider. In fact I believe that they are running 
ads on television indicating this, and I want to say to the public 
this is simply inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, let me quote again from the 
victim’s letter. And it says: 
 

We felt it was important to clarify this point because the 
Minister for the Public Service Commission continues to 
say that Murdoch Carriere wasn’t a friend of the 
government. This isn’t true. 

 
These women know the truth, and they want the truth to be 
made public. So I ask the minister, why is the minister 
continually downplaying the friendship between the former 
Environment minister and Murdoch Carriere? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously the member will want to 
table that letter since she’s read from it which is proper protocol 
in the House. But I will say this, that one of the things that 
we’re looking at in terms of amendments to occupational health 
and safety legislation is what I call abuse of authority or 
intimidation tactics, where people use their position to 
intimidate others by saying well I know so-and-so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the occupational health and safety 
legislation at the moment only applies to those grounds as 
defined in the Human Rights Code. We believe that the 
anti-harassment legislation needs to go much farther so that no 
one in the workplace can be engaged in what I call abuse of 
power or bullying tactics or intimidation tactics. And I would 
urge the members opposite — particularly that member — to 
support any amendments that we bring into this House so that 
we really do protect workers in this province from abuse of 
power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the victims are listening to the 
minister’s responses very carefully, and they’re angry with 
those responses. Mr. Speaker, let me quote from Hansard from 
April 11 when the minister says, and I quote, the members: 
 

. . . of the opposition continue to insinuate that Murdoch 
Carriere was the buddy of people in this cabinet. I want to 
say to the public — because I think it’s important to know 
that it is a continuation of misinformation that is coming 
from members of the opposition — there isn’t one person 

on this side of the House that was a buddy of Murdoch 
Carriere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the victims disagree. Is the minister accusing the 
victims of spreading misinformation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I know this. I regularly 
get telephone calls into my constituency office and my cabinet 
office from citizens who indicate to my staff that I am a friend. 
Mr. Speaker, I know what a definition of a friend is. A friend is 
someone that you might go on holidays with. You might invite 
them to your home for supper. You might visit with them. You 
have a relationship between their family and your family. That 
is a friendship, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we have professional relationships that take place in 
government between ministers and senior officials. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that what this really speaks to is people who 
abuse their power and authority in the workplace by indicating 
that they know people in high places, and that is an intimidation 
tactic, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we have to end in this 
province, and that’s why we need to amend the legislation to 
protect the very people who believe in that workplace that 
somehow Mr. Carriere had a relationship with the government 
that he clearly did not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, either the minister is spreading 
misinformation or the victims are. The victims say that 
Murdoch Carriere was a close friend, had a close friendship 
with the former minister of the Environment. That’s not me; 
that is the victims of this man who are saying this. The minister 
said that he didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women are watching question period daily. 
They’re likely watching today. Will the minister admit that she 
is wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say it again. People 
who use their position in management to intimidate workers by 
saying they know people in high places, that’s intolerable, Mr. 
Speaker. And workers need to be protected from that. And 
that’s why we are seriously considering amendments to the 
occupational health and safety legislation so that that kind of 
behaviour would clearly be harassment and so that those 
workers would be protected. 
 
I say this again, Mr. Speaker. It came to our attention. We read 
it on the front page of The StarPhoenix. And we fired him, Mr. 
Speaker, because behaviour like that is unacceptable in a free 
and democratic society, and we need to protect those workers. 
And I ask the member opposite, do you concur? 
 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I just wish to remind the minister of 
maintaining all of her remarks through the Chair. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Response to Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the very same letter points out 
another issue: the women believe Murdoch Carriere was 
rewarded for harassment. Let me quote from the letter: “. . . we 
believe giving Murdoch Carriere $275,000 plus lots of money 
added to his pension is REWARDING harassment.” 

 
Another victim on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
last Thursday said, and I quote, “They paid Murdoch $275,000 
for assaulting women. That just gave him all the more power.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the words of the victims, not of the 
official opposition. Why does the NDP government continue to 
deny that they rewarded harassment? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can clearly understand 
why someone might think that $275,000 is an outrageous 
amount. I concur. But the reality of the matter is this. Mr. 
Carriere had been punished for his behaviour by being demoted 
and suspended for three months. When the government learned 
of his behaviour, he was fired. He was punished twice for the 
same event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly Mr. Carriere had a cause of action against 
the government for not only dismissal but also, Mr. Speaker, 
because of defamation of character. His personnel file ended up 
on the front page of the newspaper. Mr. Speaker, he sued The 
StarPhoenix and other media. They settled for a substantive 
amount, not for harassment but for what they reported on the 
front page of the newspaper. And the Government of 
Saskatchewan settled with him, not for harassment but because 
we fired him incorrectly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the letter states, and I quote: 
 

Murdoch Carriere should have been fired with cause many 
years ago. If he would have been fired with cause, he 
would not have received a penny in compensation. This is 
what SHOULD have happened. 
 

The letter goes on to state that there are more than just nine 
women in the Gillies report who were harassed by Murdoch 
Carriere. Mr. Speaker, will the government admit that their 
inactions on this file has resulted in more women being 
harassed? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere should have 
been fired by the deputy minister. He was not. He was 
suspended without pay and sent to Regina. Mr. Speaker, when 
the government of the day learned of this, we directed that he be 
fired. Anti-harassment policy is to be enforced. There is no 
tolerance for harassment in the province of Saskatchewan in our 
public service workplaces. We have changed the policy. It is 
zero tolerance for harassment. 
 
But I want to ask the members this. Are they prepared to 
support the government’s introduction of amendments to the 
occupational health and safety legislation so that we have the 
best anti-harassment provisions in all of North America, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s what I want to know. Put your money where 
your words are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the victims also say they were 
insulted by the Premier’s response to their concerns. Again I 
quote from the letter, “We could not believe that even the 
Premier turned his back on us in March of 2003.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve read the letter the victims wrote to the 
Premier on March 10, 2003, and there is no way anybody could 
have claimed they didn’t understand the seriousness of the 
complaints raised. Yet the Premier, in his famous do over scrum 
after hours on March 16, claims he had no idea about the extent 
of the allegations raised until he read the April newspaper story. 
 
The victims said the Premier turned his back on them again 
when he made that claim. Mr. Speaker, why has the Premier 
repeatedly turned his back on women and Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, surely the opposition 
raises these issues in the Assembly to affect public policy, to 
lead to public policy change. Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
introduce amendments to the occupational health and safety 
legislation to go further than other jurisdictions in North 
America to protect workers from abuse of power. 
 
Is this, Mr. Speaker, about the opposition’s caring concern for 
workers in the province, or is it about their own bottom line? 
Are they wanting to protect workers and affect public policy or 
are they not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister wants to 
know what this is about. Well yes, it’s about the things the 
minister has highlighted. But it is also about getting answers 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

and some justice for nine victims of harassment done by this 
gentleman, Mr. Murdoch Carriere, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
it’s about. This letter from victims utterly and completely 
contradicts the statements that have been made by that minister 
and by that Premier about the closeness of the former minister 
and Mr. Carriere, Mr. Speaker. It highlights completely and 
utterly the disappointment on the part of the victims and that 
Premier’s lack of response to the issue. 
 
Will he now agree to do the right thing, Mr. Speaker? Will he 
call an inquiry by the appropriate committee of the legislature 
into this scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear that we need to 
affect change in this province so that people cannot use their 
authority in the workplace to intimidate workers, Mr. Speaker. 
It is clear that there are some people that use their knowledge of 
knowing someone as an intimidation tactic, Mr. Speaker. That 
is clear. 
 
Now what I will say to the members opposite, is this about 
affecting public policy? Is it about changing public policy, or is 
it about ads on television, pamphlets on your doorstep to try and 
enhance their own political hides, Mr. Speaker? I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s about the latter. It’s not about affecting public 
policy and having the best occupational health and safety 
legislation when it comes to harassment in North America. 
That’s what I think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Here’s what it’s about 
for this particular victim — the minister is asking some 
rhetorical questions — she writes: 
 

We ask that the details of this harassment be brought to 
light. We feel we do not have to testify about what was 
done to us by Murdoch because some of that is already 
known. We do want answers from people who ignored us 
for years and did nothing to stop the harassment. Many 
people know the truth. We support an independent inquiry 
or some sort of process that will get to the truth because 
people deserve to hear it. 
 

Close the quote, Mr. Speaker. Does the Premier agree with this 
victim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you have an 
inquiry, you call all of the people involved to testify before an 
inquiry. That’s sort of how it works, Mr. Speaker. You can’t 

have half of an inquiry. 
 
Now I’ll say this. In 1993 there was no protection for workers 
in this province when it came to sexual harassment. We 
introduced amendments to the occupational health and safety 
legislation on human rights grounds. But, Mr. Speaker, we have 
an opportunity here to go beyond and to develop good public 
policy where managers cannot use abuse of power and authority 
on workers, Mr. Speaker. They can’t intimidate them or bully 
them. 
 
And I guess I ask the members opposite, do you in principle 
agree that we need to amend the legislation so that no other 
member has to stand in this House and talk about some manager 
that used his authority to intimidate workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, even more important — as 
important as it is — than the proper legislation and the proper 
regulated protection for all workers in the workplace against 
harassment, is a government, Mr. Speaker, that’s prepared to 
enforce it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This government, this government, this 
government failed in this case back to 1994, Mr. Speaker, 1994. 
The member for Kelvington has asked some very basic 
questions on this count. When these instances occurred back in 
1994 the question that has been asked of this minister and never 
answered is, will she conduct an investigation into why nothing 
was done back to then? Better yet, again to the Premier, will he 
do the right thing and hold a special inquiry into this scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, in 2002 an official complaint was launched. It was 
investigated by Mr. Gillies. He was suspended without pay on 
February 12. That was unacceptable to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and he was fired, Mr. Speaker. He was fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the anti-harassment policy was changed, and the 
anti-harassment policy has led to significant improvement in 
terms of how workplace harassment is dealt with in the 
workplace. But, Mr. Speaker, I find one of the most difficult 
questions is this whole abuse of power and authority to 
intimidate workers, and I find that unacceptable. And I ask the 
members opposite: we are going to introduce some amendments 
to the occupational health and safety legislation to protect 
workers; will they support it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

Mr. Wall: — Here this minister and this government are unable 
or unwilling to enforce the protection that is already there. Mr. 
Speaker, again to the Premier of the province, will he direct his 
minister, the Minister of the Public Service Commission, to 
hold the proper investigation to direct her officials to find out 
what failed these women back to 1994? And again to the 
Premier, will he do the right thing in light of the utterly 
contradicting evidence presented in this letter from what his 
own ministers have said, will he hold an independent inquiry, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there are events that 
unfold in the province of Saskatchewan and elsewhere that none 
of us like, none of us like, Mr. Speaker, but we have a real 
opportunity here to go beyond the existing provisions of the 
legislation and protect workers, Mr. Speaker. We have that 
opportunity as legislators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would they raise these issues if they don’t 
support changes? We need to change the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. Will the members opposite support those changes that 
further protect workers in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to those 
changes, what is being proposed. We look forward to looking at 
them to see if indeed they can strengthen protection for 
workers. But even more important than that, Mr. Speaker, I 
think the people of the province — these victims and other folks 
in the public service — look forward to a change in a 
government that’s actually prepared to enforce the protection 
that’s there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And on that note, Mr. Speaker, on that note it was 
interesting. I understand that just before question period the 
Minister of Finance has ruled out, has all but ruled out a spring 
election. Isn’t that interesting? The Minister of Finance earlier 
this day apparently all but ruled out a spring election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Is he still in charge 
of things over on that side of the House, and will the Premier, 
for the people of this province, rule out dragging this term out 
into its fifth, tired, old year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition has spent 
over a month on this subject. And, Mr. Speaker, the members of 
the opposition have spent, I would suggest, over $100,000, 

probably hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ money 
on ads and newspaper ads and stuff in our mailbox — lots of 
trees going to waste, Mr. Speaker. They’re using taxpayers’ 
money. But this is my question: why would the opposition sit 
on their hands when they continue to raise this issue, when they 
have a real chance to bring . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Once again 
the Minister for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, why would the members 
of the opposition sit on their hands when they have a real 
chance to protect workers? Mr. Speaker, is the limit of their 
concern to harassment in the workplace really about the Sask 
Party’s bottom line? And if it is, I say shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Election Timing 
 
Mr. Wall: — What a really ridiculous answer, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
difficult for the opposition to react to changes that the 
minister’s proposing until they’re actually proposed and laid on 
the Table, Mr. Speaker. I would point that out to her. 
 
I would also ask the Premier to answer the previous question. 
His Minister of Finance has apparently decided to call the next 
election. The Minister of Finance has all but ruled out a spring 
election. The Premier and the Minister of Finance are now 
talking a lot about dragging this tired, old NDP government into 
its fifth year. My question to the Premier is this: will he commit 
to an election within the four-year term of this government, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the Leader 
of the Opposition and all members, yes, I’m still in charge of 
calling the election in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, 
when that election is called and the results are tallied, Mr. 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The deputy of the 
opposition doesn’t want to hear this answer, Mr. Speaker, 
because what I’m going to tell him is this. When I call that 
election and the votes are counted, you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? I’ll still be in charge of calling elections in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what the 
Premier just said was true. After the next election you see, Mr. 
Speaker, a brand new Saskatchewan Party government is going 
to bring into effect in this province set election dates so all of 
the taxpayers and private citizens will know when and be in 
charge of when the election is going to be held in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, importantly to the Premier, 
importantly to the Premier. He has mused increasingly of late 
about dragging this government into its fifth term, and we could 
go through all the times, all of his . . . into a fifth year, Mr. 
Speaker. All of his quotations prior to the election in 1991 were 
about the importance of a government not dragging things out 
into a fifth year. He said he was opposed to that. Is he still 
opposed to that? Will he commit to having an election within 
four years of the previous election in ’03, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear I think to all 
members that the Leader of the Opposition’s feigned interest in 
public policy soon, soon resolves to an interest about electoral 
politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker, my confidence about the future 
of the New Democratic Party government in this province 
grows on a daily basis. I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker: because 
here’s an opposition who sees themselves slipping in the polls 
on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s the proof of that? What’s the proof of that? Mr. 
Speaker, any opposition that raises its funds through trips to 
Augusta, Georgia, sends its leaders over to Calgary and 
Edmonton so they can scoop up all this money so they can 
begin to run negative ads way before the election campaign — 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a political party that’s in trouble. This 
opposition’s in trouble. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that’s going to continue 
to govern for good public policy for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people because, Mr. Speaker — let me say this 
again — our interest is in Saskatchewan people; their interest, 
in the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — For ministerial statements, the Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the 
House to make a statement of condolence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make a 
statement of condolence at this time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

CONDOLENCES 
 

The Honourable J.E.N. (Jack) Wiebe 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great sadness 
today that we mark the passing of the Hon. Jack Wiebe, former 
lieutenant governor, great friend to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
John Edward Neil Wiebe was a Saskatchewan-born farmer and 
politician. He served as our 18th lieutenant governor from 1994 
to the year 2000. As members well know, and so do the people 
of Saskatchewan, during his time as lieutenant governor he 
embodied the very essence of what we have come to expect 
from the position of lieutenant governor. He represented the 
Crown with dignity, grace. He represented the people of this 
province well, displayed the fundamental spirit of what it means 
to be from Saskatchewan. 
 
Jack Wiebe’s trademark was his great affection for people. He 
brought the viceregal role alive for everyone he met, from 
schoolchildren to farm families to senior citizens. He never 
seemed to tire of meeting with people from around the 
province, and he was always willing to spend time with our 
citizens. 
 
Jack often said that as he travelled this province, he was 
constantly amazed at the resourcefulness of Saskatchewan 
people. Mr. Wiebe was also one of those remarkable and 
resourceful people who never forgot his Prairie roots. 
 
In the year 2000, Mr. Speaker, he was appointed by then Prime 
Minister Jean Chrétien to the Senate representing the senatorial 
division of Saskatchewan. He resigned from the Senate in 2004. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wiebe made a better life for others through 
his service and dedication to the role of lieutenant governor and 
senator. He was truly a role model for this province and a 
champion of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Wiebe was inducted into the Order of St. John of Jerusalem 
on October 21, 1994, and he holds the grade of Knight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our prayers and our sympathies go to Jack’s 
family, to Ann and their entire family. And I would ask that all 
members join with me today, perhaps following a comment 
from the opposition, from the leader, for a moment of silence. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to offer comments of 
condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — Granted. Leave has been granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I also want to thank the Premier for sending this 
over prior to question period. And when I just read the heading, 
I was shocked and surprised. I hadn’t heard the news yet. And it 
is truly sad news, not just for this Legislative Assembly and for 
the entire province but, I think, in a particular way for the city 
of Swift Current, for southwest Saskatchewan. Mr. Wiebe and 
Ann are constituents, or Mr. Wiebe was; Ann is a constituent 
living in the city of Swift Current. And it’s truly a shock. 
 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

The last time I had a chance to visit with Jack was at the 
Remembrance Day ceremony, and it was a time that Jack, that 
Mr. Wiebe, I think, looked forward to. He was an honorary 
colonel — and I’m going to forget, Mr. Speaker, the regiment 
— but he was an honorary colonel, and he was there in full 
dress visiting with everybody that was waiting for the parade as 
he was certainly wont to do in all of his different public roles in 
the province. He was visiting with the firefighters that were 
there, members of the Legion of course, and cadets, making a 
special effort to do that, to visit with the cadets that were there 
getting ready to assemble for the Remembrance Day parade. 
 
Both Jack and Ann have been leaders in southwest 
Saskatchewan and in the city of Swift Current in particular. 
Jack of course served as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] in this Assembly, as the Premier has noted. The 
constituency, I think, was Morse. And the deputy leader has just 
commented to me while the Premier was making his remarks 
that Jack had told him once that he won his first election by 12 
votes and earned the nickname Landslide Jack after that. And of 
course went on to various levels of great public service for the 
province. I would just simply, on behalf of the opposition, again 
thank the Premier for this chance to make a few remarks, and 
on behalf of all of us to offer our condolences to Ann and the 
family. 
 
Ann, in and of herself, is a dynamic leader, a very strong lady. I 
know she was instrumental in helping get the safe shelter, crisis 
services line going — worked with my dad actually on some of 
those committees, and he would comment about Ann and the 
couple. So as strong as she is, this will be a very difficult time 
for her, and we offer her our condolences, and through her to 
the family. We thank them for the great sacrifice they made by 
sharing Jack Wiebe with all of us in as many roles of serving 
this Legislative Assembly, the Senate of Canada, and the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, at the request of 
the Premier and Leader of the Opposition, I would ask all 
members to rise at this time in memory of late Jack Wiebe, 
former lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, and please be seated. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment. 
 

Announcement of Green Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday, April 12, 
Premier Calvert and I had the pleasure of releasing 
Saskatchewan’s green strategy. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, order please. Order please. Just a 
reminder to the member about the use of other members’ names 
in the proceedings of this Assembly. The minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Premier and I had the pleasure of 
announcing Saskatchewan’s green strategy. The green strategy 
is about making life better for Saskatchewan families by 

conserving, protecting and, when necessary, restoring the air, 
land, and water of this great province. 
 
The green strategy provides our province with a solid 
foundation for wise resource use, conservation, job creation, 
and building wealth. It’s a vision for a greener future — a 
framework that sets out our long-term goals, our strategic 
outcomes, and the actions we will take. 
 
The green strategy describes and builds on the things we 
already have in place such as the Office of Energy 
Conservation, our work on water conservation, the biodiversity 
action plans, SaskPower’s wind energy development, and the 
work on carbon sequestration. We also have effective, 
province-wide recycling programs for beverage containers, used 
oil, scrap tires, waste paint, and end-of-life electronic 
equipment. 
 
Our government recently committed $5 million to protect the 
environment and address the effects of climate change. On 
Thursday, in support of the launch of the green strategy, we 
announced $7.5 million in this year’s budget’s funding; $4.9 
million is for the Green Initiatives Fund, which through three 
strands will support the development, implementation, and 
promotion of environmental innovation. The fund will help 
communities adapt to climate change, conserve and protect 
water, and develop green agriculture and sustainable projects. 
 
The green technology commercialization portion will help 
small- and medium-size businesses develop and sell green 
technologies. The green energy and energy conservation thread 
will directly assist homeowners and home buyers, agricultural 
producers, community and non-profit organizations produce 
alternative energy and reduce energy consumption. 
 
We are also supporting a number of other projects. We are 
creating a Minister’s Council on Sustainability and Climate 
Change that will be made up of leaders from across 
Saskatchewan. While much work has already been done, it will 
be helpful to have their advice on developing a sustainable 
future and on initiatives dealing with climate change as we 
move forward. 
 
Saskatchewan students and schools will be able to compete for 
energy efficiency prizes by taking part in the climate change 
education challenge. We will work hard to have the people of 
our province understand what they can do and what others are 
already doing to help build a sustainable future. 
 
We are providing funding to help communities safely collect 
and dispose of unwanted pesticide containers and other 
hazardous materials. We are enhancing the collection of air 
quality data from anywhere in the province accessible by roads. 
We’ll be providing new funding to the Prairie Adaptation 
Research Centre for research on the impacts of climate change 
and adaptation strategies. 
 
And we’ll incorporate innovative green technology into 
provincial park facilities, showcasing green solutions for park 
visitors and reducing the greenhouse gas emissions of park 
operations. 
 
[14:30] 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

Recently the federal Environment minister and I announced 
$44.4 million in funding for Saskatchewan for projects related 
to clean air and climate change. Within the next few weeks 
we’ll be unveiling our sustainable energy strategy which will 
lay out our targets and describe our long-term plan for dealing 
with greenhouse gas emissions and the effects of climate 
change. 
 
Saskatchewan’s green strategy is a solid platform to deliver our 
vision of Saskatchewan people working together to achieve 
improved human health and education and a thriving, 
sustainable economy all supported by a diverse and enduring 
environment. Each of us has a role to play in shaping our future, 
and each of us will benefit from the successes that a clean, 
healthy environment and a sustainable, vibrant economy offer. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the ministerial statement, the Chair 
recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was able to attend 
the green strategy launch last Thursday, and while there are 
some good initiatives that were outlined by the government, my 
concern is that there’s no measurability in this document. There 
are no targets, no deadlines, no measurability. The 
announcement was a reannouncement of some initiatives from 
March and a pre-announcement of more announcements to 
come later this month. The NDP have announced in the last few 
weeks over $12 million for initiatives and, as I said, a lot of 
these initiatives are very good, but they’re not announcing what 
results they expect to achieve at the end of all of this. 
 
We know that they are liking photo ops lately, and the NDP are 
bringing Al Gore to town apparently to educate people in 
Saskatchewan. Yet only a handful of people will be able to hear 
his message because the NDP agreed to Mr. Gore’s media ban 
on the performance. 
 
The minister’s statement today says that the green strategy 
includes, and I quote: “a framework that sets out . . . long-term 
goals” except we have been unable to find out what those goals 
are. The document contains no specifics, no targets, and, like I 
said, no measurability. 
 
Ann Coxworth, the program director for the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Society, had this to say about the green strategy, 
and I quote: 
 

. . . I wouldn’t describe it as a strategy. I think for a 
strategy, you need to have targets — ‘This is what we’re 
going to accomplish’ — and then a road map as to how — 
‘This is how we’re going to get there.’ And I’m not seeing 
the targets . . . 
 

The NDP have had 16 years to address climate change and 
environmental issues and have done very little. I found it 
interesting that the Premier was handing out energy efficient 
light bulbs the other day. And although the light bulbs are a 
very good idea, people had to get in their vehicles and drive 
down to the store to pick them up, so the Premier’s photo op 
actually resulted in even more emissions going into our air. 

Under the 16 years that this government has been in office, 
greenhouse gas emissions have increased by 62 per cent above 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Martensville. Please continue. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under the 16 years 
that this NDP government has been in office, greenhouse gas 
emissions have gone up by 62 per cent above 1990 levels — 62 
per cent. It’s staggering. It’s one of the worst records of any 
province in this country. 
 
And I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, over the weekend, in 
response to the non-aggression pact between the federal 
Liberals and the Green Party, the NDP leader, Jack Layton, said 
that he was shocked that Elizabeth May would support 
Stephane Dion. He was shocked because under Stephane Dion 
and the Liberals, when they were in power, greenhouse gas 
emissions rose by 30 per cent in Canada. I wonder if the NDP 
still has Jack Layton’s support provincially considering their 
completely dismal record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wait with great anticipation for the next . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’m certain that all members 
have some very important things to say. Member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We wait with great 
anticipation for the next round of NDP environment 
announcements, and hopefully they are more detailed, contain 
some goals and direction and targets and measurability, because 
this green strategy does not. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, The Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 63, The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum Act be now introduced and read for the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 
will be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,100 through 
no. 1,104 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,100 to 1,104 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 54 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I feel 
very honoured to be able to rise in the Assembly today and 
speak on Bill 54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act. This 
Act will give protection to reservists who choose to serve our 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very, very happy to see that this idea is 
being moved forward by the Government of Saskatchewan at 
the urging of people who are reservists in our province and also 
by the official opposition who in early, I believe it was early 
January, called on the government to bring forward legislation 
to protect reservists who choose to serve our country. I recall 
quite clearly the day that that press conference was held. There 
was the Leader of the Opposition and members of the Canadian 
Legion and active and former reservists who were calling on the 
government to support such legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this legislation is very important. As an 
elected official in the province of Saskatchewan, I am aware 
that my previous job is protected, is guaranteed for me should 
the day come where I’m not an elected member of this 
Assembly. And I think that it just makes perfect sense that this 
should be extended to those who choose to fight for freedom 
and fight to protect our country in the name of the Government 
of Canada under the Canadian Armed Forces. 
 
I briefly — I won’t speak very long to this, Mr. Speaker — but 
I briefly want to mention a couple of people from the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency who I think deserve our 
protection in the province of Saskatchewan. The first is James 
Richards, Mr. Speaker. James was here in the legislature on 

April 3 when this Bill was read for the second time. He was 
introduced by the Minister of Labour. 
 
James is actually a college buddy of mine. He lived a couple 
doors down in residence at the University of Regina. James I 
believe is originally from Moose Jaw but he now lives in 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. He works for the Southeast Regional 
Library. He supervises the rural library branches in the 
southeast system. James Richards is a sergeant and he is 
preparing to depart for Afghanistan with the Saskatchewan 
Dragoons and I wish Godspeed upon James and hope for his 
speedy and safe return. 
 
And I also want to speak a little bit about . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
have a nephew. Well he’s my wife’s nephew. He’s in his early 
20s and last year he decided to — he’s a reservist — and he 
decided to go overseas and serve his country. And he served 
with honour and distinction and I know our entire family is 
certainly very proud of him. And he came back home safely and 
we’re certainly thankful for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, in preparing to bring forward our own 
legislation on this prior to the government’s, we held our own 
consultations with reservists and former and active reservists 
and business groups, and we certainly would support this 
legislation. We do want to see what will come forward in the 
regulations as that will be certainly meaningful. 
 
And I do also want to extend to the minister appreciation for 
allowing a staff member from the official opposition to sit in 
on, participate on a few meetings that were held in concert with 
his office. And we certainly appreciate that opportunity. 
 
And I just personally want to thank the reservists in 
Saskatchewan who choose to serve our country, to go overseas 
and fight in the name of Canada and the name of freedom. It 
certainly takes a lot of courage. And we also express our 
condolences to our Armed Forces families who lost I believe 
eight members of the Armed Forces last week. And it’s been an 
honour to speak on this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am honoured to be 
able participate in this debate on Bill 54. Mr. Speaker, I was 
surprised just prior to the end of this last year to learn of the 
holes in the protection that exists for reservists who wish to 
serve our country, both either in responding to domestic issues 
or to serve our country on an international basis. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, there is a protection there. 
There’s an employment protection for reservists when they are 
called to serve. But of course that is a rare, rare occurrence. 
Generally speaking, reservists are volunteering to perform 
duties on behalf of all of us domestically and internationally, 
and in that situation there is no protection. 
 
And I was surprised to learn of that in a letter that I received 
from a reservist who wrote to myself and the minister, I believe, 
and I corresponded with him. We contacted those reservists and 
indicated that I personally would be interested in sponsoring a 
private member’s Bill and/or working with the government on a 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2007 

Bill that would achieve this kind of protection. 
 
Specifically we wanted to look at issues of preserving tenure in 
education programs, tenure in unions, and of course 
employment protection. This Bill represents some progress — 
significant progress — and I congratulate the minister for his 
work on this, his earnestness to try to deal with this situation. 
And I agree with the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. We 
appreciate the fact that our office has been included in the 
consultations that have occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lest anyone have a doubt at all, you don’t have to 
do a lot of research to find out about the amazing impact that 
Canadians, that reservists have had here in Saskatchewan, in 
Canada, and around the world. You don’t have to do a lot of 
research to find out the impact that reservists and regular 
Armed Forces are having today in Afghanistan. 
 
You can measure that impact in the number of schools that are 
open, the number of young girls that are going to schools, the 
number of women professionals who now practise to the great 
benefit of society in Afghanistan, and even I would argue, Mr. 
Speaker, you could measure it in the number of terrorist training 
camps that are closed for business as a result of a presence 
there. The presence does not come without great cost to our 
country and, more significantly, to families of Armed Forces 
personnel, as the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy has pointed 
out, eight of whom passed away, died in action just last week in 
Afghanistan. 
 
So we are very mindful of the sacrifice that reservists and others 
are prepared to make. The very least we can do is afford them 
employment protection so that while they serve in Afghanistan, 
while they serve elsewhere around the world or domestically, to 
the benefit of all of us, that they would have a job to come back 
to, that they would have protection in student tenure and some 
of the other issues that we raised. 
 
So I’m pleased to support this Bill, to speak on the record on 
Bill 54, to congratulate the government for bringing it forward. 
 
I would say this. One of the challenges of an opposition private 
member’s Bill is that we’re not obviously allowed to attach any 
expenditures of public purse to those Bills — understandably 
so. And so when we were contemplating our own private 
member’s Bill, there was an element to it that would have . . . 
that we would like to have written into the Bill but couldn’t, 
based on those rules. And that is the provision for some sort of 
an initiative, some sort of a program that would compensate 
employers, both public sector and private sector, co-operative 
sector employers who wish to obviously comply with this 
legislation, wish to support reservists, but who have some 
attendant costs with that, be they training, be they even 
succession planning, whatever it might be. 
 
And we think because the numbers are relatively small, the 
number of Saskatchewan reservists who would be serving and 
who would be away from work, it would be very affordable. It 
would be achievable for the province of Saskatchewan, even 
perhaps to take a percentage of their salary — a small 
percentage of their salary — and provide that benefit to 
employers, public and private, and co-operative sector 
employers to provide for the training that’s required for a 

replacement and any other costs associated with this. 
 
[14:45] 
 
If there’s even one concern I’ve heard from reservists — and I 
have fielded them; I’m sure the minister has as well, other 
members of this House — it’s been that, if this protection is in 
place, will there be a reticence, a hesitancy on the part of 
employers who know that this Bill is in place to go ahead and 
employ a reservist? 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, have a great faith in all of the employers of this 
province, both in the public sector and in the private sector. I 
believe that this protection will be supported by them, that they 
wouldn’t even hesitate at it. However, Mr. Speaker, for those 
reservists who have raised that with me, one area, one 
advancement the government could take would be to provide 
some sort of perhaps training compensation when those 
reservists leave. And I’m thinking of, today, constituents who 
are in the provincial civil service who are . . . I also think of 
private sector employers. I think it would represent an 
improvement to this initiative. 
 
Still, as it’s written, as it stands before the Legislative 
Assembly, we support this Bill and we are grateful it’s come 
forward. We think it’s a good example of an idea that’s brought 
forward by reservists, by those affected directly by their 
families, that find support from MLAs of different ideological 
beliefs and party stripe. It’s how the system should work. And 
in this case, it’s working for those among us who are prepared 
to sacrifice, who are prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice in 
the interests of freedom, in the interests of our nation of 
Canada. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, we will be certainly encouraging 
that this Bill move to committee and that it could be passed then 
as speedily as possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Labour, Bill No. 54, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill No. 54, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 



April 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 54 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 54 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
order to accommodate the good work of the standing 
committees on both Human Services as well as 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, as well as the 
Board of Internal Economy, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:48.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1285 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1286 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1286 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom haShoah 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1287 
 Blacksburg Massacre 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Recognition of Saskatchewan Volunteers 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Panther Drilling Launches New Rig 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Saskatchewan Aboriginal Literacy Network 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1289 
 Premier’s Regina Business Dinner 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Former Minister’s Relationship with Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
 Response to Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Election Timing 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
CONDOLENCES 
 The Honourable J.E.N. (Jack) Wiebe 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Announcement of Green Strategy 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Forbes (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................1298 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


