




















































Hansard: December 10, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 1A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 10, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serje SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Subject of recount  Meadow Lake 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

 December 10, 2007 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have received a 

communication from the private secretary to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the first 

session of the twenty-sixth legislature at 10 a.m. this 10th day 

of December 2007. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

10:01.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — I am commanded by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 

until later today when the Legislative Assembly shall have 

elected a Speaker according to law. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:02.] 

 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 

 

Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 

to inform you that only one candidate has declared his intention 

to stand for the election of Speaker — Mr. Don Toth, the hon. 

member of the Legislative Assembly for the constituency of 

Moosomin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 

to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 

the high honour the Assembly has conferred on me. 

 

While I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s 

Chair, I leave behind all political partisan biases in order that I 

may discharge with impartiality to all and to the best of my 

ability the various and important duties pertaining to the office 

of Speaker. 

 

It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 

traditions of the Assembly and secure for each member the right 

to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 

preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 

hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 

facilitate the transaction of public business in an orderly 

manner; and above all to seek to be fair and impartial in the 

decisions you entrust to me. 

 

It has been my pleasure to serve in this Assembly for the past 

21 years. During this time I have gained a greater respect for 

our system of parliamentary democracy and all that it 

represents. This parliamentary democracy gives us the legal 

framework and stability necessary to allow us the opportunity 

of continuing to build this fine province. 

 

When I was first elected as a member of this Legislative 

Assembly, I felt my duty was that of a servant. It was my 

responsibility to ensure that the voice of my constituents was 

heard and that their interests were represented in this Assembly. 

As I leave the floor of the Assembly to assume the role of 

Speaker, I accept that not only do I serve my constituents; I now 

become your servant. 

It will be my responsibility as your servant to ensure that the 

rules and customs of this Legislative Assembly, which have 

been refined by members past and present, are observed. I will 

endeavour to the best of my ability to ensure that, as members 

of this Assembly, you have optimum and equal opportunity to 

be the voice for your constituents and to represent them with 

integrity and honour. 

 

I pray that I will be able to serve this Assembly well as your 

Speaker and that during my term the work of the members of 

this Assembly will make your constituents proud. 

 

I close by acknowledging the most important people in my life. 

It is because of their support and encouragement that I stand 

before you today. I am joined today by my wife Lois, son 

Byron, and daughter Stephanie. They are seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery and I ask them to stand and be recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I thank you once again for entrusting your 

confidence in me. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It falls 

to me to have the great honour and privilege of being the first of 

a number of members, I’m sure, who will take the opportunity 

to congratulate you on your election as Speaker of this House. 

 

John Diefenbaker commented on the role of parliament, saying 

that “Parliament is more than procedure; it is the custodian of 

the nation’s freedom.” It is the role of the Speaker of course to 

ensure that all of us as elected members are living up to those 

duties that are ensuring that this House plays its role in living 

up to those duties. 

 

Your job, the one you’re about to embark on, is obviously very 

important. It’s probably also one of the more thankless tasks 

that are a fact of life at the Legislative Assembly. The 

challenges I think we all know about — those members who 

have been here certainly before, and new members will find this 

to be true — the challenges of what can be at times what I’ve 

witnessed to be some raucous behaviour. Never participated 

myself, Mr. Speaker, but I have seen some raucous behaviour in 

this Assembly. And of course it’s your job to strike that proper 

balance between the need for lively debate and proper 

exchanges and also proper behaviour and decorum. 

 

And I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that we have a lot of 

faith in your ability to do just that. You, sir, are up to the task 

that lays before you because of the fairness that you have 

exhibited as a member of this Legislative Assembly for 21 

years, because of your disposition, because of the personality 

you have, because of your temperament, because of the honesty 

that you live on a daily basis. 

 

I noted with interest that during the election campaign when 

there were some articles, I think 20 questions sorts of articles 

asked of various combatants or contestants in the election 

campaign, we were asked, some of us, about people in the 

Assembly that we knew — who to be perhaps the friendliest or 

the easiest to get along with. And I noted that those of us who 

were asked the question cited the same people, and you were on 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2007 

that list. You have that respect from both sides of the House. 

 

And you have the experience to do this job. You have been in 

this Assembly for all of these years. You have participated in 

debate. And we all know on our side of the House — and I 

think it’s probably true to say of members opposite — that you 

understand the procedures. You have the experience to get this 

job done and to do the task very well. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, you’ve been here a long time in this 

Assembly. It’s a testament, I think, not only to the support that 

you have built in your constituency but also your own 

endurance, your own interest in public life and being a Member 

of the Legislative Assembly. For example, Mr. Speaker, when 

you were first elected, when you took your seat here, I was in 

third year university at the time. That’s how long ago it was. 

 

I’ve done a little bit of checking this morning on the Internet. 

The Ticats won the Grey Cup. They beat the Eskimos the first 

year that you were elected. Top Gun was the top grossing movie 

at the charts, and “Walk Like An Egyptian” was one of the most 

popular songs. That is a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it highlights for us the reality that you have the experience. 

You have the knowledge of this place, and as I’ve said earlier, 

you have the disposition and the grace and the personality to do 

this House proud. And we commit on this side of the House, 

and I’m sure members do, to commit to work with you in 

ensuring that the work of this institution continues and that we 

can build respect for the institution while we build the province. 

We say to you, Mr. Speaker, today, a heartfelt congratulations 

on your election as Speaker of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier and with I’m sure all members, with those who are 

guests in the Assembly today, and I’m sure with the people of 

Saskatchewan in congratulating you, sir, on your acclamation as 

our Speaker. It’s one thing to win an election. It’s another thing 

to win an acclamation. In fact many of us wish we could have 

done that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues want me to say to you our thanks 

for the approach that you have already made to the opposition 

caucus. We congratulate you on opening your door immediately 

to all members of this House. As the Premier has pointed out, 

your long experience in this House and wisdom gained will 

serve you well and will serve this House well. 

 

And I am caused to be reminded, when the Premier talks about 

that survey that was conducted during the election when we 

were asked as leaders to discuss members of this House, he is 

absolutely correct. You appeared, I think, on all of our lists, 

along with Peter Prebble. I’m not sure what else you share in 

common with Peter but clearly this — the respect of members. 

And that will serve you, sir, and will serve this House well. 

 

[10:15] 

I wish you well not only in the challenging role of overseeing 

the proceedings of this House but in sometimes the equally 

challenging role of administrator of this Legislative Assembly 

and all that goes with that. We know that is a very significant 

role and a very significant task if not accompanied by the same 

level of public awareness. 

 

We also wish you well and know that your demeanour and your 

experience will serve us well in terms of representing this 

legislature, and by representing the legislature, the province and 

the people of Saskatchewan both nationally and internationally. 

You will often receive the visits of foreign delegations. You 

will often represent this House and this legislature beyond our 

borders, and we wish you well in those endeavours. 

 

And finally if I may say, you follow in the path of two former 

Speakers who have proven to be activist Speakers through the 

establishment of the social studies institute, the engagement of 

the Speaker’s office in the classrooms, the internship program, 

the mace runner and cushion. And I would encourage you, sir, 

to continue that role of activism for you represent not just a 

legislature and a province, but you represent the fundamental 

principles of democracy in our province. And part of your work 

can be, and I’m sure will be, to extend that understanding and 

knowledge of democracy beyond this Chamber. 

 

It was a former clerk of this Chamber, who now serves in 

another office, who put together a little booklet about our 

Chamber and talked about the only true enemy of democracy 

being indifference. You, sir, have an opportunity to combat that 

indifference and in doing that work, we wish you well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I personally would like to say thank you to 

the Premier and the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition 

for the kind words you’ve expressed on my behalf, and I will do 

my utmost to serve you well. 

 

This House now will recess until 2 p.m. later today when His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor will present the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 14:00.] 

 

 



 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


