


















































Hansard: December 17, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 5A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 17, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 97 
 December 17, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to members of this Assembly, 
there’s a number of guests that I’d like to introduce that are 
seated in your gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery. In no particular 
order though, they together represent well the millions of 
dollars that have been invested by companies in the potash 
industry in the province and most importantly literally 
thousands of people affected directly through employment, 
through business work by the potash industry of our province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce the senior 
vice-president of operations of Mosaic — and maybe as I 
introduce them, I’ll ask them to stand — and chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association, Norm Beug. As 
well joining us is Steve Dyer who’s the vice-president of 
manufacturing for Agrium and the vice-chair of the Potash 
Producers Association of this province. Garth Moore is joining 
us as well, the president for PCS [Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] potash and the past chair of the Saskatchewan 
Potash Producers Association; Darrell Zwarych, the 
vice-president of finance for Mosaic Potash; as well as Gay 
Patrick who’s the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
Potash Producers Association. 
 
They’re here to see the introduction of an important little bit of 
business in this Legislative Assembly later today, important to 
the industry and an important signal about the economy of the 
province. And so I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 
the representatives from the potash industries here to our 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, I think those present on the 
government side and in the galleries, Mr. Speaker, will know 
that the relationship between the government and the potash 
industry over the last years has been a very positive and 
productive one. Mr. Speaker, we welcome the industry reps to 
the gallery this afternoon, and we look forward to continuing to 
work with them over the coming years. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, while I was on my feet I 
should have also taken the opportunity to introduce a number of 

members of CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 
Union of Canada] who have joined us in the Legislative 
Assembly today. I had the privilege of meeting with the 
president of the union to discuss the Domtar situation in Prince 
Albert on Friday. And we also want to welcome them through 
you to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the Premier in welcoming those citizens of Prince Albert and 
northern Saskatchewan who are joining us today in the 
legislature seated in the west gallery. Many of these visitors are 
or were employees at the P.A. [Prince Albert] mill and part of 
CEP, although not exclusively. Mr. Speaker, they have come to 
Regina today seeking answers from government about the 
future of the mill, about the future of their own livelihood, 
about the future of their community. And I, and we, welcome 
them here to legislature and invite all members to again 
welcome them heartily to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
two constituents from Regina Douglas Park who are with us 
today. They’re seated in the east gallery. They’re no strangers to 
this Chamber. They’ve visited here before. I look forward to 
their visits in the future as well. Would you please join with me 
in welcoming Bob Ivanochko and Maureen Eckstein. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly, I too would like to 
introduce a couple of guests in your gallery that are from my 
constituency, Ron and Karen Saal — if you can just give a bit 
of a wave. Ron and Karen are from Rouleau, Saskatchewan — 
better known as Dog River — and they’ve made the journey 
into Regina today to see the proceedings. 
 
I do want to . . . I mentioned if Ron Saal’s name is familiar, it’s 
because I mention him briefly on Thursday, I guess, when I did 
my reply to the Speech from the Throne. Ron was my 
fundraiser in this past campaign plus the campaign in 2003. He 
did such a great job in 2003; we wanted him back in 2007. He 
did a great job again. So I’d like all members to welcome Ron 
and Karen to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you and 
through you to the members of our Assembly here today, I’d 
like to take this opportunity to introduce Maria Lynn Freeland 
in your gallery, sir. She’s a senior Crown prosecutor from 
Meadow Lake. She’s part-time in my constituency, when she’s 
home on the weekends, and she’s setting up a residence in 
Meadow Lake. And today she’s come down with a friend of 
hers as he’s busy with the Speaker’s office, actually, doing 
some work this afternoon. So if everyone could give a rousing 
welcome to Maria Lynn Freeland please, and welcome to your 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I’d like to bring to your 
attention as well, joining us in the Speaker’s gallery is the 
Provincial Ombudsman, Mr. Kevin Fenwick, and I would invite 
members to welcome the Ombudsman, Mr. Fenwick, to his 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Furber: — I wish to present a petition of the Legislative 
Assembly on behalf of the citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit to reopening negotiations with 
Domtar based on an already negotiated MOU so as to see 
a viable pulp mill continue in Prince Albert. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks of the city of 
Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

We Are Many: A Festival 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
past days, weeks, and months a small group of very thoughtful 
and committed young people have been planning and 
organizing an event to be held in Saskatoon in August 2008. 
 
The “We are Many: A Festival,” or WAM for short, is an 
extremely ambitious and creative undertaking aimed at 
promoting environmental sustainability. Mr. Speaker, WAM 
organizers believe that the greatest barrier to changing the way 
that we as individuals impact our environment is the sentiment, 
I’m only one person — that if we knew our actions do have an 
effect on the world, we would be much more willing to make 
change. 
 
In order to overcome individual feelings of powerlessness, the 

festival is aiming at engaging 50,000 participants and — 
through music, theatre, visual arts, and dance — will cement 
those festival goers and artists’ personal commitment to 
environmental sustainability. Central, Mr. Speaker, is a pact 
that each will be invited to sign, agreeing commitment, 
proposing 40 personal actions that are all attainable and will 
result in positive change. Each signatory is also asked to sign up 
five more people to the WAM pact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to be working with this group of 
young people. I look forward to working with them over the 
months ahead. Tonight they are approaching the Saskatoon City 
Council for their support, and they will be seeking the support 
of this provincial government. I would encourage all members 
to lend their support to this creative, ambitious, and important 
event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

Borden’s Terrible Loss 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great sadness that I rise 
in this Assembly today to express our government’s 
condolences and sympathies to all the people of Borden, 
Saskatchewan and area, who are mourning the tragic and 
untimely loss of two young basketball players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Greg Sargent, 16, and Sandon Sutherland, 15, 
both members of the Borden High School boys’ basketball team 
lost their lives in a car accident while on their way to a game in 
Osler, Saskatchewan last week. Our thoughts and prayers are 
with the families of these two young boys, the coaches and 
team, the staff and students at the Borden High School, and 
everyone in the community of Borden as they work to come to 
terms with this terrible loss. Our thoughts and prayers are also 
with the four other young men injured in the accident, as well as 
the mother of one of the boys who perished, as they begin the 
recovery process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan small, and villages are known for 
coming together in times of tragedy, and Borden is no different. 
I want to thank the counsellors with the Prairie Spirit School 
Division who have been at the school supporting staff and 
students. I also want to thank everyone else in the community 
who has come together to support the families and their fellow 
community members. Whether it’s through their visits to Royal 
University Hospital or through their prayers, I know these and 
other gestures will help with the grieving process. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Dedicated Volunteer Honoured in Moose Jaw 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week a dedicated and valuable volunteer in Moose 
Jaw was honoured for his long service to our community. 
Retired Judge Gerald King was formally recognized last 
Thursday by the John Howard Society for more than 40 years of 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

volunteering. Twenty-five of those years have been in 
association with the John Howard Society in one way or 
another. 
 
Gerry’s donation of time and energy has not been limited to the 
John Howard Society. He’s also been active with the Kinsmen, 
the United Way, minor sports, and also as a strong advocate for 
people of differing abilities in our society through groups like 
the Saskatchewan Association for Community Living and many 
others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gerry has long believed in public education and 
raising public awareness of issues and has believed strongly in 
the groups who support these issues. He’s a man who has 
walked the talk and gotten involved on many levels. After a 
stint in the broadcasting field, Gerry entered the legal 
profession. He practised law in Swift Current and Maple Creek 
before being appointed a judge in Wynyard. Gerry then moved 
to Moose Jaw where he completed his legal career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gerry decided that, at 70 years of age, that was a 
good time to step away from board positions and committee 
work, and that time has come. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to join me in wishing retired Judge Gerry King a 
happy retirement and thanking him for his many years of 
dedicated service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Congratulations and Tribute in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you’re all very 
aware of the Saskatchewan Roughriders’ triumph in the 95th 
Grey Cup. Mr. Speaker, the Grey Cup was publicly displayed at 
the Moose Jaw Civic Centre during the hockey game on 
Saturday night between the Moose Jaw Warriors and the Regina 
Pats, and I’m happy to report that the Moose Jaw Warriors 
convincingly won the game 6 to 1. 
 
What made this evening so special was watching the 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Roughriders display this 
prestigious award at the Moose Jaw Civic Centre and seeing the 
standing ovation that they received from the fans. 
 
Among those champions was hometown hero Scott Schultz. 
Scott grew up in Moose Jaw where his family runs a 
progressive family furniture business. He attended Riverview 
Collegiate and is placed on that school’s wall of fame. Mr. 
Speaker, Scott is a role model both on and off the field. He is 
dedicated to giving back to the community by working with 
many charities, running a football camp for young people, and 
working full-time in the off-season. Moose Jaw Mayor Dale 
McBain paid special tribute to Scott by making him an 
honorary citizen of the city of Moose Jaw. I have personally 
suggested to city council that a sign of recognition for Scott 
Schultz and the 2007 Saskatchewan Roughriders be erected in 
the Moose Jaw area. Join me in congratulating Scott Schultz for 
his dedication to the province and being an honorary citizen of 
the city of Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Circle of Voices 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday evening, December 13, the Saskatchewan Native 
Theatre Company held its seventh annual farewell celebration 
for its Circle of Voices participants. This year six young people 
were recognized for their commitment and determination in 
completing this unique program. 
 
Circle of Voices or known as COV is a full-time, eight-month 
program for youth ages 16 to 26. COV provides valuable skills 
and knowledge in the areas of culture, life skills, and careers to 
help young people reach their own goals. Specifically through 
COV, participants gain confidence, pride, self-esteem, and a 
foundation for future growth and skill development. 
Participants receive drama 30 and 20 credits from 
Saskatchewan Learning. 
 
Now COV youth work with mentors to present live dramatic 
performances based on issues that are relevant and important to 
youth and communities. Universal themes are cultural identity 
and intergenerational impact of residential schools. Past 
programs have addressed issues of gangs, homelessness, 
families, and relationships. This year the students focused on 
the timely issue of residential school settlements. 
 
This year’s graduates were Diedre Badger, Jaired Henderson, 
Daniel Knight, Demetrius Knight, Aaron Shingoose, and Cory 
Standing. Over the past seven years, over 120 young people 
have successfully completed this amazing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
SNTC [Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company] family and 
wish the very best to these young people. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Grand Opening of Ranch Ehrlo Corman Park Campus 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday the 
Minister of Social Services, the member for Humboldt, 
announced the grand opening of Ranch Ehrlo Corman Park 
Campus. The campus includes two group homes, an education 
centre, and an administrative centre. The opening of this new 
campus represents an increased capability for Ranch Ehrlo to 
meet the needs of vulnerable youth, and it will increase their 
ability to build a secure future for Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a nationally recognized community organization with 40 
years of history toward helping vulnerable youth. Ranch Ehrlo 
is dedicated to improving the opportunities for individuals with 
addictions, mental illness, and conduct disability. Through 
partnerships with the Minister of Social Services, Ranch Ehrlo 
is committed to ensuring our youth live healthy and productive 
lives. This organization is an asset to the community because 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

the youth of Saskatchewan are an asset to this province. Ranch 
Ehrlo’s continued success will ensure our youth are supported 
in overcoming adversity. 
 
It is with pride, Mr. Speaker, that this government recognizes 
the contribution made by Ranch Ehrlo Society. There are four 
people who have contributed a great amount of time and energy 
to this organization. These individuals are Donna Welke, Tim 
Young, Frank May, and Justice Ellen Gunn. They will have 
campus buildings named in their honour. Mr. Speaker, the 
government shares the value of Ranch Ehrlo as they also are 
committed to securing the future of Saskatchewan and our 
youth. The government is sure the Corman Park Campus will be 
a success and will help many young people realize their full 
potential. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Martin Collegiate’s Bricks and Mortar Program 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, educators and programs 
throughout the province have the challenge of meeting the 
needs of the economy and the whole child needs of students. 
High quality educational opportunities are key not only in 
providing students with the knowledge and skills necessary to 
successfully participate in the province’s booming economy, 
but also in helping them develop into healthy and strong 
citizens. In short, Mr. Speaker, quality education programs 
benefit everyone — students, their families, the economy, the 
community as a whole. 
 
I want to commend two educators at Martin Collegiate in my 
Regina Rosemont constituency. Ian McKillop and Peter Flasko 
who, with the support of Bruce Pearce, have developed the 
program Bricks and Mortar, an innovative and progressive 
trades and skills program to complement the school’s more 
traditional course offerings. Mr. Speaker, the Bricks and Mortar 
program has served in part as a model to a much larger scale 
project — the development of a regional skills and trades centre 
right here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me in commending 
Mr. Ian McKillop, Mr. Peter Flasko for developing Bricks and 
Mortar, a program that not only benefits students and their 
families but the community and the economy as well. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 
 
Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s 
handling of the Prince Albert pulp mill file is a betrayal to the 
city of Prince Albert and a betrayal to the province. For two 

years we worked on a deal along with our union partners, First 
Nations, people of the city of Prince Albert. Perhaps the most 
egregious betrayal of all, Mr. Speaker, was the member of 
Prince Albert Carlton who speaks from his chair, that a vote for 
him was a vote for the mill open and people working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the people who read that ad are in the 
gallery today — his constituents — and they want answers. 
Will that member apologize to his constituents for providing 
them with wrong information during the campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has spoke to the 
Domtar representatives. I have spoke to Domtar representatives. 
The Premier has indeed spoken to union representatives as well. 
We feel that that’s consulting, obviously. The Premier as late as 
Friday has spoke to union representative folks. We also spoke 
to the chamber of commerce, spoke to the city council, spoke to 
the mayor about it, spoke to First Nations groups, which indeed 
the members opposite did not do in the consultation leading up 
to the deal — the MOU [memorandum of understanding]. We 
have consulted with the people of Saskatchewan with respect to 
it. We will continue to consult with the people of Saskatchewan 
and we’re going to do what’s necessary to keep the mill open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 
 
Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton is a minister in this cabinet. He can answer questions in 
this Assembly. He’s just as responsible as any other member of 
that cabinet for the decisions made by cabinet. His constituents 
are in the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, and his constituents want 
an answer. I’m asking the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
will he stand in his place in the Assembly today and apologize 
to the people that sent him here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, the government has 
widely consulted with people prior to the election, during the 
election campaign, and after the election campaign, and will 
continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. And when it comes to the 
betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan, we will take no lessons 
from the members opposite about that. What we will do, Mr. 
Speaker, is we will never engage in the eleventh hour activity 
that the members opposite did in trying to buy the votes of 
Saskatchewan people with the taxpayers’ monies of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. That may be the policies of the members 
opposite, but that will never be the policies of this government. 
 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Prince Albert Carlton promised during the election campaign 
that reopening the mill would be a top priority. He even ran an 
ad proposing that a vote for him was, quote, “a vote for the mill 
open and people working.” Well the people of Prince Albert 
voted for the member opposite — a whopping 47 per cent of 
them did. They believed his ad. They took him at his word. 
 
They’re not getting what they bargained for, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re joined today in the Assembly by constituents who are 
here to say that their MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] broke the public trust, betrayed his solemn promise, 
and lost the confidence of his constituents. 
 
Will the member of Prince Albert Carlton respect the wishes of 
the constituents, do the honourable thing, and resign today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the member 
opposite that in a recent poll in his own backyard, in the P.A. 
Herald, 60 per cent of the people of Prince Albert agreed with 
the decision taken by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Sixty per cent, 60 per cent of the people 
looked at that deal, Mr. Member opposite, 60 per cent of the 
people of Prince Albert, right in your own backyard, looked at 
this deal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the members to give the minister 
the same opportunity to respond as the member was given to 
ask the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so 
the members opposite would know that right in Prince Albert, 
in an online poll conducted by the Prince Albert Herald, that 60 
per cent of the people agreed with what actions have been 
taken. And as a result of that we will be doing everything we 
can to work with Domtar in the future to deal with this 
important issue for the people of Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Furber: — Well I guess now online opinion polls count as 
consultation. I’ll repeat myself because I don’t think the 
member heard me. 
 
He ran an ad saying a vote for him was, quote, “a vote for the 
mill open and people working.” People voted for him because 
they thought they would get the mill open and people working. 

They took him at his word. They made the mistake of taking 
him at his word. 
 
Here’s a letter to the editor from December 17, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I ask the members to come to 
order. I invite the member from Prince Albert Northcote to 
place his question. 
 
Mr. Furber: — I quote: “Although Darryl Hickie was loose 
with the lip, (he should and will be made to pay at the polls) 
. . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Just to remind the members to refer to 
members not by first name but by their seat. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Furber: — He should and will be made to pay at the polls. 
Will he finally start listening to his own constituents, to the men 
and women of Prince Albert, and step down immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
energy and mines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member is an 
excellent member representing the people of Prince Albert. But 
what is important here is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The most important consultation that could 
possibly take place in Saskatchewan did take place in 
Saskatchewan. On November 7 the people of Saskatchewan 
said in a resounding fashion that the policies opposite are not 
going to be the policies that govern this province any longer. 
 
What they represent, Mr. Speaker, the policies of that former 
administration, they represent very clearly to the people of 
Saskatchewan the failed policies of a failed philosophy, the 
failed policies of a failed government, the failed policies of that 
failed former premier. That’s what the policies of the members 
opposite represent. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
have voted in an overwhelming fashion and they agree with us 
in an overwhelming fashion that that deal was not in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, and that is precisely the 
reason why this administration will not be carrying that 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve learned a couple of things in this question period. One, 
the member from Prince Albert Carlton won’t stand in this 
House and answer for his own commitments. And two, the 
minister in charge of forestry now is good on an online poll, I 
guess. 
 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan Party government is making a 
science out of saying one thing before an election and doing 
something quite different. Make no mistake about it, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Prince Albert Carlton said that a 
vote for him and a vote for the Sask Party was a vote to open 
the mill. He didn’t say, I’d work towards it. No, it was a 
promise. And even after the election all that he would say is, 
well we’re going to put the Sask Party’s stamp on the deal. 
 
Well they put the stamp on the deal all right — DOA, dead on 
arrival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member from Prince Albert Carlton won’t 
do the right thing, I’m going to put a question to the Premier. 
Will the Premier today ask the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton to resign his seat? And, Mr. Speaker, if he will not, if he 
will not, is that an indication that he believes that saying one 
thing in front of an election is okay and doing something after 
an election is just fine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I was just in Prince Albert on 
Friday. We met there with the mayor and the council of Prince 
Albert. We met with the president of the union. We met as well 
with the chamber of commerce. Mr. Speaker, we met with First 
Nations, whom that member, when he was in this chair, failed 
to consult on this deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — He did not consult with the First Nations 
that are a partner to this project. They just made the 
announcement. The reason that that happened, Mr. Speaker, is 
because there was no deal to announce, except for the 
desperation on the part of that government to try to win a 
government, to try to win re-election. 
 
Since that day we’ve been very consistent, Mr. Speaker, that 
this party — if elected to government, which happened on 
November 7 — would not put at risk $100 million on a pulp 
fiction deal, a deal that simply didn’t exist; that we would work 
towards the reopening of that mill with a proper arrangement, 
Mr. Speaker, that didn’t risk taxpayers’ money and actually was 
grounded in some truth. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
will happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Premier got to 
his feet. He wouldn’t answer my question, so I’ll try another 
one. 
 
Now finally, finally, the Premier decides to go to Prince Albert 
at the end of last week, on Friday. And I read in the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald, when he’s asked about why he did not 
consult with the task force or with anyone before axing and 

ripping up the MOU, he said about the task force work, quote, 
“[Well] We’re looking at it now.” We’re looking at it now. I 
tear up the deal first and then I go and speak to the people that 
are intimately involved with this deal and say, “[Well] We’re 
looking at it now.” 
 
My question to the Premier is, why didn’t he talk to the task 
force members? Why didn’t he review their work before he 
ripped up the deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the work of the task force that 
was done, other work around the forestry piece, was the subject 
of review by this party when we sat over on the opposition 
benches, Mr. Speaker. That’s the bottom line here. 
 
What was also very consistent from the very, very beginning 
was the position of this party. When that deal was announced 
on September 12, when this MOU was announced on 
September 12, this party said we would not proceed with this 
kind of risking of taxpayers’ money. 
 
I would point out, by the way, that next day, on September 13, 
in the P.A. Daily Herald the chief of the Montreal Lake First 
Nation, Lionel Bird, said he was not consulted on the MOU. 
The next day Domtar had to clarify their message. On 
September 15 they said, we’re not going to see people back to 
work next summer as that member had promised, trying to get 
elected. Then the next day after that, that member, when he was 
the premier, issues another press release to try to clarify that, 
no, it’s going to be in the summer. And then a few days after 
that the president of Domtar holds a webcast to say no, it may 
never open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was cruel to the people of Prince Albert. They 
saw through the charade. This government will work to real 
opportunity at that facility in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — The bottom line is, that party was invited to be 
part of the task force and they never showed up once. Not once, 
Mr. Speaker. And would the leader of the opposition care to 
explain to this legislature — in fact to the investment 
community of North America — how it is that he can go about, 
how it is he can go about insulting a major investor on this 
continent, Mr. Speaker, by calling their signatures pulp fiction. 
Pulp fiction — that’s what he calls the signatures of Domtar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is: he says one thing 
before an election, he does something quite different after an 
election. Before the election he was demanding of government a 
timeline — a timeline for the reopening of the Prince Albert 
pulp mill. Now we have in this legislature today people — 
workers and families — who have come all the way from 
Prince Albert to hear a question to this. 
 
I ask the Premier of the province: what is your timeline for the 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

reopening of the P.A. mill? What is the timeline? No ifs, ands, 
or buts. What’s your timeline? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
we have said on numerous occasions, the Premier has spoken to 
Domtar representatives, I have spoken to Domtar 
representatives. The Premier has spoken to representatives of 
the union. The Premier has spoken to the mayor of Prince 
Albert. The Premier has spoken to city council. The Premier has 
spoken to the chamber of commerce. The Premier has spoken to 
First Nations groups in Saskatchewan as well about it. 
 
The timeline is really quite simple, Mr. Speaker. We are going 
to do what we possibly can to put a deal in place for the people 
of Prince Albert. What we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
we’re not going to risk $100 million of taxpayers’ money on a 
deal that even the representatives of Domtar said may not ever 
happen . . . [inaudible] . . . to keep the mill open in Prince 
Albert. That’s the one thing that members opposite may be 
prepared to put this cruel hoax before the people of 
Saskatchewan, but the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, will never do that to the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve just heard 
from the minister and the Premier is all of this consultation 
takes place on one Friday after the deal has been ripped up. 
Eighteen minutes they spent with the working people — 18 
minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say one thing before an election; they do 
something entirely different after the election. And we’re seeing 
it over and over again. 
 
You know, they talked about wasting money in government. 
Well I’ve seen the land speed record today — the land speed 
record in backtracking. We’ve forced them off this foolish 
notion of getting rid of the wheat sheaf and spending millions of 
dollars. The land speed record in backtracking. 
 
Why don’t they just backtrack one more time and do the right 
thing? Do the right thing. Honour your commitment; honour 
your promise. Do what you said you would do before the 
election and let’s get the mill reopened. 
 
I’m asking the Premier again. Why don’t you sit down with 
Domtar? Why don’t you sit down with the memorandum of 
understanding that was worked out with the community, the 
First Nations, the working people, the people of Prince Albert? 
Sit down with the executives of Domtar. Sure, if you want to 
put your stamp on it, go ahead. Get a deal. Give us a timeline. 
Reopen the mill for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
would think, given the track record of the members opposite 
when it comes to investing on behalf of Saskatchewan people, 
you would think, given the record of the losses of $35 million in 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company], the losses of 72 million in Navigata — and the list 
goes on and on and on — you would think, given the record of 
the members opposite, that they would be running away from a 
deal like that as fast as they possibly could. But what did they 
do, Mr. Speaker? What did they do? In the heat of an election 
campaign, in the eleventh hour of the campaign, Mr. Speaker, 
they brought forward a deal on the back of a napkin that they 
dreamed up hoping that the people of this province would buy 
into this dream that they had to create opportunity in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Well the good news is, Mr. Speaker, is the people of this 
province of Saskatchewan looked at the deal, looked at the 
MOU, and said, no, we’re not prepared to be a part of this. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province has said on a number 
of occasions leading up to the election campaign, during the 
election campaign, and after the election campaign, we are not 
going to put taxpayers’ money at risk, and we will not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Comparisons of Financial Policies 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last week the government 
introduced the much touted growth and financial security Act. 
The Act . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The Act includes the creation of a 
Growth and Financial Security Fund — a big name, Mr. 
Speaker, which might explain why the Minister of Finance kept 
referring to it in his scrum as a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
In that scrum, the minister was asked by reporters what was the 
difference between what he was planning to do with the Growth 
and Financial Security Fund and what the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund had been used for by the previous government. The 
minister replied, quote, “fundamentally, there is very little 
difference.” 
 
My question is to the Minister of Finance: can he put on the 
record today if his new fund can be used to balance the budget 
in a year where expenditures exceed revenue? Yes or no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased after 12 years to have the opportunity on behalf of 
government to answer these questions. Mr. Speaker, there is 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

some fundamental differences between what that member, when 
he was a Finance minister, had in his Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
and what we’re committing to in the Growth and Financial 
Security Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some fundamental things. And that 
member if anyone should know that up until January of this 
year, there was no money, zero balance in real terms in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. It was indeed a phony-baloney fund 
that was just taking, increasing the debt of the province, and it 
was a book entry, and it was . . . been perpetrating a falsehood 
on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really, really important to indicate that there 
are concrete steps in this new fund, the Growth and Financial 
Security Fund, that are going to be markedly different than what 
the government used to do with its phony-baloney fund. And I 
hope there’s a subsequent question so I can fill it in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Speaking of the last 12 years, Mr. 
Speaker, it was more than a phony-baloney fund as referred to 
by members opposite. Here is some of the language, some of 
the words used by members opposite as they criticized the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They called it, yes, a phony-baloney 
fund, voodoo economics, a fancy slush fund. They said it was a 
fudge-it budget, worn out, old accounting tricks, a false 
bookkeeping procedure, and a shell game. Pretty harsh 
criticism, Mr. Speaker. And now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Finance says there’s basically no difference between the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] plan and their plan. 
 
My question again is for the Minister of Finance: will he admit 
that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund set up by the NDP 
government was sound public policy, or will he admit that the 
new Financial Growth and Security Fund too is a 
phony-baloney, voodoo, slush fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I realize that that member does not quite understand 
the differences of the fund in this fundamental way: their fund 
had no money in it; ours is fully funded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, until 
January of this current year, 2007, there was no money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. It was a book entry against long-term 
debt. It was the equivalent of using your credit card to balance 
your family’s budget. Mr. Speaker, that might be a subtle 
difference to the member opposite, but it’s a fundamental 
difference to this government to actually talk about a way of 
balancing the extremes of budget income by using a savings 
account that has money in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out to the member 
opposite that there are features that have impacted discipline on 
government in terms of how surpluses are accounted for, where 
these monies have to go, how they have to be used to pay down 
debt, how they can go to infrastructure and things of this nature. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental difference, but mostly 
because there’s money in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, some things haven’t 
changed. Rhetorical excesses haven’t changed. Mr. Speaker, 
that Sask Party member for Cannington, on May 26, 2000, said, 
quote: 
 

The government likes to call this the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. Actually probably a better name for it is the fancy 
slush fund because the government claims it’s going to use 
this money to maintain its balances in the budget. 

 
And then the Sask Party government brings in essentially the 
same fund, Mr. Speaker. And what does the member for 
Cannington have to say in his reply to the Speech from the 
Throne? Last week, the very day his government introduces the 
same fund, quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, it was like their balanced budget statements. 
They would set up one little fund and say, yes, that fund 
was balanced, while they’re paying debt, Mr. Speaker, to 
support that program. 

 
To the Minister of Government Services, Mr. Speaker: have his 
cabinet colleagues bothered to explain to them their new Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and will he be referring to it as a fancy slush 
fund in the future? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that former 
Treasury Board chairman should have the responsibility to 
stand up in the House and explain to this House why in the last 
budget there were no go-forward year forecasts in that budget. 
How in the world, how in the world . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — How in the world could that member 
sit and be a part of government that in essence was keeping 
from the public of Saskatchewan that, at the spending rates that 
were being incurred, that there was going to be potentially a 
$4.1 billion deficit in the next four years? How in the world 
could that former Finance minister sit and support that kind of 
actions on behalf of his government? 
 
How in the world can that minister and that member, when he 
was part of the Department of Finance, how could he have 
possibly continued to perpetuate the illusion that there was 
money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? I find it ludicrous that 
he would have the audacity to even get up and ask these 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this new Act was part of 
the Saskatchewan Party’s platform which stated a Sask Party 
government would pass the Saskatchewan growth and financial 
security Act to require that, and I quote, “. . . the budget [is] to 
be balanced every year instead of over four years as is now the 
case.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Finance: does the minister believe his new 
legislation matches the commitment outlined in the 
Saskatchewan Party platform? Does he believe the government 
kept their word to the voters of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, clearly in the platform of the Saskatchewan Party in 
the last election we made commitments of transparency and 
accountability to the people of this province. This legislation is 
going to ensure that that happens. 
 
With this legislation we’re reducing a lot of the risk that was 
created by that government when they were in this side of the 
House. We’re mandating balanced budgets. We’re ensuring the 
surpluses go towards reducing deficits and investment in 
economic growth initiatives. We’re tabling four-year financial 
plans with every budget. And we’re making sure that the 
Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t grow any faster than the 
population and the people of Saskatchewan do. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is a responsible way to look after the finances of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I just want to make one comment. 
We’re all aware of the fact that use of proper names is not 
appropriate unless coming from a quote. And I understand that 
earlier this afternoon a quote was being used, which I 
unfortunately didn’t hear, and I apologize for that. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Enterprise and 
Innovation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 2, The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Enterprise and Innovation that first reading of Bill No. 2, The 
Enterprise Saskatchewan Act be now read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 
Potash Development Repeal Act be introduced and now read a 
first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 
and Resources that first reading of Bill No. 3, The Potash 
Development Repeal Act be now read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I lay 
before the Assembly, pursuant to section 30 of The 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, a special report of 
the Provincial Ombudsman. 
 
I also wish to lay on the Table, in accordance with the Board of 
Internal Economy directive #22, the members’ accountability 
and disclosure statements for the year ended March 31, 2007. 
 
And in accordance with directive # 23, I also table the audited 
financial statements for the New Democratic caucus and for the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus for the year ended March 31, 2007. 
 
I wish to table a letter from His Honour dated December 19, 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

2007, advising of the membership of the Board of Internal 
Economy. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

The Passing of Two Former Officers of the 
Legislative Assembly 

 
The Speaker: — Members, I wish to advise the Assembly as 
well of the passing of two former officers of this Assembly. 
 
Kenneth Bradshaw was a senior Clerk at Westminster when he 
was invited to serve as Clerk of this Assembly for the 1966 
legislative session. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw was born September 1, 1922, and spent his early 
years in Kenya where his father was employed. His studies in 
history at the University of Cambridge were interrupted by his 
service with the 2nd Battalion, Royal Ulster Rifles during the 
Second World War. In 1947 Mr. Bradshaw entered the 
Department of the Clerk of the House of Commons, eventually 
serving as Clerk of the House from 1983 to 1987. 
 
Throughout his career, Mr. Bradshaw retained an interest in 
fostering interparliamentary relationships within the 
Commonwealth. He was an active participant and leader in the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the 
Inter-Parliamentary Union, and the Association of Secretaries 
General of Parliaments. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw died on October 31 of this year in London, 
England at the age of 85. 
 
Derril McLeod, who passed away on December 12, 2007, 
served as the province’s first freedom of information and 
privacy commissioner and later as the first conflict of interest 
commissioner. 
 
Mr. McLeod was born on March 3, 1924, at Marcelin, 
Saskatchewan. He graduated from the University of 
Saskatchewan with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1944 and a 
Bachelor of Law degree in 1946. Mr. McLeod had a 
distinguished legal career and was appointed Queen’s Counsel 
in 1962. Mr. McLeod was an active participant in numerous 
community organizations. He served in senior positions on the 
board of governors with both the University of Saskatchewan 
and the University of Regina. Several businesses benefit from 
Mr. McLeod’s enterprise, as did many charitable and cultural 
associations. 
 
I ask all members to join me in conveying the Assembly’s 
condolences to the bereaved families. 
 
I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a few 
words about . . . I’d like to ask for permission to say a few 
words with respect to Mr. Derril McLeod. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, almost 30 years ago I started 
practising law in Regina, and I met Mr. McLeod at that time 
when he was one of the senior members of the Regina Bar. He 
worked at the firm that was then known as Pedersen, Norman, 
McLeod & Todd, and he was one of the employers who had 
been practising for a long time in Regina who was very 
welcoming to new lawyers no matter what decade they started 
practising in. And as you indicated, he practised in many, many 
decades here in Regina. 
 
When I was elected in 1995 and became the Minister of Justice, 
I then had the privilege to work with him as an officer of the 
legislature. And I just want to say to his wife and to the family 
that I very much appreciated working with him. 
 
I know that he provided very capable, wise, patient counsel as 
we all worked through the initial issues of privacy in 
Saskatchewan. And he served in that role for many years and 
then eventually passed that on, but continued with the conflict 
of interest work where he worked with all members of the 
legislature. 
 
And I just want to say on my behalf, but I think on behalf of all 
of us here, thank you very much for the service that was 
provided by this man. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Canora has asked for leave 
to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to the members for allowing me this opportunity 
to introduce a couple of guests that are seated in the west 
gallery. Two gentlemen have entered the gallery since the time 
for introduction of guests, and I appreciate the members 
allowing me to do this. 
 
On behalf of the member from Kelvington-Wadena and on 
behalf of a member in Regina — because I know one of the 
gentlemen up there lives in Regina — but I’d like to introduce 
Edmund Genoway Sr. and Edmund Genoway Jr. 
 
These two gentlemen have long been involved in the affairs of 
the small community of Rama. The Genoway family is a 
long-standing name that you will find in many areas around 
Rama. Edmund Sr. and his family still operate a large dairy 
farm and serve the needs of many people in the Yorkton area in 
terms of supplying them with milk. And Edmund Genoway Jr. 
and I have been seen on the ball fields occasionally, but we 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

won’t go into that. So on behalf of all the members in the 
House, I want to welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 
Ottenbreit, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Calvert.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to enter into the Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker, 
but first off I’d like to congratulate you on your appointment to 
the Chair. I think, as everybody else has stated so far, that 
you’re well-suited for the job, and you will do an excellent job 
as Speaker of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this time to thank the residents 
of Wood River. It was a little bit different campaign this time 
around because I didn’t know who I had for an opposition for a 
period of time, and when it come down to the final analysis I 
still didn’t know who I had for an opposition. 
 
I would sure like to thank my campaign managers, Mr. Bud 
Romansky and Mr. Don Peterson, who were co-campaign 
managers for me, and all the rest of the committee in Wood 
River that worked hard in obtaining the results that we did. And 
I’d just like to talk just a minute about the election in Wood 
River, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just received this morning the final summary of the polls from 
the returning office. And it was close in a couple, but I never 
lost a poll in the constituency. I didn’t quite hit 70 per cent as 
some of my colleagues have, but I think I’m .041 away from the 
70 per cent. So I’m relatively pleased with that. The plurality of 
the vote was in excess of 4,000, Mr. Speaker, so I’m very, very 
pleased and satisfied and happy to represent the people of 
Wood River. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s some reasons that the 
plurality probably ended up the way that it did. When I started 
looking at the campaign and how the campaign was unfolding 
on a provincial basis, it was very, very easy to see that there 
was a campaign of fear and a campaign of hope. Now we know, 
we know in the past the campaign of fear from the socialist 
government tended to work. And that’s all they campaign on. 
 
I’ve asked people in my constituency in the 2003 election what 
the NDP policy was, and the answer is zero. They didn’t know. 
It was fear only. I asked the same question in this campaign. I 
talked to people, and I’d say, can anybody tell me any part of 
the NDP policy? And the answer was, well I think the only 
thing I ever heard out of the NDP was something about 

universal drugs that was going to cost so many multi-millions 
of dollars that it wasn’t worthwhile. Other than that, they didn’t 
know anything else about their campaign except fear. 
 
Now it’s interesting when you talk about a fear campaign and 
how it’s portrayed and how it comes out. And I’d like to 
address a couple of those issues because I think a lot of it fits in 
with the whole socialist policy. 
 
Hidden agenda — they talked about that. That wasn’t much of a 
campaign policy on their part. It was about somebody else. The 
privatization of Crowns, well they had to go back to that 
because they figured it worked in 2003, so they had to go back 
and talk about privatization of Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an air of mendacity throughout their 
whole campaign, and all you have to do is look at what the 
actions were in their campaign. Now they even addressed 
lowering minimum wage. Where did they get that from? They 
talked about for-profit health care. Where did they come up 
with that? They just made that up. That’s been kind of their 
whole campaign . . . was just making things up on the fly. 
 
Again privatization of Crowns, they’ve hit that a few times in 
their campaign. The scare tactics that they used . . . We even 
had word that there was phone calls to seniors in senior 
housing, phone calls before the election, that they would be 
removed if the NDP didn’t get elected. Now where would they 
come up, where would they come up with that? 
 
[14:30] 
 
And we look at other incidents that happened in the campaign. I 
think we all are familiar with the Jeff Potts incident in Swift 
Current. Now if you look at what his wording was, where 
would they come up with that? Was this a unilateral decision by 
one Mr. Jeff Potts? Or was he given that from the central 
campaign? It’s hard to say, Mr. Speaker, but they were just not 
being forthright with the people of the province and trying to 
use a scare tactic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when all of this fear is put forward to people, there 
are some that subscribe to it. And I don’t know the individual, 
but I heard a bit of a story — embellished or not, I don’t know 
— but he was an NDP supporter that subscribed to the theory of 
the fear campaign. And on November 7 when he went to bed in 
the evening, he was quite distressed. He was very, very 
disturbed. But when he woke up in the morning, Mr. Speaker, 
the furnace was still working, so SaskEnergy wasn’t shut down. 
Gosh, he flicked the light on and right away the room lit up, and 
SaskPower had not been shut down. He immediately phoned his 
son and — lo and behold — the phone worked. So he went 
running outside quickly, and the sky had not fallen, Mr. 
Speaker. Well just to make sure he drove into town at noon, and 
the liquor store was open. He is no longer an NDPer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also like to talk or I would like to talk about 
the wolf in sheep’s clothing. Where did that come from? Where 
did it come from? Well there’s an indication of the tired, worn 
out NDP coming up with some fictitious, little gimmick. They 
figured a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
leader of the NDP tried to pull the wool over the people’s eyes 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

of Saskatchewan, but in fact he got bit. They did not subscribe 
to that one little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to talk about some of the business. We get talking 
about Domtar . . . I’ll touch on that a little bit more, but we hear 
that the members opposite now start talking about business. 
Well you just have to look in the Regina Manifesto, and you can 
really understand their position on business, when they want to 
eradicate capitalism. Well what is business if it isn’t capitalism? 
 
So I want to just touch base on a little bit of the business 
acumen of the members opposite. And we’ll look at some of the 
real business dealings that they’ve had. And I want to touch on 
quite a number of these, Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s 
worthwhile for the people of Saskatchewan to know the 
business acumen of those people on the other side. 
 
SaskTel, some of their great ones: tappedinto.com, a mere loss 
of 6.7 million; Persona, 9.4 million. Navigata’s up to something 
like $72 million loss now. Retx.com — heck, some of these 
people don’t even remember the names — but that was just a 
$26 million loss. Craig Wireless, $10 million loss; NST, 16 
million; Clickabid, $1.9 million; Soft Tracks, 2.2 million; Ag 
Dealer, 8.9 — that’s just from SaskTel. These are losses from 
these business geniuses from the other side of the room. 
 
Now we look at SPUDCO, the infamous SPUDCO. And we 
could talk for an awful long time on SPUDCO because there 
was a case where the then-government was not forthright with 
the people of Saskatchewan. And we could look at the headlines 
of the papers and see how they weren’t being truthful with the 
people of Saskatchewan. A public-private partnership that was 
not public-private partnership — it was all taxpayers’ money. 
Well it ended up at about a $35 million loss. 
 
What went along with that, Mr. Speaker, is Broe Industries. 
Now what happened to Broe? All of a sudden the Belle Plaine 
ethanol plant kind of went by the wayside. I don’t think it 
passed the smell test. I think what happened there, they had the 
same kind of a deal cooked up with Broe that they had with 
SPUDCO, where, okay we’ll give you the money and then you 
give it back to us for being a partner with us. Well that one 
slipped the surly bonds I’ll tell you, once SPUDCO was 
highlighted. 
 
Let’s go to a couple more: SaskPower Channel Lake, a $15 
million loss; Guyana, $2 million loss. Now Channel Lake, the 
loss there was because somebody . . . part of the loss was 
somebody didn’t read the bottom line of a contract. I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that one doesn’t pass the smell 
testing either. 
 
Now we go to SGI: Coachman Insurance, a mere $16.1 million 
loss. How about trying to take over the bingo industry of this 
province? Mega bingo — only the NDP could want to get 
involved in bingo — $8 million loss. Pangaea, $3.5 million 
loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now talk about the Meadow Lake pulp mill. That 
is an $800 million loss. If you add those up — just the ones that 
I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker — we’re over $1 billion in a loss 
from this government that wants to eradicate capitalism. I didn’t 
think they’d choose this method to eradicate it though. 

When you look at, when you look at what Domtar . . . And 
there’s questions in question period about Domtar, and $100 
million is going into Domtar. How much more would have gone 
into Domtar, gosh, had’ve they been re-elected? 
 
When I talk about Meadow Lake pulp mill $800 million loss 
. . . And the minister of Industry at the time got up in this House 
and says, yes, but we didn’t start it; it was started by the then 
Devine government. So that absolved them from blame in 
according to their own mental capacity. 
 
But it kind of, it kind of brought to light to me the . . . A person 
that buys a racehorse and another person goes and bets on the 
racehorse at the race. And the horse keeps losing, but the person 
keeps betting on it. So every time he bets and the horse loses, he 
blames the person that bought the horse. But he still, still bets 
on it. That’s exactly what the Meadow Lake pulp mill has done. 
These people kept betting on it and putting more and more 
taxpayers’ dollars into the Meadow Lake venture. 
 
That’s some of the business ones, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
talk about another one that really didn’t pass the smell test . . . is 
third party leasing. Now we know that the third party leasing 
has happened. And now just prior to the election, I think, 
they’ve eliminated it; they got out of the third party leasing. 
And I think one of the reasons is it didn’t pass the smell test. 
 
And that’s, that’s kind of a deal where if money could be 
borrowed from a growth fund and then a company that buys 
something — let’s say, an airplane or some vehicles — and 
then leases that back to SPM [Saskatchewan Property 
Management] who then in turn leases it back to other 
government agencies, there’s something just a little fishy there. 
 
Anyway I think the proof in the pudding is that they made sure 
that was scrapped before the election. And I think that’s 
something that’s going to have to be looked into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the Throne Speech — by the way, which was 
an excellent Throne Speech — when the Leader of the NDP 
made a comment on the Throne Speech to the media, and what 
was reported in the paper was the Leader of the Opposition “. . . 
said the throne speech has no clear plans to deal with issues 
such as the crisis in the livestock industry . . .” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how can that group over there have the 
audacity to talk about the livestock industry or anything in rural 
Saskatchewan? They gutted programs in rural Saskatchewan. 
They’ve devastated the crop insurance. People don’t even get 
into crop insurance now because of what those men and women 
on the other side now have done. Gosh there’s a whole list. 
There’s a whole list of their attacks on rural Saskatchewan. You 
know closing rural service centres is one, farm fuel rebates . . . 
There’s just a whole list of items that they have attacked on 
rural Saskatchewan. But when it comes to the livestock 
industry, Mr. Speaker, this is one that I’ve talked about since I 
was elected. 
 
Every year since I was elected, I talked about it. And I said how 
can, how can we justify shipping 750,000 head of cattle from 
Saskatchewan to Alberta every year to be fed? Along with it, 
we ship the grain. And along with that, we ship our young men 
and women to feed Saskatchewan grain to Saskatchewan cattle. 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

And I’d look across to the other side, and I’d say, does anybody 
over there agree with this? And you would see some people that 
would actually put their heads down. Did they do anything, 
anything at all to help cure that problem while they’re in 
government for 16 years? And the answer is absolutely not — 
nothing at all to help the livestock industry. 
 
Now here’s, here’s just another one — again when I say, having 
the audacity to speak about rural Saskatchewan. We have, we 
have a drought situation in the Southwest for four consecutive 
years. Drought and gophers been a huge, huge problem. You 
know what the minister then, the minister of Agriculture got up 
and said we don’t have any money for it. Oh we got $100 
million to put into skating rinks. We’ve got $100 million to put 
into Domtar on an MOU, but we don’t have any money for the 
drought-stricken people of southwestern Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, that is shameful. That is absolutely shameful. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think my time is running out, 
so what I would like to, what I’d like to do . . . Well I got about 
another hour’s worth here. What I’d like to do is just talk about 
the forward thinking that this government has in the Throne 
Speech — the balanced budget legislation we’ve heard about, 
tuition rebates, Enterprise Saskatchewan. 
 
Again the fear coming from the other side about Enterprise 
Saskatchewan . . . it’s quite interesting because again we look at 
Enterprise Saskatchewan as taking the politics out of, out of 
some of the business dealings. And in fact the minister, the 
minister of Industry and Trade prior to the election, he had 
stated on our leader’s economic paper that he didn’t like the 
economic paper because it took too much out of the hands of 
government. Well Enterprise Saskatchewan is designed to get 
politics more removed from business in this province. But it’s 
interesting to note for members over there that haven’t studied 
the Regina Manifesto, that even in theirs they talk about “. . . 
competent managements freed from day to day political 
interference.” That’s even in their own manifesto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway the outstanding things within the Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, it goes on and on, and we’ve heard from other 
members on this side of the House that very much agree with 
the Throne Speech. So, Mr. Speaker, I will definitely be in 
support of the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the debate in reply to the Throne Speech. I want to begin 
following the example of many members, including the 
Minister of Health, and take time to thank the people who 
worked in the election, who supported me in the election, as a 
matter of fact the people who supported any candidate in the 
democratic process. 
 
As the minister pointed out, it’s surprising at the end of the day 
how many people it takes to run a successful campaign over 28 
days, how many people that is, how many different individuals 
that is at the end of the day. And I can’t even begin to try to 
thank them here. I have thanked them in various ways since the 

campaign. 
 
But I want to make particular note of my family. As some 
members have noted, spouses and children are a particular 
support to those in campaigns, and that’s true in my case as 
well. My wife, Cheryl, took time from what is a very busy 
personal schedule — she’s a very busy person — to campaign 
for me. And I want to acknowledge and thank her for that. And 
my children as well, including my son, Nathan, who was away 
on other duty until about the day before the campaign. And I 
know how hard he would have worked in this campaign, as he 
did in 2003, if he had been able to be there, but he was not. But 
I still want to acknowledge his enthusiasm even though he had 
to be absent for much of the campaign. 
 
All elections for me, Mr. Speaker — whatever the result when 
the ballots are counted — are a reason to celebrate. It is a rare, 
still rare achievement of humanity that all adults in a society, in 
a community, despite income, class, background, get up one 
morning and in a very casual way go to a school or some other 
community building and cast a vote for who’s going to govern 
them without even, in most cases, considering the importance of 
that, the value of that, and the rarity of it, Mr. Speaker. And 
some elections are more celebratory than others, but all 
elections, I think, are reasons for celebration because they 
celebrate the freedom that we almost breathe spiritually, such 
that we are not aware of it unless we are ever deprived of it. 
And fortunately in this country that is not our experience. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I was again bemused, as I was at the election of the previous 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, at the ceremony involved in that election. 
I want to congratulate you on that election. It seemed to me that 
when we were looking at the makeup of the legislature that 
there were perhaps two members from the government’s side of 
the House who could fill that role: one, the member from 
Cypress Hills who has gone into cabinet, and you were clearly 
the other one. And people who know you well and have known 
you well for a long time obviously agree with that and have 
spoken to that. And I want to join with them in that 
congratulations. 
 
But I was bemused, as I always am, by the feigned struggle to 
take you to your chair, which we all smile and laugh at, but is 
again a celebration. And it’s a celebration of the fact that the 
democracy that we take so casually, so for granted, when we get 
up on that morning on election day and walk to a school and 
cast a ballot for those who will govern us, that was not an easily 
won, that was not a given-to-us democracy. That was a hard 
won struggle to have that, and we are beneficiaries of that 
struggle. It was not always a pleasant duty to represent a 
legislature or a parliament, and that’s where that ritual comes 
from, and we should acknowledge that. 
 
We should remember that we owe a debt to those who fought 
those struggles, and we should be eternally vigilant of the 
freedoms and those rights. They are still far too rare in this 
world that we would have a free vote like that. And the losers, 
or some of them at least, would sit and be reimbursed to be Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and to criticize and attack, in the 
appropriate way, the government of the day — a very rare and 
precious thing indeed. 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

Now all electoral systems are imperfect. They all try to achieve 
the ideal of democracy. None of them do that perfectly. Ours 
has often been said to exclude small parties, as small parties 
have been excluded from this legislature. We have a two-party 
legislature. But other systems can be said to give too much 
power to those small parties, disproportionate amount of power 
to those parties. They all have their quirks. 
 
And I guess a quirk of our system and this last election is that I 
am here with less than 36 per cent of the popular vote in 
Saskatoon Meewasin. I think, Mr. Speaker, you have about 
twice of that or pretty close to it. My seatmate has over 50 per 
cent of the popular vote bringing him here. I can imagine how 
humbling that is. I have to imagine it, Mr. Speaker, because I 
haven’t had the experience. I’ve had the experience of now 
arriving here with 35.5 per cent. 
 
I believe over 15 candidates in the last election received a 
greater proportion of the popular vote but did not win a seat in 
this legislature. And the reason of course that I did is because of 
the unique circumstances of the vote in Saskatoon Meewasin, 
which included the Liberal leader for the province of the 
Saskatchewan, David Karwacki. 
 
Many members have in their reply to the Throne Speech 
congratulated new members on their arrival here, congratulated 
members on their re-election, and I want to do that of course. I 
want to congratulate everyone on their election and welcome 
back members that I served with the last term. 
 
But I think it might fall to me to acknowledge the contribution 
of someone who was not elected, and that is Mr. Karwacki. 
There have been some rumours and even some mention in the 
press that David Karwacki may be retiring from provincial 
politics in some time less than the 10 years that he originally 
thought he might be involved. And even if that is not the case I 
think something should be said, and perhaps best by me, as to 
the contribution that he has made to date. 
 
His job has been a difficult job. All members know how 
difficult public life can be, how casual and careless some of the 
criticism and scrutiny can seem, and how lonely — even with 
all the support — the job can sometimes seem. I think the 
leaders of the political parties — the Leader of the Opposition, 
the Premier — are probably most aware that although much of 
our decision making is collective, bearing the brunt for some of 
those decisions is very individual and falls upon them. In Mr. 
Karwacki’s case I think perhaps a little more lonely and far less 
rewarding than the difficult job has been for some of us. 
 
He would have brought . . . He did bring to two provincial 
campaigns, and certainly the last one, experience, intelligence, 
and character. And he would have brought those to the 
legislature. I know that many people in Saskatoon Meewasin 
found the choice very difficult for them. 
 
I know Mr. Karwacki was told the same thing that I was on the 
doorstep — that people were very fond of him, they admired 
him, but they didn’t feel that they could vote for him in the 
circumstances of this election and the one before that. It was a 
very hard choice which I think is flattering to both Mr. 
Karwacki and perhaps myself. 
 

Members have boasted — I think most recently the member 
from Wood River — as to the margins, great margins of their 
victory — how many votes they garnered and how many votes 
more that was than the person who they defeated. I can’t do 
that, clearly, Mr. Speaker. I can say this: that I am very 
honoured by the choice that the people of Saskatoon Meewasin 
had to make and the choice that they did make, given the choice 
that they had to make. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, someone who has received less than 40 per 
cent of the vote — I think that’s less than 36 per cent of the vote 
— has a question as to how they might best represent all the 
people of Saskatoon Meewasin, whether they voted or not. And 
certainly all those people that, you know, 64 per cent . . . well 
the exact number doesn’t really bear thinking about, Mr. 
Speaker, but that large number of people who voted for 
somebody else. And the people who have been much in my 
mind, Mr. Speaker, the last while since the election day, were 
perhaps oh a little less than 10 per cent of the electorate in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin, a little under 800 votes 
And these are for the most part the difference between what the 
highest number that the Saskatchewan Party has ever received 
in the riding of Saskatoon Meewasin before and what they 
received election night 2007 — about 800 votes. And these are 
people who for the most part would have never voted for the 
government party before, would never have voted for the 
Saskatchewan Party before. Some of them probably hadn’t 
voted before, because the turnout was a little up in Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
And how are these people different than the people who voted 
for me, the people who voted for Mr. Karwacki, or the people 
who voted for the Saskatchewan Party in previous elections and 
kept on doing it? 
 
Well I think the citizens of Saskatoon Meewasin are for the 
most part alike in their concerns about public issues. Whether 
they vote as Saskatchewan Party or Liberal or New Democrat, I 
think they want public universal health care to be defended and 
strengthened if possible. I think they hold education in high 
esteem. I think they want more opportunities for young people. 
I think they want financial responsibility and accountability 
from the government and they are like this in many respects 
across those party lines. 
 
But the people who voted for the Saskatchewan Party this time, 
for the first time, are a little different. Most of the people who 
vote in Saskatoon Meewasin don’t necessarily believe — as a 
matter of fact many of the people in Saskatoon Meewasin did 
not believe — that the Saskatchewan Party would follow 
through on the commitments they made in the 2007 election. 
That’s not their expectation and they didn’t support that party. 
They didn’t support now the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the expectation of those people who for the first time voted 
for the Saskatchewan Party — they may have voted for a 
different party in the past — the expectation of those people is 
that the Saskatchewan Party would follow through on those 
commitments. That may prove to be naive, Mr. Speaker, but 
that’s their expectation. 
 
And if I strive to represent those people, Mr. Speaker, the 
people who have an expectation of the government — who 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

believed the government when the government said they were 
going to add 800 nurses, who believed the Saskatchewan Party 
when they said they’re going to add 100 doctors, who believed 
the Saskatchewan Party when they said that they were going to 
account for the finances of the province in a significantly 
different way — if I represent those people and their 
expectations and the trust they put in the members opposite, 
then I can truly represent I think all the members of Saskatoon 
Meewasin, whether or not they had that trust in the 
Saskatchewan Party government, whether or not they believed 
that the Saskatchewan Party would follow through on their 
commitments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it is in a sense by representing the supporters of the members 
opposite, I think, that I can best represent all of my constituents. 
Because a government was elected and a government was 
elected to follow through on certain commitments. I suggest the 
government member was elected in Prince Albert Carlton to 
ensure that the mill opened, not the reverse, and so on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The members opposite made a series of commitments and an 
opposition was elected as well, Mr. Speaker. And this 
opposition was elected to hold them to account for their 
commitments, for the expectations they raised, for the trust that 
they had placed in them as members of the Legislative 
Assembly. And that’s what I will do, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
what we will do on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We will 
want to know where are the 800 nurses. Where are the 100 
doctors? Where is the balanced budget every year, Mr. 
Speaker? Where are these things? Where is the P.A. pulp mill, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The members opposite are entertained or appear to be 
entertained by quotations from the program — from their 
program — made by members on this side of the House. I note 
that members opposite, members of the government, don’t 
quote their program very much. They don’t quote their election 
platform very much. And as they hide and retreat and run away 
from their own platform, they can expect that the members on 
this side of the House will remember what’s in that program, 
remember what’s in that platform, and will stand up for the 
people who voted for them in expectation that they meant what 
they said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think you’ll hear a lot of quotations from the Saskatchewan 
Party platform on this side of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. I 
note you’ll probably hear more accurate quotations from the 
Sask Party election platform from this side of the legislature 
than you heard in the Throne Speech. And the Throne Speech 
already represents a retreat, a withdrawal, a running away from 
the election program of the Saskatchewan Party. It already 
displays that in fact they did have a different agenda. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is why I will not be supporting the motion and I 
will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker. While I’m a 
rookie in this Assembly, I’ve been a student of politics for 
many years and I’m well aware of your history and your 
experience, and I know you’ll serve this legislature well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — I have several issues I’d like to talk to you about 
today. I want to tell you a little bit about my constituency, 
Rosetown-Elrose, and the good people in the communities that 
it consists of. I want to talk about the Throne Speech and some 
of the items in it that are near and dear to my heart. And finally, 
I have a number of people that I’d like to publicly thank once 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin I’d just like to tell you what an 
honour and a privilege it is for me to be addressing the 
Assembly today. Indeed for me it’s a culmination of a lifelong 
dream. Now I know what you’re thinking, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know what the members opposite are thinking. In fact I know 
what the members on this side of the House are thinking as 
well. What on earth, what possible kind of dream could consist 
of sitting this close to the member from Carrot River Valley? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — That’s more of a nightmare, really. But no, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of having to sit this close to the member from 
Carrot River Valley, this is indeed a dream come true for me. 
 
Now on to my home constituency. Rosetown-Elrose has an 
economy based mostly in agriculture, both grain and livestock. 
We also have some oil and gas development as well as some 
other exciting economic development, and we are looking 
forward to even more development and diversification in the 
future. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Geographically we are a very large constituency. The northwest 
corner consists of the communities of Plenty and Dodsland. 
Dodsland is just a few miles away from my original home area 
of Tramping Lake and I’ve curled there many times over the 
years. 
 
At the opposite corner are the communities . . . in the southeast 
are the communities of Lucky Lake and Beechy. Beechy is 
home to Elwin Hermanson, the former leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, and also of a former Speaker of this 
House, Mr. Herb Swan. 
 
Along the west side of the constituency is the town of Eston, 
home of West Central Road & Rail. 
 
Centrally located in the constituency is the town of Elrose. 
South of there is the town of Kyle, and Kyle is very near to 
Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park which is home to one of 
the most beautiful 18-hole golf courses in the province. 
 
Jumping up to the northern end of the constituency is the town 
of Harris. Harris is home to a theatre group, a volunteer theatre 
group which has become famous for its production of the 
musical The Pull of the Land. This volunteer group has 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

produced a very professional production and now a sequel, and 
has raised many dollars for its local community organizations. 
 
Forty miles west of there is the community of Fiske. Fiske is an 
organized hamlet in the RM [rural municipality] of Pleasant 
Valley and is well-known for curling. Fiske is the home to the 
only single-sheet artificial ice curling club in the country. 
 
Our two largest towns are Outlook and Rosetown. Outlook is 
home to Sky Trail, the longest pedestrian bridge in Canada. It 
also has the largest irrigation project in the province. Rosetown 
is the largest town in the constituency and is my home. I will 
forever appreciate all the support I have received from friends 
and family in that area. 
 
We have many other friendly, active communities and I look 
forward to informing members of this Assembly about every 
part of our constituency in the upcoming months and years. 
 
I can’t leave this topic without mentioning two other 
municipalities in the constituency — those are the rural 
municipalities of Marriott and Pleasant Valley. I’ve been 
administrator for the RM of Marriott for over 25 years now and 
I would like to publicly thank . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
did. I started when I was about 12 years old. I’d like to publicly 
thank Reeve Colin Ahrens and councillors, Don Rawson, Les 
Wardrop, Mike Longworth, Orville Minish, Glenn McNally, 
and Perry Russell for all their help and all their support over the 
years, and most recently in the campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — I’ve also been administrator for the RM of 
Pleasant Valley for the past 12 years. And I would also like to 
thank Reeve Jerry Spence and councillors, Dave Walker, Byron 
Siemens, Ken Cross, Dave Lamarsh, Blake Jeffries, and Gord 
Houston for all their support as well. I would also like to thank 
the ratepayers of both those municipalities for again all the help 
and support over the years and most recently the tremendous 
support I received during the recent election campaign. 
 
On to the 2007 Speech from the Throne — growth and 
opportunity, security and compassion, keeping your word. The 
Speech from the Throne lays out an exciting future for our 
province. A number of the items especially excite me. Our 
youth retention plan is very, very important. We have lost far 
too many of our young people to other provinces over the years. 
Now we have a plan to reverse that trend. 
 
The commitment to negotiate a new revenue-sharing agreement 
with municipalities is a very important initiative. Including a 
percentage of the province’s own-source revenue will be 
welcome news. I know from personal experience that many 
municipalities and municipal associations will welcome this; 
they’ve been asking for this for years. 
 
One of the issues that I heard repeatedly on the doorstep during 
the campaign was health care. The Speech from the Throne 
talks about hiring more nurses. It also refers to creating more 
training seats and more residency positions. This is key to 
creating a better health system. 
 
One of the commitments mentioned in the Speech from the 

Throne is the initiative dealing with education tax on property. 
In my life as a rural municipal administrator I’ve dealt with that 
issue every day for many, many years. It’s not an easy problem 
to solve. I don’t believe there is a magic solution, no silver 
bullet, but it’s a problem that needs to be solved and this 
government’s committed to solving that problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — I was thrilled to be appointed as Legislative 
Secretary to the Minister of Education, with specific 
responsibility for the property tax initiative. I’ve lived with this 
problem for years and I’m very excited at having an opportunity 
to be part of the solution. Excuse my throat, Mr. Speaker; I tried 
to go to the doctor but there was a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to take a moment now to acknowledge 
a special person, my uncle, Arnold Schultz, from Unity. He’s 
been having some health problems lately but I know he’s 
watching today from home. And he’s taken a huge interest in all 
the political activity as of late, and I want to wish him well and 
let him know he’s in my thoughts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I once again need to thank my 
campaign team from the November 7 election. I’m still amazed 
at the sheer number of people who volunteered to help out. 
Some people donated a few hours and some people worked on 
it virtually full time. I’ve already thanked most of them 
personally, and the ones I haven’t got to I will very soon. I’m 
hesitant to start naming names as I know I’ll forget some 
people, so suffice to say just thank you once again to each and 
every one of them for helping me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I wish to acknowledge my family: my 
wife, Bonnie, for her support; my sister, Laura, and her 
husband, Eldon, from Wilkie, who were here for the 
swearing-in ceremony recently; as was my brother, Ken, from 
Lloydminster. Unfortunately my sister-in-law, Debbie, and my 
nephews, Jeremy and Justin, were unable to attend due to bad 
road conditions. Also, I was thrilled to have my parents, Ed and 
Elizabeth Reiter from Unity, here in attendance at the 
swearing-in ceremony as well. By example, my parents instilled 
in me the importance of doing the right thing and of having a 
good work ethic. I owe them everything and I know they’re 
watching today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, hope beats fear. I will be voting 
against the amendment and I will be very proud to vote for the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker — I guess, in this case, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — I congratulate you on your election and I 
congratulate the Speaker on his election to the Chair. Being a 
newbie, I didn’t realize just exactly what all was involved with 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

the Speaker and I’m amazed, totally amazed, that you would 
take these jobs on. It is a tough job to do. I realize that now, and 
I congratulate you and commend you. 
 
And I have a little bit of a story about the first Speaker’s chair. 
Actually the first Speaker’s chair was . . . The first Speaker was 
Thomas MacNutt and his chair was actually in Arborfield, the 
place where I was born in. His chair was in Arborfield at the 
residence of a Mr. T. R. MacNutt, who was a person who ran 
for the constituency of Nipawin in 1953 and was elected. He 
was a grocer in town. That chair is now in Saltcoats. Now at 
that time you could keep the chair and, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling 
you it’s good thing they changed the rule because I wouldn’t 
want to be the guy packing the chair out when your term is 
finally done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though I am a newbie this is not my first 
time in the House. I received my Queen’s Scout here in 1968. It 
was the last year of the Queen’s Scout and actually we came 
down and we got our Queen’s Scout given to us here by the 
Governor General — I believe it was Georges Vanier at that 
time. Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a privilege to be elected 
an MLA and, you know, in our orientation they said there was 
only 600-and-some MLAs I believe it is in all of the time the 
government has sat. And it’s a real privilege to be one of those 
600-and-some-odd people. It really is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — And I congratulate all members — all 
members on both sides, both the returning members and the 
new members — for letting their name stand. Because it is a 
challenge. It is a challenge, Mr. Speaker, to come here and you 
want to do something for your constituency and it’s a real 
challenge. And I’ll tell you a lot of the guys say, well why run 
for politics? I had a very good friend of mine by the name of 
Morgan Cummings who now lives in Abbotsford, BC [British 
Columbia] — has for years, one of our exports — and Morgan 
Cummings gave me probably one of the best compliments I 
had. He said to me — this was while things were going on — 
he said to me, Mr. Speaker, he said, you know, Fred, he said, 
look at it this way: win or lose, the rest of us sit around the 
coffee shop and talk about it. He said, at least you’re going to 
go out there and you’re going to try and do something along 
with all the rest of the members of this place. This is great. 
 
I also want to talk a little bit about our campaign, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank Leigh Spencer, the NDP candidate who ran in our 
constituency, for running a very clean campaign. Actually we 
had a little bit of fun and I know it was great to be running 
against somebody like him. But you want to talk about a team 
effort; we had co-campaign chairpeople — and I’m not going to 
bring up all the names of all the people that helped because 
there were so many of them, just so many of them; our 
executive, everybody — but a special thank you to our 
co-campaign managers, Murray Coulter and Shelly Meyer, who 
made sure, made sure that I went everywhere they told me to go 
and they rode with me every day. And Murray is a farmer, and 
he only missed two days on the campaign trail. Out of the 28 
days, Murray only missed two days for combining. Other than 
that he was with me all the time. It took a great commitment 
from them. 
 

Since the Saskatchewan Party is more like family, I want to 
thank the member from Kelvington-Wadena who came up and 
helped us knock doors in Tisdale and . . . three times as a matter 
of fact. In the end with the great effort of our campaign team 
working hard at all of this, we ended up getting 67 per cent of 
the vote, 67 per cent of the vote in Carrot River Valley which is 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — I’d like to talk a little bit about our 
constituency, since I’m new here, and some of the places within 
our constituency we have and some of the things that our 
constituency is known for. We have a vibrant constituency with 
a lot of innovations I guess I would say. 
 
We have Nipawin. Nipawin is well-known across North 
America and perhaps the world for some of the best fishing in 
the world. When people sit back . . . And they go fishing at 
Nipawin. They go fishing in Tobin Lake. And when they say 
they got a fish that big, you can just about believe them. And 
now everybody said, all fishermen are liars, Mr. Speaker, but 
. . . and I know I’m not, but I’m not quite so sure about you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — We also have the town of Ridgedale. In 
Tisdale we have ENSASK, a new ethanol plant which is 
starting, and a brand new venture that started out at the Tisdale 
dehy area, and I believe that this is going to move ahead on the 
ethanol plant. 
 
We have Northern Steel. Northern Steel is a company that got a 
bunch of Ukrainians to come in and do welding. And I met 
some of them as we were out door knocking and very 
interesting people and very hard workers. And that’s really, you 
know, that’s really helping out our constituency. 
 
We have the town of Crooked River, Peesane, Mistatim. Of 
course, Prairie River — everybody knows that Prairie River is 
famous for Bob Poley. We have Hudson Bay, who is more of a 
lumber town. It’s got a strand board plant there. And 
unfortunately their plywood mill is closed down right now, and 
hopefully, hopefully we can get something going there. It also 
has a rail to the North. 
 
Now Churchill has been one of my subjects, and for northeast 
Saskatchewan I think it would be a boon if Churchill was 
opened up more. They are doing some experiments now on 
backhauls of fertilizer out of Russia. And Hudson Bay could be 
the rail link to the North, and we could actually supply fertilizer 
— as far as I can see — to all of basically Saskatchewan and the 
Midwest US [United States] if we could get two-way traffic 
working there. It’s something I would like to work on. 
 
[15:15] 
 
We have the First Nations communities of Shoal Lake and Red 
Earth, and then we have Carrot River, which also has a saw mill 
but at the present time is shut down. I hope we can get it going. 
And we have obviously, in Carrot River . . . Carrot River is very 
famous for its carrots. It wasn’t just named Carrot River by 
fluke because that story I was telling you about the fish being 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

that big, well you know how big we can get the carrots. 
 
We have Pasquia Park there, one of the nicest parks, small 
parks. It’s a regional park in the constituency. It boasts a 
nine-hole golf course. It has a large swimming pool, a great 
campground, and that swimming pool is only a year old, so 
things are going good there. 
 
We have Premier Peat, who is a net exporter of peat moss. 
They’re also starting about, talking another bog up over in 
Hudson Bay. Premier Peat is a Quebec company that has a plant 
in Carrot River and Olds, Alberta. 
 
In Arborfield, Arborfield we have CanPro, which is — as I 
talked about in my member statement last week — it’s a dehy 
plant but it also is fractionating canola meal to use for fish food, 
and this is another initiative. Like I said, our whole constituency 
is full of great initiatives and people working hard to make 
things go. 
 
The other thing Arborfield has — as arbor and the field part of 
it stands— is trees. Now I have to tell you, some people, some 
people in the South don’t know exactly what trees are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now we had a member from our side of the House from Swift 
Current, came up there and he was wondering what these great 
big green things were that provided shade, etc. We were having 
a, we were having a leader’s dinner up there. So what happened 
is we gave him a picture of trees, so he could take it home, and 
study it on the wall, and maybe do some reading up in the 
encyclopedia and find out what these big green things actually 
are. 
 
We have the community of Aylsham. Now Aylsham is well 
known as to having some of the best farm land in all of 
Saskatchewan, and when you talk to the farmers over there they 
actually brag a lot. And I asked one of the farmers one day, I 
said, is there anything that you guys actually can’t grow? Yes, 
they said, pumpkins. And I said, well how come you can grow 
everything else but you can’t grow pumpkins? And they said, 
well they grow so fast, the vines grow so fast, what they do is 
they wear the pumpkins out as they’re dragging them around. 
 
It’s a great area. We have progressive farmers. We have started 
using no-till long before anybody ever thought about it. We’ve 
been no-tilling up there for approximately 20 years, and 
continuous cropping. It’s a great community, a vibrant 
community, and I am very proud to represent it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I was born in 
Arborfield. I was born in Arborfield and I was raised in Carrot 
River. We moved to Carrot River, my family moved to Carrot 
River in 1960, and I married a local girl there. We have had 
three children: Lisa, who is deceased; my oldest, unfortunately, 
had cerebral palsy and passed away a number of years ago. 
Morgan, my son, who is going to the U of R [University of 
Regina] here, majored in political science and is just finishing 
off his economics degree. His last test is tomorrow. And my 
daughter Gina, who is in her first year of education there, and 
since I am going to get a condo in town, is going to live with 

me. That ought to be something a little different. 
 
Now I have farmed basically all my life and in the mid-’80s I 
decided to take up crop spraying as farming diversification. By 
1998, unfortunately, the spraying business got larger than I had 
envisioned, and so consequently I rented out the farm and just 
concentrated on the spraying. And talking about that, that same 
member from Swift Current happened to be up visiting in our 
area one day. I decided to fly him around the countryside and 
let him take a look and see what our constituency was like. And 
he insisted on being in control of everything, and he wanted to 
fly the airplane, Mr. Speaker. Well it was a good thing I was 
there or we would not have the leader from Swift Current now. 
Flying is not his forte, unfortunately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I have the experience to be an MLA. I sat 
on the town council of Carrot River, the Carrot River Fire 
Department, sat on the Pasquia Park board, the Arborfield Dehy 
board. I’ve been a Boy Scout leader. Believe it or not, I sing in 
the choir in the United Church — sometimes they’re a little 
disappointed about that however — and numerous other local 
things. Provincially I’m past president of the Saskatchewan 
Aerial Applicators. Federally I’m past director of the Canadian 
Aerial Applicators Association. And I’m a founding member of 
the Northeast Early Childhood Intervention Program. 
 
I have a good business there, Mr. Speaker, so why at this time 
in my life would I go into politics and why go in with the 
Saskatchewan Party? Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have 
a problem. We have a major export or have had a major export 
within this province for years. And it’s not wheat and it’s not 
potash. It’s not lumber. It’s not uranium. Mr. Speaker, it’s our 
children. 
 
When I look around my community, when I look around our 
community I see so many kids who have left, who have left to 
go to other provinces because they just couldn’t have the jobs 
— what we need to provide — the meaningful jobs within 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is why I wanted to go with the 
Saskatchewan Party. I believe that the Saskatchewan Party is a 
party that can make a difference in this province. It’s going to 
take our children and it’ll train them and retain them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve had too many years of socialism and that has not done 
our province well. The difference between the Saskatchewan 
Party, the Saskatchewan Party and the NDP is — and I’ve told 
this to lots of people — when you look around at the 
Saskatchewan Party members, the vast majority of them are 
entrepreneurs. We have the dreams and we have the visions to 
move this province forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this why I wanted to be with the Saskatchewan 
Party. I want to try and help. I want to try and help and 
therefore I support the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. I do not 
support the amendment. Remember . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Remember, Mr. Speaker, hope beats fear. 
And as far as myself personally, what I’m going to do is I’m 
going to, like I said I was old Queen Scout, I’m going to 
remember my Scout promise. I still remember it, and it goes 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

like this: on my honour I promise to do my best to love and 
serve God, my queen, my country, and to live by the scout law. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what I plan to do. I promise to do my best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good 
afternoon. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
First of all I want to greet all my constituents in the Cumberland 
constituency, and regardless of what the member from Carrot 
River has said, we do have real trees and real big fish in my 
constituency. I also want to acknowledge the elders [Cree], 
family, and friends, especially to everyone in my community of 
Deschambault Lake. [Cree] I am honoured by their support. 
[Cree] 
 
I also want to thank my parents, Oscar and Jean Beatty, [Cree] 
for giving our family strong cultural and spiritual values to live 
by. I want to pay special tribute to my greatest role model, my 
father, who is 83 years old, and as many know, he is not very 
well today. Our family is blessed that he is still with us today, 
especially during this Christmas season. Like so many elders, 
his life and legacy truly reflects what he has taught us — to 
always put [Cree] first, our creator, and to work for the benefit 
of all. He is not only a pillar of strength for our family but for 
our community. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And I want to extend my condolences to the many families who 
have lost their loved ones, their pillars of strength. Sadly we are 
losing elders every day. I extend my sympathies to the family of 
the late Senator Myles Venne of Lac La Ronge, a great First 
Nations leader who believed in education and economic 
development as the answer for his people. Today we are seeing 
the results of his vision with the many business ventures the La 
Ronge Indian Band is involved in today. 
 
I also thank my huge family, many nieces and nephews who 
keep me grounded, reminding me not to lose my sense of fun. I 
thank many good friends. Truly we are never alone in our 
journey of life nor do we ever achieve anything on our own. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate everyone on their 
election to the Saskatchewan legislature and congratulations to 
you too, sir, on your new role as Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank the former premier for giving me the 
opportunity to serve in his cabinet. He is truly a man of honour 
and integrity. I appreciate what he did for the North, his 
determination to ensure that northerners too benefited from our 
economic boom, such as investing in education and in northern 
roads and, for the first time, on reserves as well. 
 
I had a lot to learn and a lot to do when I first got elected. I so 
appreciated the support I received from the ministerial caucus 
and constituency staff and the civil service, of course. I thank 

them for their professionalism and hard work. There were 
several anxious moments, especially when it came to protocol 
and royal visits. Mr. Deputy Speaker, only in Saskatchewan 
could you see a northern Cree woman, who is more comfortable 
in the bush, being asked to be part of the royal visit during our 
centennial. But it was truly an honour and a privilege and I am 
thankful for that opportunity. 
 
I also want to acknowledge Myron Kowalsky, the former MLA 
of P.A. Carlton, and to Judge David Arnot, the former Treaty 
Commissioner of Saskatchewan, for fulfilling my wish to see 
First Nations recognized in the chambers for their place in 
history. 
 
The beaded moosehide runner which sits on the Clerk’s table 
was made by Florence Highway, formerly of Pelican Narrows. 
This beautiful artwork depicts treaties forever which state as 
long as the sun shines, the waters flow, and the grass grows. It 
was presented to the Assembly in 2006 by Alphonse Bird, the 
former chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let this be a reminder to all of us in this House that 
we are all part of treaty, as Judge Arnot often said, which 
allowed for a peaceful settlement of this province. The treaties 
allowed the newcomers to some of the best farm land anywhere 
in the province. 
 
But it’s going to take more than learning about the treaties to 
correct the wrongs of the past. But it is a good start and I 
commend the government for continuing on with treaty 
education in the schools. There is no question the First Nations 
have lived up to their end of the bargain. Unfortunately as 
governments, as people, we have not done so well. We have not 
done enough to fulfill the treaty commitments. We have been 
slow to move forward. I believe this is Saskatchewan’s and 
Canada’s black mark. Because in this day and age and with all 
the resources that we have, First Nations people should not be 
living under such poverty and Third World conditions. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I do acknowledge the work done by past governments and First 
Nations leaders, especially the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement signed a few years ago. This allowed many First 
Nations — including my own, the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 
— to get their land back, which was theirs in the first place. 
There is also many great success stories of the First Nations 
themselves, forging ahead despite the many obstacles they face. 
There is no question progress is being made. 
 
But sadly, Mr. Speaker, we also see today the stark reality of 
the negative impacts because the treaties have been ignored — 
cultural, spiritual, social and economic upheaval of a 
once-proud people who were free, healthy, self-sufficient and 
self-governing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard elders talk about how they had to get 
passes from an Indian agent to leave the reserve; how their 
spiritual practices were banned; how they used to sit in 
hallways of government buildings not so long ago, hoping for a 
chance to speak to a bureaucrat, never mind a cabinet minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have lived through some of the culture’s 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

suppression myself, when I attended the mission school in 
Timber Bay, where I just about lost my Cree language because I 
was not allowed to speak for 10 months out of the year. But as 
the MLA from the Athabasca constituency so eloquently said 
last week, we all have our challenges. 
 
And we as a province also have another huge problem. It’s 
called racism. This is based on a survey done by the Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner a few years ago, and it is something 
that many experience every day as well. 
 
Earlier the member from Saskatoon Northwest spoke about how 
we as a province lead many other negative statistics when it 
comes to Aboriginal people. There is a reason why. It is not by 
choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any nation faced with the same suppression and 
injustices that Aboriginal people have to live with in this 
country found themselves with the same consequences. 
Professor Eric Howe wrote about this in a public policy paper 
last year. When Eastern European settlers first arrived here 
during the early 1900s they had a few challenges. This 
population was considered “. . . racially inferior: ‘poor, 
illiterate, diseased, morally lax, politically corrupt, and 
religiously deficient,’” and the list goes on. Today the 
descendents of these immigrants are the movers and shakers in 
Saskatchewan — as leaders, as entrepreneurs, as professionals, 
even government members and premiers. It took political will 
to help these new immigrants, Mr. Speaker, and we can do it 
again. 
 
We all know that by 2045 a third of this province will be of 
Aboriginal ancestry. Treaties cannot be ignored just because 
they’re old. First Nations want practical solutions and they will 
do their part to ensure that their people have access to jobs and 
economic opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to talk a little bit about the 
Cumberland constituency. As the MLA for the past four years I 
have met many wonderful people, dynamic men and women 
both young and old who are doing great things for their 
communities. They care about what happens to the North, to the 
land, to the water, to the trees, to the environment. Most of all 
they care about what happens to their children and their 
grandchildren. 
 
I look at Sandy Bay, a community that has had a difficult year, 
but what I see is a young leadership dealing with issues head-on 
with a strength and determination and wisdom beyond their 
years. Chief Tammy Cook-Searson of the La Ronge Indian 
Band combining motherhood and a career and still having time 
to run marathons. 
 
I am privileged to know Chief Rosalie Tsannie-Burseth of the 
Hatchet Lake First Nation, who has overcome great odds to 
reach many milestones as an academic and now is a leader for 
her community. I have met many elders and young people 
working together to help those who have lost hope. 
 
I have seen communities like the Montreal Lake Cree Nation 
making great strides to become more economically independent 
while providing good homes and good jobs for their people. I 
have seen innovative partnerships in health, education, and 

businesses that are the envy of the country. I see partnerships 
with the private sector, with municipalities and industry, and 
First Nations and Métis communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to pay tribute to the trappers and the 
fishers and the wild rice growers — many of them elders — 
strong individuals, hard-working, living off the land. They are 
the heart and foundation of our beautiful northland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like all members I’ve had the chance to travel and 
talk to my constituents during the election campaign, and 
perhaps I’ve put on a few more miles than most members 
because my constituency is so huge. There were many issues 
raised. The need for better roads, especially the road to the Far 
North and to Wollaston Lake where people depend on the ice 
road every winter to get their basic supplies. The critical need 
for better housing, protection for our lakes and the land, support 
for trappers and fishers, the fish processing plant, the renewal of 
the federal-provincial Northern Development Agreement, 
keeping our forestry sector alive, access to good education and 
skills training, infrastructure needs like the Churchill 
Community School in La Ronge, access to cell service and the 
high-speed Internet, sports and culture facilities for a rapidly 
growing young population. Basic needs often taken for granted 
in the South, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also concern the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company] bus service will be terminated. This service is 
critical to the North because for many patients, elders, and 
students, this is their only mode of transportation. Medical 
supplies are also shipped north using this service. 
 
First Nations leaders state the duty to consult must be adhered 
to when it comes to northern development. Tribal councils like 
the PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council] Grand Council, which 
represents 12 First Nations, want more than the ability to create 
traditional maps. They want to be fully consulted and to have 
equal recognition when it comes to the development of 
resources and their traditional territories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northerners don’t want the same thing to happen 
to them again like the last time a conservative regime was in 
power. Weyerhaeuser, through the Forestry Management 
Agreement, was given free reign to the forests without any 
consultations of the northerners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House believe when our 
economy is doing well everyone should benefit, that no one is 
left behind. That saying is real to northerners and to Aboriginal 
people, because this is a value and this is how they’ve always 
lived and survived. They too want to share the wealth, 
especially when much of the resource development is in their 
own backyard. 
 
However it seems that almost everyone in Saskatchewan has 
received a Saskatchewan Party promise in the Throne Speech. I 
was disappointed that northerners weren’t even mentioned. I do 
hope actions will speak louder than words for the north. I do 
hope the amalgamation of Northern Affairs into another 
department will not mean this government has turned its back 
on northerners once again. I urge the new Premier and his 
government to renew the treaty relationship with the First 
Nations and to make it real to the lives of those most vulnerable 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

in our society. 
 
The duty to consult is not only about setting process and 
protocol. It must be a genuine partnership because, in my view, 
the First Nations and northerners will not accept anything less. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with deep respect, the First 
Nations were here when the first immigrant reached our lands 
and they will continue to be here as long as the sun shines, the 
rivers flow, the grass grows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I conclude by wishing everyone a merry 
Christmas and all the best in the year to come. Mr. Speaker, I 
will be supporting the amendment. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off, I would like 
to congratulate you on your election. For the last four years I’ve 
worked with you and I’m very pleased to see you sitting there 
and very proud to show the Chair the respect with you there. 
Thank you very much for taking the time to take on that task. 
 
I’d also like to thank Mr. Deputy Speaker for his time of putting 
his name forward. For the last while he’d been my seatmate so I 
know him well sitting up there, and I appreciate the time and 
effort that you’re taking to do that. 
 
I would also like to say congratulations to all the Sask Party 
MLAs who retained their seats and did it in fine style. I would 
also like to congratulate all the 10 new Sask Party MLAs. 
Welcome, and I hope your stay is long and fruitful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — I would also like to thank the people of Batoche 
constituency. One of the people that I met in the campaign that 
gave me an indication that we were off to a good start was a 
gentleman I met up at Duck Lake and he said, “I’m sorry but I 
vote NDP. But after the election could I please have a meeting 
with you?” So it was sort of . . . He already saw the writing on 
the wall and we hadn’t had the election. It was kind of nice. 
 
This time I moved my margins up and I’m very excited that this 
time by a just about 2,000-vote margin and 
fifty-nine-point-some per cent of the vote. So I’m thrilled and 
pleased. Last election the town of Bellevue voted Liberal, and 
the previous government thought they had a chance of making 
progress there so they actually — on Thanksgiving weekend, 
paying overtimes and all — they paved one kilometre through 
the main street of Bellevue. Thanksgiving weekend. It was quite 
a sight to see — 33 Department of Highways trucks bombing 
down the roads, taking grid roads, back roads, hauling it all the 
way from my hometown of Middle Lake to Bellevue to rush in 
this patch of pavement. But, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work. 
Bellevue saw what needed to be done and was strongly returned 
with the margins in Bellevue too. So I thank the people of 
Bellevue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. Kirsch: — I would also like to thank my wife, Valerie, for 
her support, her friendship, and her believing in me and always 
being there beside me. She’s a key member of my team and a 
key member in everything I do. So personally I would really 
like to thank her. 
 
I would also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant], Mary 
Anne Telfer, and her husband, Don. They don’t work for me, 
Mr. Speaker; they work with me, and I thank them for their 
advice and their friendship and always being there for me. 
Thank you very much to Mary Anne and Don. 
 
I’d also like to thank my campaign chairman, Mr. Robert 
Georget. He took four weeks time off of his job, took his 
holiday time, and came and was my campaign chairman. And 
he did a wonderful job, and for that I thank him very, very 
much. And I’d also like to thank the rest of my team: Donna, 
Dave, Hellen, Danny, Karen. Without them we couldn’t have 
done it. They put in the extra time, and I really appreciate that. 
 
I’d also like to thank my three children. Roxanne came down 
for the election. She’s the chief fellow at the Stollery Children’s 
Hospital in Edmonton, and she had to come down and see how 
dad did this all, and she was there for the election. It’s the first 
time, so was thrilled to have her there. My daughter, Tracy, 
she’s the music teacher at Marion Graham Collegiate in 
Saskatoon. And she was there for the election night, and it was 
great to have her there. My son Jonathon couldn’t make it 
because he’s in Lethbridge now. He’s pursuing a degree in 
broadcast journalism, and that’s where the course was offered, 
so we’ve got him in Alberta too. So two of my three kids are in 
Alberta and hoping someday to bring them home. 
 
I would also like to thank the member for Swift Current. 
Watching him handle the team, building it, executing the 
election has been a real thrill and a privilege and a pleasure to 
be on-board. I also had a great thrill the other week during 
Agribition. I took the Premier to Agribition. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we know that rural Saskatchewan are big Sask Party supporters, 
but when I brought him to Agribition it was like escorting a 
rock star. The rural people of Saskatchewan were thrilled that 
he would take the time to come out and expressly meet them, 
and I thank him for the privilege, for being there. It was 
wonderful to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to talk to you about Batoche 
constituency. Batoche has a very vivid history, a very old 
history, and of course we know the Batoche National Historic 
Site. There’s a lot that needs to be done there, and we’ll be 
working with the federal government because it can be so much 
more. We have the river lots by Batoche. And Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and Quebec are the only provinces left in Canada 
that still have river lots. And the river lots in Saskatchewan, 
which is the long, narrow strips off the shore of the river that 
lead back. In Saskatchewan the only river lots are in Batoche 
constituency. So being a history buff, I think that’s kind of neat. 
 
[15:45] 
 
There’s also new archeological digs on River Road, west of St. 
Louis. There’s a place called South Branch House which was a 
fort there from 1786 to 1794. Now most history buffs, myself 
included, didn’t know about it till last year. They’ve 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

rediscovered it — shall we say — and there’s a cairn there now, 
and the archeological digs were started. And that’s 100 years 
before the 1885 uprising at Batoche. And it’s going to be quite a 
site, and it’s worth something to see if you’re a history buff, so 
take a trip to South Branch House. If you’re on the road past 
Batoche headed north on the way to St. Louis, you watch; 
there’s a little cairn on the side by the bush and that’s . . . on the 
river bank is where South Branch House was . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You were there were you? A member from the 
other side claims to be there. Well I know that they sit a long 
time there. 
 
There also is a great museum at Duck Lake, with a tower. And 
if you ever have the energy to climb up into the tower, it’s quite 
a view to see the outlay of the Batoche site. You also can have a 
great little, old-fashioned ferry ride, the St. Laurent ferry. You 
can go down to the battlefield sites. There’s so many sites there, 
so many things to see. You can spend all day doing the Duck 
Lake and Batoche area, and we need to do more. It would be 
quite impressive. 
 
Batoche also has a great future. Batoche happens to be home of 
Bourgault Industries. And Bourgault Industries, Mr. Speaker, is 
now a worldwide sales company. I met with the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Minot division, United States, of 
Bourgault Industries. And he says in United States, the 
company that they go nose-to-nose with fighting for market 
share is John Deere. Mr. Speaker, a little Saskatchewan 
company going nose-to-nose with the big green lion. That’s 
quite impressive. And yes, they keep on expanding. They keep 
on expanding. They’re right now in the process of another big 
expansion. 
 
Batoche is home to places like Dry Air which has been very 
innovative in inventing heating systems that are safe, that do a 
wonderful job. They’re big operators in the dry air system. 
Batoche is also home of Belle Pulses. Belle Pulses does a 
multi-million dollar sales in peas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a story I have to tell you about peas. There 
was a gentleman at Bellevue that wanted to get his seed back 
from the old Habitant Quebec peas — the best there were, the 
best in Canada, the best in North America. So he contacted 
company after company in Quebec. He even went back to 
France contacting companies. And finally they said they had 
found him the best peas possible, the best peas in the world. 
And he ordered a bag full of it for seed, and — lo and behold — 
when it arrives, stamped on the bag, processed and grown by 
Belle Pulses peas, Bellevue, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this weekend I was at Muskoday Reserve, and I 
was there for a diamond cutting and polishing demonstration. 
Mr. Speaker, this could be big in our horizon, in our future. We 
actually saw diamonds being processed, how they polished, 
how they cut them. It is truly interesting and fascinating and 
when you think it could be a big part of Saskatchewan’s future 
. . . diamonds, who would have thought it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Batoche is a rural constituency and I mean fully 
rural. Batoche has no cities, six towns and numerous villages. 
 
The town of St. Brieux now has, this past spring, reached the 
magic number of, they’ve passed the 500 mark, so now they are 

full town. And last spring I was there for the opening of their 
new daycare. And their daycare could accommodate 124 
students, and the day of the opening it was full — fully 
registered, can’t hold any more kids. 
 
Another one of our towns is Birch Hills. And one of the rural 
things that is a little bit different in Birch Hills that you might 
not see in other towns — it’s a little unique — there are two 
churches in Birch Hills that accommodate each two religious 
denominations. So four religions, two churches and they share, 
and it works well. It’s the rural way of doing things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all of the above reasons and for millions more, 
I am very, very privileged and proud to represent the wonderful 
people of Batoche constituency, and to them I owe a great big 
thank you. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, due to the time factor, I must move on to matters 
of the Throne Speech. This Throne Speech is the first one I’ve 
heard that sets out a real plan for the future. It has dreams and 
ideas and a way of reaching them and getting there. This 
Throne Speech addresses green and prosperous with ways of 
getting there, not just the words, green and prosperous. 
 
This Throne Speech addresses highways. This Throne Speech 
addresses, at long last, property tax. This Throne Speech 
addresses health care, nursing shortages, and has a real plan on 
how to achieve them and get there. This Throne Speech is 
already, already enacting its promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca spoke last week and 
blamed the Devine government. Sixteen years they blamed the 
Devine government, and then in his next breath what does he 
say? Don’t blame the NDP. You’re already blaming the NDP. 
Mr. Speaker, who made the mess? Who did the things wrong? 
And if the job was done so good, why the big change in the 
election? 
 
People have had enough, and they’re looking to the Sask Party 
to make things better. And they are already smiling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say on the term balanced 
budget, we have now said that we are going to address balanced 
budget, and we’re going to address it in real terms, not in 
fictitious terms. Our Finance minister has things well under 
hand, and we’re looking forward to how he’s handling it. 
 
When we look at the other government and they talk about not 
keeping promises, one of the big ones is, Mr. Speaker, who, 
after promising no tax cuts, raised the PST [provincial sales tax] 
two cents? And then come this election, they drop it two cents 
and brag about it. We dropped PST two cents. Well who was 
the one that put it up there? 
 
One of the worst mistakes of the former government was also 
their duty to consult. Mr. Speaker, there was no consultation. 
There was no consultation on the smoking Bill. There was 
nothing done with it. They just put it out there and then passed 
it and said, consultation had been done. And it wasn’t. And now 
we’ve got consultation on the memorandum of understanding, 
MOU. The natives came out and said no consultation. Yet the 
NDP claimed that they’ve been working on it for two years — 
two years — and they hadn’t talked with any of the native 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

people or tribes on their input at all. Two years and nothing 
done. And they keep on referring to this MOU as a deal. It was 
not a deal. It was a memorandum of understanding hastily put 
together and hastily signed. And it said right on the front cover, 
it is not binding in any point, any way, any form. It was just a 
piece of paper and thank goodness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank goodness it was never enacted because 
our province cannot afford mistakes of 100 million any more. 
There have been too many of them made, and we have to stop 
that practice. And this government is well on its way to doing 
that. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
amendment, and I will be enthusiastically supporting the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous, the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
back here in the House after the election. It’s always nice to 
come back here. And I always enjoy the Throne Speech because 
it’s one of the few speeches you can make in the House that 
gives you latitude to thank the people that helped get you here 
and talk a bit about your constituency, talk about the voters of 
Arm River-Watrous, the voters of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say hi to my dad who faithfully watches the legislative 
channel everyday. I also want to thank Tanya for her support of 
helping me throughout the election. 
 
I also want to welcome all the new members that are here on 
both sides of the House. The speeches that I’ve heard from both 
sides of the House have been excellent, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
set the bar very, very high, at that end of it. I wish that my first 
maiden speech was as good as the speeches I’ve heard here off 
the new members. 
 
I know that they will enjoy working here as I have for the eight 
years because to come here you have the respect and the 
confidence of your voters. Those are the main reason that we 
can’t forget that we were here — the support of the voters that 
put us here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank the staff. The Clerks, they’re excellent. We 
have excellent staff — the Hansard, library staff, SPMC 
[Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation] which has 
been excellent with the move. I know that they’ve had 58 
requests for desks and chairs and tables and shelves and all. 
Everybody wants everything done not now but right now. And I 
know that they’ve been very good at trying to help members set 
up their offices. And the move, I know, has not been easy for 
them. I know I’ve been here at nights and I’ve seen them 
working into the night, trying to accommodate members — 
moving filing cabinets, desks around, putting up shelves. I want 
to thank them and I know it has been a very hard transition 
period. 
 

I know the first two or three weeks, my phone after five rings 
would go to the NDP caucus office. We finally got that 
straightened out. I know that it did surprise and alarm a few of 
my constituents that phoned my office here shortly after it was 
set up. I had a few calls back to my constituency office 
wondering what was going on. But I think we’re finally getting 
the phone lines all set and all . . . I think next week hopefully 
we’ll have my fax machine up and running. 
 
I want to thank the voters from Arm River-Watrous for giving 
me the confidence to come back here again. That’s the main 
reason that a person runs, is because of the voters. The day 
when you go door to door, that’s what keeps you going — the 
people that say you know what, we need a change in this 
province; or we support you, we support what you believe in at 
that end of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I also want to thank just not my constituents 
but the people that I ran against — Gord MacMurchy for the 
NDP, Lou Coderre for the Liberal Party, Arnold Taylor for the 
Green Party, and Gordon Pederson ran as a Progressive 
Conservative. They all ran good elections. We ran a nice, good, 
clean campaign and got along. In fact we had an enjoyable 
debate in Watrous which I found was . . . I think all of us 
enjoyed it. I would like to see more of that throughout. In the 
old days they used to have lots of that, what they called town 
hall debates, and that was the first one in eight years that we 
had. The first two terms either just the chamber of commerce 
couldn’t set it up or the other people running didn’t want to, but 
this time the chamber in Watrous set it up and I found it quite 
enjoyable. 
 
And then surprisingly the hall was full and most of the people 
that came to that debate, they came to listen to the issues. They 
came to listen to what was presented out there. They didn’t 
come with closed minds and, you know, that’s a very good way. 
I found that the voters have been changing over the time. I 
remember in my dad’s time — he was very active — and back 
then voters were more partisan, but now voters are more savvy. 
They vote, they vote on the party platform. They want good 
government is what they want and that’s the way it should be 
out there. 
 
I know that members opposite have talked about that they’re 
going to be keeping an eye on us, that they’re going to be 
making sure our promises are kept, and that’s good. But you 
know, I’m not worried about them keeping their eye on it. I’m 
worried about, you know, who’s going to be keeping an eye on 
us will be the voters. The people of Saskatchewan will be 
keeping their eye on us and if we don’t keep our promises they 
will vote us out. And that’s why we’ve already to started to fill 
them promises in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, because the 
voters are going to be keeping an eye on whichever government 
is here, and that’s the way it should be. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I found that the voters are getting more in tune with the 
elections. They’re more into the issues. When you go door to 
door, I’ve been finding every year that the young people are 
more engaged because they’re concerned about this province 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

and the direction that it goes to. They want it to grow. They 
want this to be home. 
 
I also want to thank my staff back home. They’re one of, 
probably the main reason that I’m here, my CA staff. They’re 
the ones handling the cases. We’re up here making speeches, 
we’re up here in the House. My staff back home, they’re the 
ones answering the phones. They’re the ones that are bringing 
the cases up here. They’re the ones who are dealing with it 
day-to-day. 
 
I have Clark Puckett, Donna Petit, and Lavonne Lyke. And they 
did an excellent job for me over the eight years that I’ve served 
the people of Arm River-Watrous. I don’t think you could ask 
for better staff, and yet I know that everybody’s constituency 
association or constituency assistants have did excellent jobs. 
 
I just know, dealing with members here opposite and even the 
staff, even some of the ministers’ staffs from the previous 
government, I know we dealt with them and I was happy with a 
lot of the things they would try to do at that end of it for the 
constituents. Because the main thing is everybody here wants a 
better life for Saskatchewan, wants a better life for the people 
here. 
 
And that’s what we’re going to be doing with this Throne 
Speech. And that’s why I like this Throne Speech. It’s a good 
Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’ve made many speeches on Throne Speeches 
and to be honest with you, Mr. Speaker, this is the best one I’ve 
seen. It lays out a four-year plan and it’s already kept some of 
the election promises that were set out. 
 
One of them was set election dates. When I went door to door 
— you’d mentioned that — whether it was a voter that said, you 
know, I’m not voting Saskatchewan Party, I’m either Liberal, 
NDP, but they would still agree that we need that. 
 
We need set election dates because the government should 
never have the hammer or play with the voters, trying to decide 
a date when it’s best for them. When you go to the polls, you 
should be able to run on your record whatever day that you go 
back to the polls. And that was one of the things when I went 
door to door that every person agreed on that liked set election 
dates. And I was glad that that was one of the things that we’re 
setting out right away. 
 
Another one is balanced budgets. People don’t want to be 
running debt. And we’ve laid out some legislation for that to 
make stronger, so we can have stronger balanced budgets, and 
also a four-year plan on budgets, and also working towards 
paying the debt. It’s already laid out in the speech how much 
money will be going per year putting down the debt. I heard 
that a lot at door to door when I went that we must work 
towards paying down the debt. And that is one of the promises 
that was made and that was one of the promises that are kept in 
this Throne Speech. 
 
Another one is agriculture. On CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization], it was laid out in the Throne Speech that 

we will be fully funding CAIS. And I know that we need more 
support for agriculture and I know that our Agriculture minister 
is going to do an excellent job trying to get a better deal from 
the federal government, at that end of it. 
 
But least now the producers, right now today, know that at least 
if that’s the only program that is out there, it is going to be fully 
funded. In my eight years, some years it was said it would be. 
Some years they had to wait till the budget. And some years 
they only put in 100 million and some years that they didn’t. I 
think it was 2003 you only got 60 per cent of your money, 
which was the federal money. And I still get calls from 
constituents that say, you know, the government owes me that 
40 per cent for that year. So at least now that they know that at 
least it’s going to be fully funded in the Throne Speech, which 
was a promise that was made throughout the election and it was 
a promise that’s being kept in the Throne Speech. 
 
Another good initiative is dealing with the First Nations is 
mandatory education and treaties. And I think we need that. I 
have two reserves, Kawacatoose and Day Star, in my 
constituency. And I’ve met with them regularly over the last 
four years because they changed the borders before that, Mr. 
Speaker, and they weren’t in my constituency. I’ve met with 
them regular over the four years, and I think we have a very 
good working relationship. And I know that they have a lot of 
concerns and a lot of issues, but all they want is dialogue and 
they want to be treated with respect. And this government is 
going to do that, is going to treat them with respect, and 
consulting with them. And one of them is, is more education out 
there. And I think we need that in the schools. I think that was a 
very good initiative that was brought in from here. 
 
Dealing with this Throne Speech, just what it’s about, 
“Securing the Future,” that’s probably what I heard. That was 
the theme of the election as you’re going door to door in Arm 
River-Watrous. Arm River-Watrous is filled with a lot of small 
towns. My biggest ones are Watrous, Davidson, and Wynyard, 
and they’re still only running around 3,000 population — same 
population since the ’70s, the ’60s. And what they want is 
growth and they want a future with that. And that’s what they 
want is hope, and they didn’t like the fear campaign. 
 
What they wanted, what I got door to door was, we want a plan. 
We don’t care who brings it forward. But we were the only 
party that actually brought a plan, a four-year plan that is going 
to work towards grow the province. And that’s what the voters 
of Arm River-Watrous want. That’s what the voters of 
Saskatchewan want. They want this province to grow. They 
want a plan. They want to be able to see it, that they know that 
it’s going to grow. 
 
I have some potash on the edge of my constituency, some 
mines. I know in the last year or two they’ve been doing some 
seismic testing around the Jansen area and they feel that 
expansion could take place there, of the mines, under the right 
government regulations, maybe royalties changes, along that 
line. Or just the idea of a government that is willing to work 
with business. 
 
And the people in that area are looking forward to . . . There 
already is some mine expansion, but also possibly of a new 
mine being put in or just more expansion. I know that every 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

year that they’re hiring more and more people, which is good. 
There’s more and more young people staying back from the 
surrounding towns. They’re working in the mines. And those 
are very, very good paying jobs. 
 
So any way that we can help grow that . . . And that’s what the 
people want. They want the oil industry. They want the 
resources to use to help build this province, bring the people 
back. And the money to be used towards health care, better 
education, pay down the debt. But the main thing is, what they 
want is growth, Mr. Speaker. They want this province to grow. 
And that’s why they put their confidence in this government. 
And I think with this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, it lays out 
that plan. It lays out a future for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many things. The education tax which has been an 
issue in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan for 
many, many years, it was an issue all the way — if you 
remember back, I don’t remember that — to Tommy Douglas 
had even talked about it, that it was an unfair way, an unfair 
way to fund education. It was too much of a burden on property 
owners. And this Throne Speech is addressing that. 
 
They know, the people of Arm River-Watrous and 
Saskatchewan know that everything can’t be done in one year, 
that there is the highways, even the education tax. But it needs 
to be addressed. It needs to work on, which it is. We lay out a 
four-year plan on rebates, on education tax, with a little more 
every year helping that. That’s all they want, is that you 
recognize the problem, that you’re going to try to work with it 
within a balanced budget. 
 
They know the highways aren’t all going to be fixed in the first 
year. They know that. But do you know what they want? They 
want a four-year plan. They want to know that this is why 
you’re fixing this highway. This is money that you’re going to 
be putting towards that highway; that you’re going to be 
working towards making it a better place in Saskatchewan, a 
better place to do business; that you have a plan. And the people 
are patient, but they wanted to see some action. 
 
In my constituency, there wasn’t any. I mean, I’ve made many 
speeches in this House on that and my highways haven’t 
changed in eight years. They hadn’t changed before that. And I 
know that now the Highways minister’s going to try to work. 
We have a budget. We’re also putting more funding in. The fuel 
tax has all been dedicated towards highway construction. And I 
know it’s a priority for this government to make it, to address 
that problem because that is a huge problem throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The towns along my constituency, especially between Regina 
and Saskatoon, there are people moving back, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re moving back. They were moving back before the 
election, but they also felt that there was going to be a change in 
government. They felt that Saskatchewan is going to grow 
because there is a huge potential here. 
 
Of all the provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker, this province has 
the most potential in the next 10 to 20, 30 years to grow. With 
our resources and our tourism and our agriculture and the 
innovation and the universities that we have here, that this is 
going to be the next boom province. If it is managed right and if 

it is brought in with a government that is going, has one goal, 
and that is to grow this province and grow it in a direction that 
is going to benefit all the people in it. 
 
Health care has always been an issue in Saskatchewan and yes, 
it’s going to be a challenge. But we also have an excellent 
Health minister. He’s been working as critic for many years. He 
understands the system. He’s willing to . . . He’s had meetings 
with the health care professionals. He knows what has to be 
addressed. We’re going to work towards getting new nurses, 
more nurses; expanding the training seats within what can be 
allowed at the universities. But we know that has to be 
addressed because it was never addressed under the previous 
government. 
 
And I know that it’s easy always to blame the past 
administration, and I know that. As myself as an ex-opposition 
member for years, I still tend to go back there. And I want to 
talk more about this Throne Speech, but I still have to mention a 
few things of why, of why there’s a lot more members on this 
side of the House and why we’ve formed government. 
 
And that is one of the reasons, because there hasn’t been some 
long-range plans at that end of it. And I know that, I know this 
Throne Speech is laying it out at that end of it. It’s also like 
talking about retaining our young people. Tuition rebates of up 
to $20,000 over seven years for the students who stay in the 
province after graduation. Those are the people, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have to retain here. Our students — that’s our future. 
And there’s a good plan set out to retain them so that they, after 
they get their education here, that there’s a reason to stay. 
 
And then you have to make sure that they have the jobs. And I 
think the things that are being laid out over the four years, that 
there will be more job opportunities for them in the future. In 
fact I’m confident that this government is going to be providing 
more jobs for the students as they graduate here. And with the 
tuition rebate, that’s just one more incentive to stay here and 
work in this great province, Mr. Speaker — for it is a great 
province. 
 
And that was one of the reasons that I got . . . that I’ve always 
been voted because they always, in Arm River-Watrous, they 
always felt that this was . . . the potential for this province was 
never being fully utilized. And they feel that under a new 
government, under new direction, that that potential will be 
utilized. And that’s a goal. That’s a goal of this government and 
a goal of the people that I’ve worked with. And many of them 
. . . I’ve worked here with many of them over the past eight 
years. And I know that that’s their goal to work towards that, to 
make this a better place to live. That is the main reason that 
each and every one of us have been elected to this House. 
Everybody wants to make this a better place, to leave their mark 
and say, you know what, I was a small cog into making this a 
better place, into reshaping this province into the potential that 
it could be, Mr. Speaker. And this province has huge, huge 
potential. 
 
You know there’s been . . . There’s many, many opportunities 
for this province. Tourism is another one. I mean that’s . . . even 
in my constituency, it’s huge. We’re making that a priority in 
this Throne Speech. We’re dealing with that, trying to promote 
that more — more funding for tourism. There is many, many 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

opportunities for this. 
 
You can go through this Throne Speech, page by page, and 
everything about it is about growing this province. And it’s 
about the future, and a four-year plan that is going to do it 
within balanced budgets and is going to work towards it. And at 
the end of four years, you know, like some of the members have 
been, over the last few days have been . . . you know, there’s 
been a little heckle, and that’s when it will be judged. 
 
And I’m confident with this Throne Speech and the many more 
to come, and the budget, that we will be here for a very long 
time. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Christmas approaches, which this House today 
is, I also want to wish all my constituents that are listening a 
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. I also want to, to the 
members of the House and the people in the building, same 
thing, wish them a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 
 
I think from the tone of my speech that, Mr. Speaker, you know 
that I’ll be supporting the Throne Speech. And with that, to you 
yourself too, a very Merry Christmas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a 
grand honour to rise before this Assembly to serve my maiden 
speech and engage in the debate to the Throne Speech. I want to 
congratulate yourself, Mr. Speaker, on your election as Speaker, 
and I know your experience will serve this Assembly very well. 
I look forward to working with you. I would like to echo this as 
well for the Deputy Speaker and congratulate him in his role as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the members on 
both sides of the House within this Assembly, particularly all of 
the new members who have been granted the trust of their 
respective electorates. As a member of this Assembly, we are 
blessed to serve a very honourable role. To be honest with you, 
it is quite a surreal feeling each morning to walk up and through 
the doors of this storied building. I am hopeful that this is a 
feeling and honour that will not soon dissipate as the new 
becomes the routine. 
 
I would like to make specific mention of our new members — 
the member from Saskatoon Massey Place and the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. Both these members will have 
substantial roles in dictating the direction of our province and 
will serve the constituents incredibly well. 
 
Any one of us would be remiss to believe that we stand here 
today solely because of ourselves. Personally, I stand here 
because of the privilege of family that I have been granted, and 
I am ever thankful for this foundation and aware of its 
influence. I stand here today because of the incredible team of 
supporters, new and lifelong, within Regina Rosemont who 
have extended their trust and offered their energy. 

I stand here today because of my beautiful and intelligent wife, 
Stephanie, whose love shows no bounds, who can always keep 
me grounded and my ego in check, and whose family, the 
Willows, offer unwavering support. I am privileged with 
family, supported by friends, past colleagues, and constituents. I 
thank every member of this small army. 
 
I would also like to specifically thank a few members from the 
campaign team. I thank Heath Packman, Chad McCormick, 
Terry McNaughton, Chantal LaHaye, Jennifer Sherwood, and 
maybe most of all 82-year-old Kurt Holstein — lifelong 
member, sign man, who put in over 600 signs throughout the 
election. 
 
I grew up on the north end of Regina Rosemont and have lived 
within Regina my entire life. Thus, serving as the member for 
Regina Rosemont is natural. The process of nomination and 
then election granted me the opportunity to reconnect with so 
many friends, colleagues, neighbours, and to build new 
relations with so many families and individuals. 
 
The constituents of Regina Rosemont who have entrusted me to 
offer their voices within the Saskatchewan legislature are a very 
diverse group. Rosemont is made up of an array of 
socio-economics, ethnicity, backgrounds, education, and 
employment. It is the home to many community leaders, new 
families to Canada, small- and medium-sized business owners, 
civil servants, hard-working individuals and families, seniors 
who have retired from the farm, new families who have moved 
from other provinces — particularly Ontario, British Columbia, 
and Alberta — and lifelong residents. 
 
I represent many families and individuals working to stay afloat 
with the inflationary cost of housing. Conversely, I represent 
many hard-working homeowners whose homes have doubled in 
value in the past few years, offering reward for their hard work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Rosemont has a history of strong member 
representation. I have succeeded well-represented, 
well-respected Joanne Crofford, who has retired from public 
service, and it is with determination that I work to fill Ms. 
Crofford’s role of excellent service to the community and 
meaningful work in legislature. I thank Ms. Crofford for all of 
her support, mentorship, and friendship. 
 
Regina Rosemont boasts institutions steeped in tradition. It is 
the very home to our revered Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
depot and training facility. Steeped in tradition, this site boasts 
the new RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] museum. I 
extend an invite to all members at any moment to take them on 
a tour. 
 
Regina Rosemont contains Government House, built in 1891 as 
a residence for the Lieutenant Governor of the North-West 
Territories whose territorial headquarters were within Regina. 
Over the years this house has gone through many uses and has 
recently gone through extensive renovations. It serves as both 
the office of the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan and as a 
heritage museum. It is indeed a spectacular building. 
 
Regina Rosemont also contains a first-rate golf course, the 
Royal Regina Golf Club; the Devonian bike path in Wascana 
Creek. It boasts three high schools: Martin Collegiate, Luther 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

College, and Western Christian College; five public and three 
Catholic elementary schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will honour the commitments I have made on the 
doorsteps of Regina Rosemont. As such, I am committed to the 
hard work, honesty, and strong voice needed to be . . . serve as 
their member in legislature. Through listening to and working 
with, I intend to provide progress through effective policy 
development in response to my constituents needs and hopes. 
 
I’m very proud today to add the name Wotherspoon to the only 
600 and some past members who have stood before in this 
Assembly to shape our modern province. For record on 
Hansard, I do want to mention my grandparents. Raised on the 
farm, my grandparents Albert Otto Thurm and Ann Thurm, 
lived within Regina following the Second World War. My 
grandfather, a Regina Rifles veteran, was wounded within 
Germany and was forced to return home. He was a career civil 
servant who didn’t miss a day of work his entire life and could 
do one arm push-ups until late into his 60s. My grandmother, 
who is my only grandparent still alive, keeps our fridge full of 
vegetables, cupboards full of canning, and has a new interest in 
watching the Legislative Assembly on TV. 
 
Raised on farms near Melville, my grandparents, John Lesley 
Wotherspoon and Audrey Wotherspoon farmed for many years 
while raising their family. In 1956 my grandfather was hired as 
a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevator agent. They sold the farm 
and spent time working within the hub of many communities. 
They were both highly involved in the co-operative movement. 
My grandfather was an avid outdoorsman and passed this along 
to his four boys and his many grandchildren. Great memories 
with them remain strong. 
 
I’ve been raised within a strong, social democratic family, 
sharing New Democrat core values. Thank my parents for 
providing such a strong foundation, raising us with care, 
activity, faith, discipline, and humour. Thank my mother for 
making the choice to stay at home to raise myself and my 
sisters and for her eternal contentedness in the resulting modest 
economic situation. The foundation my parents provided me as 
a New Democrat has fostered a sense of optimism, work ethic, 
and progressiveness which I maintain today. 
 
Attached to my father’s hip throughout my childhood, we 
regularly retreated to the solace of Saskatchewan’s outdoors. It 
offered my father — a passionate, committed, and progressive 
educator — a place to get away and to foster within me his 
interests of recreational historian, outdoorsman, and geologist. 
This is something I remain committed to. 
 
The sanctuary that is Saskatchewan is unparalleled within this 
world. The vast size of our province that stretches across such 
distinct variances in geographic regions never ceases to amaze 
me. It is as diverse as our province’s history and our ethnic 
makeup. Saskatchewan is a place that offers an incredibly high 
quality of living. 
 
Choosing to stay within our province for post-secondary 
education and to build my career within, I have long espoused 
the benefits Saskatchewan offers. I’ve served as a tireless 
advocate as friends sought greener pastures, only to return 
home with a new-found appreciation of what we possess. 

For an outdoor enthusiast such as myself Saskatchewan offers a 
phenomenal playground, retreat, and sanctuary. I’m excited by 
looking at the Saskatchewan map. It offers so many havens to 
escape to with each one of our constituencies. I will share a few 
of my favourite escapes. 
 
Within a five-minute drive from Regina Rosemont in the riding 
of Regina Qu’Appelle I can find partridge to hunt on the gravel 
roads at dusk. A drive just minutes further takes me to a 
tributary valley of the Qu’Appelle with Wascana Creek running 
deep below, beautiful in all seasons; a spot my wife and I 
frequent on weekend mornings with Tim Hortons in hand to 
hike and run with our dogs. 
 
From the member from Wood River’s riding, Grasslands 
National Park with its sweeping grass hills, lush with mule deer 
and complete with the original buffalo herd, natives of the 
prairies. 
 
Within the member from Big Muddy’s riding, hiking the 
badlands, geographic formations that offer panoramic 
perspectives on the land that have served First Nations hunters, 
bootleggers, police, and settlers among many others for 
thousands of years. 
 
To head north through the parklands, the boreal forest on into 
the shield within the member of Cumberland’s riding, provides 
a bespeckled land of lakes and vast arteries of rivers and 
streams; to navigate historic waterways such as the Churchill 
River, a region that has served First Nations for thousands of 
years with its bountiful sustainable resources; to camping on the 
rock of the Sturgeon Weir and to imagine the journey of those 
first European explorers to connect with the West. 
 
To the member from Swift Current’s riding, hunting on the 
majestic steep shores of the South Saskatchewan River amongst 
the deer, moose, antelope, cranes, and upland game; to spending 
a cold winter day huddled by a fire within the member from 
Touchwood Last Mountain’s riding on a frozen 60-mile-long 
lake waiting for a big hit, a lake brimming with walleye, 
northern pike, and perch. 
 
To Regina Rosemont, my home riding, jogging on the 
Devonian bike path within an incredible urban park mapping its 
way along Wascana Creek to a newly deepened lake. 
 
Each region, each community within this province has a rich 
history and a proud legacy. It is through understanding our 
history that we can thoughtfully approach offering direction to 
our future. The diversity of the geographic regions of our 
province could only be trumped by the diversity of our history, 
the communities, the people, the stories of and from our land. 
 
In any mention of Saskatchewan’s history, First Nations must 
be first and foremost. Living on the land in all corners of this 
province for thousands of years before any European influence, 
their history is our longest. Within their harmonious systems of 
governance, health, justice, education, traditions, ceremonies, 
and spirituality, First Nations have an extremely proud legacy 
within Saskatchewan. We still have much to learn from our 
First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Our province’s modern history comes through immigration, the 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

settlement of the West, the dawn of agriculture, the 
establishment of trade and commerce. It is with this wave that 
my family entered the province. This generation has passed 
along a pride in the qualities of perseverance and hard work 
needed to establish and sustain life on the Prairies. Very few of 
us are very far removed from the family farm, and these values 
run deep. 
 
As a province we are blessed with a geographic landscape that 
offers a wealth of resources — wildlife and fish, rich glacial 
basin topsoil, miles of pasture, vast oil reserves, natural gas, 
coal, potash, uranium, diamonds. The list goes on, and it’s 
extensive. The wealth of these resources has long been the 
source of our economy, and today we are experiencing a 
significant boom. 
 
From this boom we need to ensure that each family and 
individual sees the benefits of this, that opportunities to prosper 
and go forward are extended to all within our society. We need 
to be very certain that the policies that we enact during this 
robust economy are of this very nature. Otherwise we risk 
allowing only a select few to go forward and marginalize the 
broader society. 
 
A very important measurement within our society is how we 
respond to our most marginalized. If we do not care for our 
young people struggling to afford their education and 
low-income families, if we do not push to break the cycle of 
poverty, if we do not offer equality and respect to minorities, if 
we do not extend dignity to those with a disability, and if we do 
not fight the addictions cycles which tear our families apart — 
then we have failed. 
 
I’m a believer that you only know what you know, that one’s 
knowledge is limited by one’s experiences, that we are 
constructs of our environments. And I am certain that we do not 
choose the circumstances for which we are born into. In my 
history of working with youth and families afflicted by 
significant challenges such as cultures of addiction, abuse, 
neglect, hopelessness, helplessness, I’ve gained new 
perspectives. I’m adamant that I have learned and grown as an 
individual far more from these relations than the youth and the 
families ever did from myself. Working with an approach of 
mutuality, shared respect seemed to offer the most benefit for 
all parties. 
 
This guides my belief that we must ensure that the resources 
and healthy relationships are provided within our communities 
and that we reduce the barriers to sport, culture, and recreation 
and that our education system along with community 
stakeholders continue to respond to the whole-child needs of 
students. 
 
[16:30] 
 
A new Sask Party government is tasked with the continued 
response to these issues, and effective and meaningful policy 
will be essential. 
 
I’m honoured to serve within this Legislative Assembly as a 
member of the New Democrats. The values for which New 
Democrats represent have offered innovation and progress to 
Saskatchewan and Canada. To sit in the same chairs that hold 

the legacy of our party, past leaders such as Tommy Douglas, 
Allan Blakeney, and Roy Romanow, to name a few, is truly 
humbling. 
 
To enter politics standing behind our leader, Lorne Calvert, a 
man of vision and principle who has delivered to the people of 
this province, is truly my honour. The New Democrats I 
represent are committed to a progress-oriented, growing, 
inclusive, and green progress — more than just growth. 
 
As New Democrats, we leave this province in enviable 
condition and have placed the province onto the international 
stage. And we must continue to take this lead with continued 
robust, economic, and dynamic social growth. 
 
We have taken many steps forward as a province. A new 
confidence has emerged and exists in our people. However we 
retain the resiliency, community spirit, and unwavering loyalty 
to home. 
 
As New Democrats we leave this province as a place where we 
have more jobs than people. With endless opportunity in this 
province, it is truly an exciting time. Saskatchewan has the 
second lowest youth unemployment rate in Canada. When 
young people in Saskatchewan look to realize their dream, they 
need not look any further than home. 
 
As New Democrats we leave government with our heads held 
high. Our population is growing and our economy is booming. 
With this we need a government who, through policy, planning, 
and investment, will ensure the benefits of this economy are 
returned to the ordinary people, workers, parents, and seniors 
within this province. A thriving economy should not preclude 
ordinary residents from owning a home or accessing the highest 
quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time of prosperity we have the opportunity 
to enhance and enrich our quality of life and progress our 
province. The Sask Party’s number one goal is growth. I believe 
we need to be more focused on progress, of which growth is a 
very important part of. Growth alone does not ensure progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the election, the past election, the people 
of this province chose a new direction. They chose a party that 
departed their historical and deep-rooted, right-wing, 
conservative values through message, enacted tight control of 
communication, and developed sleek marketing. The Sask Party 
populist political tactics found them providing a message that 
appeared both safe and moderate to make themselves electable 
by the voting public. They have for a long time pandered to 
every disenchanted group or individual within this province 
offering the benefit that they would rectify these issues. 
 
The problem that exists is the platform that they developed; the 
commitments that they have made are not in line with the 
beliefs or the ideology of its party’s founders and/or financers. 
So the Sask Party is tasked with the challenge — let down the 
electorate who granted them power or let down their supporters 
who financed and backed the party. It is very clear that 
following the election that there will be individuals, groups, and 
companies that will be let down by this Sask Party government. 
It is evident because this is already the case with many. This is 
a shame and it does nothing to increase the trust and 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

involvement in the democratic process. 
 
At this moment here, I may now be entering a slightly more 
partisan bent. So, I know it’s my maiden speech, but if the side 
opposite wishes to object, I would not be offended if you do 
speak out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Sask Party government is offering far too 
little to the people in this very short time in government. The 
people of this province have been let down by their newly 
minted Premier whose glum outlook for Saskatchewan is a 
disrespect to all within our borders. Saskatchewan is booming 
as a province, has a pile of money in the bank, and expectations 
should be very high. This is a time within our province where 
families and individuals should be able to share in these 
benefits. Saskatchewan residents should be offered to share in 
the confident and solid state of Saskatchewan and their Premier 
should be one to extend that invitation. 
 
The Premier and the Sask Party need to be aware of the hard 
work families have provided within this province, paying down 
reckless Conservative debt to place Saskatchewan on the world 
stage with limitless opportunity. The Premier, who upon 
election described the province’s financial state as stark, should 
be ashamed and families deserve more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve far more than a Premier and a party who 
has either a severe case of performance anxiety or simply 
willing to play political games at the voters’ expense. The Sask 
Party government promised far too much to far too many, for 
which it has no chance and it seems no intentions of delivering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Sask Party likes to point out, actions do 
speak louder than words. The Sask Party actions speak for 
themselves and families are not impressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Sask Party need to be held 
accountable for misleading the public on the topic of school 
closures. Despite the now Minister of Finance claiming to have 
a solution, to have a solution, a plan for school closures, we 
have not seen a thing. They have left the people of the province 
with the impression that, under their watch, rural schools would 
not close. They started using jargon like schools of necessity, 
schools of opportunity. 
 
What we have heard is that the new Sask Party Minister of 
Education confirms that school closures are inevitable, and he 
does not have a plan in place. The lack of plan and disregard to 
this issue is little comfort for the many rural communities who 
had pegged their hopes on a Sask Party government, a 
government that had played with the heartstrings for purpose of 
election. This offers a prime example of the Sask Party saying 
one thing but doing another. 
 
On the matter of the pulp mill in Prince Albert, the same can be 
said. The Sask Party says one thing but then does another. 
 
The Sask Party’s hasty and surprise decision to enact essential 
service legislation immediately upon election, despite the now 
Minister of Health stating clearly just prior to election that this 

would not be necessary, has voters up in arms. Why did the 
Sask Party government so clearly conceal its true intentions to 
the voters? It is not right to say one thing and then do another. 
The Sask Party will try argue that essential services is to ensure 
public safety. This is not its objective. Its objective is simple. 
It’s to destroy the collective bargaining process and place the 
wheels in the hands of the employer. They will try to be sneaky 
with this legislation. They’ll say we are not taking away the 
right to strike; however, they will legislate that service must 
continue to be provided thus neutering any effectiveness of job 
action. 
 
In a growth economy such as Saskatchewan and its 
precipitating effects of rising cost of living, it is not the time to 
slash collective bargaining abilities. This legislation will 
naturally cross all work boundaries as it will remain very 
nondescript. It will leave enough room to drive a truck through, 
and it will be left to the discretion of the Sask Party 
government. From what I understand, the Sask Party did not 
seek to consult with teachers, nurses, unions, or the Sask 
Federation of Labour on this landmark legislation. This is a 
shame. Legislation which they stated was not needed just prior 
to the election . . . again the Sask Party says one thing, does 
another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have concern for Crown corporations. I suspect 
they will not privatize them; however I am sure they will begin 
to hive off the profit centres of these, reducing each one of its to 
its core services. With reduced profits, rates will be forced to 
increase and costs will rise. They will, in essence, take away the 
ability for the Crowns to remain competitive. Utility costs will 
rise. The people of Regina Rosemont will not be happy. They 
will dismantle the Crowns from the back door in, at the expense 
of the ratepayers in the province. 
 
By eliminating significant funding to meet our emissions 
targets, it appears that the Saskatchewan Party does not place 
value on the environment, an issue very important to our 
younger voters . . . and generations. But both the Sask Party’s 
platform and actions have not done a thing to support those 
challenged by the rising costs of housing, causing increased 
stress on renting families across this province. This is out of 
line with voters’ needs. At a time of growth and prosperity, we 
must all ensure we go forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the marginalizing policies and nature of the Sask 
Party offer benefit to a select few. Sask Party policies and their 
conservative agenda will not take Saskatchewan in the right 
direction. 
 
It appears just a mere month following this election that the 
Sask Party government is one that cannot be trusted. It appears 
that they will say anything to get elected and then whatever they 
want following. 
 
It appears in fact that the Sask Party have re-allocated the three 
R’s of environmental stewardship and have renamed them. I 
believe they now serve as the Sask Party’s model on how to 
deal with their platform’s post-election expectations. The Sask 
Party’s three R’s — reduce, retreat, and reinvent. 
 
The Sask Party says one thing and then does another. As a party 
that likes to refer to itself as the corporate party, the Sask Party 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

is well acquainted with the term shareholders. However I stand 
as an opposition member here today to let the people of our fine 
province know that the Sask Party is serving the wrong set of 
shareholders. The people of this province are our shareholders, 
not corporate Alberta, Wall Street, or Bay Street.  
 
Now while working with the corporate world is very, very 
important to sustain this robust economic growth, it is not the 
end goal. As New Democrats, we believe that the benefits from 
the wealth of our province should not simply serve the Sask 
Party’s allegiances of out-of-province investment. We believe it 
needs to serve and benefit the province’s true shareholders — 
the families, the individuals, the people, and the builders of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after much deliberation, I’ve chosen that I will not 
be supporting the Throne Speech, and I am supporting the 
amendment. And I thank the Assembly for the ears they have 
offered me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is certainly a pleasure to enter into the first reply to 
the Throne Speech in this new twenty-sixth legislature and our 
first sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As many other members have offered you congratulations, I 
would like to add my name to that list of members. I know your 
years of experience here in the House will certainly serve you 
well in serving the members of the legislature, and you certainly 
have my confidence, I’m sure, of all members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t thank the voters of 
Last Mountain-Touchwood for once again placing their trust in 
me to represent their interests in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s always humbling to have the people of your constituency 
renew their confidence in you as an elected member to carry 
forward the issues that they have, to speak for them, to work for 
them, to make sure that they are well represented and have 
access to all avenues of government services and to be a voice 
for their opinions on important issues, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would certainly like to thank them for, as I said, for placing 
their confidence in me once again. 
 
I should just say, take time, Mr. Speaker — and I know time is 
of the essence this afternoon — to say a few words about the 
uniqueness of Last Mountain-Touchwood. It’s a constituency 
that at one time was a bellwether constituency that always 
elected an MLA to the government side of the House. That 
changed back in 1999, and now it’s resumed its original role of 
electing a member to the government side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. It is also a very . . . the greatest portion of the 
constituency is a rural constituency. We have numerous small 
towns, hamlets, and villages. We don’t have any large centres. 
Our largest communities are less than 1,000 in population. 
 
But there’s also a component of Last-Mountain Touchwood 
which I describe as a suburban part of the constituency . . . is 
that area along our lakes and the Qu’Appelle Valley where we 

have numerous residents living in communities like Craven and 
Katepwa and Lebret and Pasqua Lake. But many of those 
residents work here in the city of Regina and commute on a 
daily basis, Mr. Speaker. So even though they live in rural 
Saskatchewan, their issues are more urban-based. Certainly all 
constituents have issues around health care and highways and 
transportation, but I find quite a difference when I’m dealing 
with those residents of the constituency who live in the suburbia 
part of the constituency, Mr. Speaker. And so it certainly makes 
the workload more diverse, and we certainly welcome that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would also like to extend congratulations to all new members 
that were elected in the last election on both sides of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. I can remember back to the first time being 
elected and making my maiden speech in the chambers here, 
Mr. Speaker. It was a whole lot less noisy at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. And one thing you do develop over a period of years is 
the ability to speak to the people of the province even though 
there is some discussions that happen occasionally, and I’m 
sure they are always productive discussions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
This new legislature is a time for new opportunities. The people 
of the province have voted to have a new party govern them and 
that party being the Saskatchewan Party. And I personally am 
certainly pleased that the voters of this province made that wise 
decision. It’s an opportunity for a new direction in the province, 
a time for sustainable growth and opportunity which I know 
will result in revenues that will provide the wherewithal for 
infrastructure and services that our citizens certainly deserve, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also provides an opportunity for the members of 
this legislature in that we have an opportunity to deal with what 
Preston Manning in a recent article in the Calgary Herald 
termed the democratic deficit. And that is . . . it’s a problem that 
is developing in this country, perhaps at a lesser extent in this 
province, but nevertheless it has to do with the view of the 
average citizen of elected members. There’s been a number of 
polls in recent years whereby various occupations are rated as 
far as job performance and satisfaction of the general public. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we as elected individuals have collectively a 
developing problem that I believe we need to address. Our job 
approval rating is not very . . . we don’t rate very high in the 
eyes of the general public, Mr. Speaker. We are way below 50 
per cent in job approval ratings — and I’m speaking 
collectively — not only in this province but all elected 
individuals across this country, particularly in the legislatures 
and in the House of Commons. 
 
And that is resulting, I believe, in some cases, in very low voter 
turnout. If we look at the recent Ontario provincial election, I 
believe, if memory serves me, there was something like 52 per 
cent of eligible voters actually voted. Now the traditional 
thought on that is that the rest of the people were satisfied with 
the way their province was being governed and therefore just 
didn’t bother showing up at the polls. I’m not so sure that that’s 
really a correct or true interpretation of that figure. I think there 
is a general disapproval and, as the old saying, well it really 
doesn’t matter who’s in power; they’re all the same, Mr. 
Speaker. 



December 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

And I think we need to deal with that. It’s something that has 
been developing over a long period of time, and it won’t be 
reversed very quickly. But we have an opportunity now where 
we can perhaps change some of the things that we do to instill 
more voter confidence in all of us as elected members, Mr. 
Speaker. And I believe that applies evenly to both sides of the 
House. 
 
Some of the things that are currently, in recent times, that are 
happening — and particularly at the national level, I’m thinking 
of the sponsorship scandal or the more current issue in Ottawa, 
the Karlheinz Schreiber-Mulroney issue — certainly doesn’t 
help matters. And fortunately, Mr. Speaker, in this province we 
aren’t plagued with those sorts of things although sometimes 
the members opposite will remind of us some unfortunate 
things that occurred quite some years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has troubled me in the last 
number of years since I’ve been a member of this legislature is 
the conduct of the House during question period. We all realize 
that this is the most charged 25 minutes of the day, and there 
are certainly good reasons behind why it is so charged and so 
on. But question period is, for most citizens of this province, the 
window which they view the workings of this Assembly. It’s 
the only time they actually see . . . that being on news clips or 
quite often if they’re visiting, particularly school groups, 
they’re here from the start of the work afternoon or morning till 
question period, and then quite often they leave. 
 
And I’m sure I know many members of the House have 
received letters and emails and telephone calls from people 
accompanying school groups, expressing their disapproval with 
the actions of all members of the House. And I think that we 
have an opportunity . . . Except for the member for 
Canora-Pelly — he gets two emails to one of every one that the 
rest of us get, Mr. Speaker. But I think we have an opportunity, 
all of us, to perhaps be cognizant at least of the way we are 
being viewed and particularly when the galleries are full of 
school groups. 
 
Quite often in the month of May when we used to sit much 
longer — it was in the early part of June — our galleries would 
be full of school groups. And we as members sitting here did 
quite often . . . I include myself in this. We didn’t recognize or 
at least we weren’t mentally aware that we had a bunch of 
young, very impressionable young people sitting in the 
galleries, looking down and watching us. And I think we need 
to be cognizant of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess this was brought home to me in a very personal 
way very recently, Mr. Speaker, at our swearing-in ceremony, 
and when I had my oldest grandson sitting in the crowd 
observing the ceremony. There’s a little bit of a story behind 
that. On election night . . . My oldest grandson lives in Regina 
here, and on election night when the first results of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood were posted on one of the local TV 
channels, he phones and he says, grandpa, he says, you’re 
leading. And then I received a second phone call from him 
some time later when I was declared elected, and he says, 
grandpa, I just saw that you were elected. And he was very 
pleased that his grandfather was once again re-elected to the 
Assembly. 
 

And he always has had a real interest in politics and that 
certainly as he’s . . . I should mention he’s 11 years old. And as 
he’s gotten older his interest in politics has become much more 
active and he’s much more keen as far as watching what’s 
happening and trying to be aware. And so I certainly was very 
proud and pleased that he was able to attend the swearing-in 
ceremony. And I could see him sitting beside his grandmother 
asking her different questions about what was happening and 
making comments and so on. And he wanted to . . . The 
Premier, after we all left the Assembly, the Premier was being 
scrummed and he certainly was very interested in that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I took him over there and tried to explain the 
dynamics of a scrum and I think he still asks me questions 
about that. 
 
Also I must thank the Premier, Mr. Speaker, for being so 
gracious as to inviting myself and my grandson into his office 
and agreeing to have some pictures taken. And they are pictures 
that I know I will value for the rest of my life, and I’m sure my 
grandson, Owen, will. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s for that reason that I raise this issue. I 
think we all have times in this Assembly that will probably stay 
with us for the rest of our lives, whether it’s a great speech that 
we give or, for those people participating in question period, for 
coming up with great answers or putting questions in a very 
effective way, whatever the occasion is. 
 
One of the things that I will remember, I think, Mr. Speaker, 
after I leave this place is I remember, I believe it was probably 
the first time I was elected; it was our first full session, and I 
was sitting in the opposition side. And it was shortly before the 
start of the day’s proceedings when I overheard one of our tour 
guides speaking to a school group, and she was saying, at that 
time describing who we were and what we did. And the phrase 
that I remember is that she said the people below us speak for 
us. And if you think about that, that is why we are here. We 
speak for the people that we represent, and I think we need to 
reflect in our actions their values, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is something that I would hope that all members would 
take notice of, that we have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
perhaps reverse that job approval trend, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would certainly appreciate and am hopeful we would all work 
toward that. I’m not saying that we need to take the 
competitiveness out of the Assembly, but we need to find the 
balance, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people outside the 
Assembly can relate to more on a daily basis. 
 
Another opportunity, Mr. Speaker, that we do have with this 
new legislature is to, I believe, to expand the democratic 
process which was started after the 2003 election through the 
formation of the standing policy committees, field committees, 
that we have in the legislature. I recall the remarks of our 
retiring Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, when she urged us to expand the 
democratic process by not being afraid to use our committees as 
they were intended. And it would be my hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
in this new legislature that — and particularly with the view, 
with the makeup of the committees where there are certainly 
more, now more government members than there are opposition 
members — that all members of committees use the committees 
to expand the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 
do that in a fashion that will result in better government. 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2007 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see the hour is late and I would just like to 
conclude my remarks by saying that I’m certainly very proud 
and pleased to be able to support the Speech from the Throne, 
and I will be voting for the main motion and not voting for the 
amendment. 
 
I would like to also adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................97 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................97 
  Hickie ...........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................98 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................106 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Furber ..........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 We Are Many: A Festival 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Borden’s Terrible Loss 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Dedicated Volunteer Honoured in Moose Jaw 
  Higgins .........................................................................................................................................................................................98 
 Congratulations and Tribute in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson.....................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Circle of Voices 
  Forbes ..........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Grand Opening of Ranch Ehrlo Corman Park Campus 
  Kirsch...........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
 Martin Collegiate’s Bricks and Mortar Program 
  Wotherspoon .............................................................................................................................................................................100 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 
  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................101 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Comparisons of Financial Policies 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................103 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................105 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 The Passing of Two Former Officers of the Legislative Assembly 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................106 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................109 
  Reiter .........................................................................................................................................................................................111 
  Bradshaw ...................................................................................................................................................................................112 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................115 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................117 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................119 
  Wotherspoon .............................................................................................................................................................................122 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................126 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


