


















































Hansard: March 15, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 31A  THURSDAY, MARCH 15, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 851 
 March 15, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this morning, 
sir, it’s my privilege to present a petition on behalf of 
constituents of Cypress Hills, in particular those concerned 
about the planned closure of the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon at the end of this month. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the community of Eastend, Shaunavon, and 
Climax. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the lack of cell service in rural Saskatchewan, specifically the 
Porcupine Plain-Weekes area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
ensure that SaskTel provides access to cell coverage in the 
Porcupine Plain-Weekes area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain and Chelan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition that asks the government to maintain full 
service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners note that the bank cannot accept 
payment if the customer doesn’t have documentation of service 
which the office supplies. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 

and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
and they come from the communities of Rosetown and Milden. 
And I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today 
with citizens concerned with the safety of driving on Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, today are from Saskatoon, 
St-Denis, and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
southeast Saskatchewan who are very concerned over the 
condition of Highway 18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Beaubier, Lake 
Alma, and Gladmar. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition for safer driving conditions on Highway No. 3. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I have a 
petition from concerned citizens that believe that the withdrawal 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

of lab services in the Lafleche and district health district would 
cause undue hardships to residents, particular seniors. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
Woodrow, Meyronne, and Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the highway 
conditions in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road to 
No. 795. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Livelong and 
Turtleford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche is recognized. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I bring 
forward a petition from the people of rural Saskatchewan 
concerned about cellular coverage. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassing the constituency of Batoche. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s signed by the good people of Humboldt 
and Watson. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition for citizens 
calling on the government to upgrade Highway 20 to primary 
weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Lockwood, Nokomis, Semans, Strasbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway No. 5. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Humboldt and Saskatoon. This highway runs right through the 
width of my constituency. I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — According to order the 
petitions received at the last sitting have been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and received. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Member Named Honorary Elder by 
Yellow Quill First Nation 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to able to 
rise in the Assembly today to inform members of a very special 
honour that has been bestowed on the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon at a special ceremony, the 
Yellow Quill Saulteaux First Nation bestowed, and I quote: 
 

the highest honour and respect to Elder June Draude MLA 
as an Honourary Elder with all rights and privileges that 
this title holds. 
 

According to that First Nation, and again I quote: 
 

An Honoured Elder is an Elder who is not from the 
Yellow Quill Community. This individual is held in the 
highest regard with the utmost respect. This person can 
contribute to the community with the high standards of 
expertise in their field or his/her line of work. He or she 
can be called on by the community, and may be used as a 
consultant if required . . . In turn, the Yellow Quill first 
nation will respect and honour this person, and bestow the 
title ‘Honoured Elder’. 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

Mr. Speaker, our caucus members are extremely proud of the 
hard work from the member for Kelvington-Wadena not only 
with respect to her constituency but on behalf of First Nations 
and Métis people in her critic duties with the Saskatchewan 
Party. She has been a leader in the area of mandatory treaty 
education. She has provided leadership in the area of the duty to 
consult and accommodate. And we are proud and benefit from 
her desire to continually learn more about the First Nations of 
our province, including those close to her home — the Yellow 
Quill Saulteaux First Nation. 
 
I invite all members to join me in congratulating the hon. 
member for this honour received yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well today is about our 
friends at Rawlco Radio. It’s about Z99, CC, Lori, and Buzz — 
saga 20. This year marks the 20th consecutive year of the Z99 
radiothon raising funds for Regina General’s neonatal unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud. This year they’re raising money 
for state-of-the-art heart monitors. No, not for CC. These heart 
monitors are for the babies in the Regina General neonatal 
intensive care unit. These heart monitors feature three tiny 
paddles attached by cable to a monitor. And it monitors 
heartbeat and breathing for these babies in their time of need, 
and the alarm will sound if their breathing or heartbeat gets too 
fast or too slow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rawlco Radio, Z99 are providing the generous 
listeners in southern Saskatchewan — and anywhere but 
particularly southern Saskatchewan — an opportunity to 
participate in making our world, our province, our southern 
Saskatchewan a better place — and a better place to raise 
families, a better place to have babies, a safer place. Hats off to 
Rawlco Radio, Z99, and especially all of the listeners that are 
supporting CC, Lori, and Buzz in this their very special 20th 
year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Member Marks Third Anniversary as Opposition Leader 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, March 15 marks the third anniversary of the day the 
member from Swift Current became the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, under his leadership the 
Saskatchewan Party’s membership has soared. 
 
Our leader has also led the Saskatchewan Party through two 

successful by-elections — one in the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy last June and most recently, earlier this 
month, in the constituency of Martensville. In Weyburn, the 
home of Tommy Douglas, the Saskatchewan Party won with 
nearly 50 per cent of the vote. And who could forget the 
Saskatchewan Party’s historic victory in Martensville earlier 
this month when our newest MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] took in 77 per cent of the vote, and the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] failed to get its vote out resulting in the 
worst turnout for the NDP in the constituency since 1944. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader was also responsible for calling for a 
comprehensive policy review that resulted in a broad policy 
document from our members that the NDP continues to borrow 
from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being the leader of any political party means a 
great deal of time away from home. Our caucus would like to 
thank our leader, the member for Swift Current, for the many 
sacrifices he has made for the people of this great province. 
We’d also like to thank his wife, Tami, and their children — 
Megan, Colter, and Faith — for lending us their husband and 
father. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

The Ides of March  
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to the remind the House of a quote by Shakespeare from 
Julius Caesar that I think is particularly appropriate today. It’s 
“beware the ides of March,” Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan should take heed of this warning because today is 
not only the ides of March but is also the three-year anniversary 
of the election of the member from Swift Current as Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — We have had three years of improvised 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where the Leader of the 
Opposition pulls party policy out of his hat and if Brenda 
Bakken didn’t like it, that was just too bad. 
 
We’ve had three years of pretending that privatized 
Saskatchewan isn’t his plan for the Crowns, but a small town 
newspaper in the member’s own constituency once said, “The 
Sask Party made complete morons of themselves” on the topic 
of Crown corporations. 
 
But where do the Leader of the Opposition’s delusions of 
adequacy come from, Mr. Speaker? His time as a political hack 
for the worst premier in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
And what does the leader of alibi Saskatchewan have to say 
about that? I quote: “I think it is an asset that I was involved in 
a government that lost its way . . . ” which just goes to show 
that the member from Swift Current has Van Gogh’s ear for 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

public sentiment. He even had to cancel his recent golf 
excursion, Mr. Speaker, because of allegations of selling access 
to a privileged few. I guess that was just unwise Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown. 
 

National Recognition for Community Beautification 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each year 
Communities in Bloom holds a national competition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
having a lot of fun this morning. 
 
Each year Communities in Bloom holds a national competition 
to showcase the efforts of communities across Canada. Through 
this national beautification program, communities are 
recognized for their commitment to the environment and their 
community. I would like to congratulate Rosetown for being 
declared the national winner in the population category of 2,001 
to 3,000 people. 
 
Communities in Bloom is a Canadian non-profit organization 
committed to fostering civic pride, environmental 
responsibility, and improved quality of life through community 
involvement and maintenance of parks and green spaces. 
 
Rosetown is being honoured for the impact of their enthusiastic, 
visionary, and committed Communities in Bloom committee. 
Through their initiatives, partnerships, and volunteer groups, 
businesses and municipal government have been formed to 
make Rosetown an outstanding west central Saskatchewan 
community. 
 
Congratulations should also be extended to Outlook for their 
work on the Sky Trail project. Outlook received a four bloom 
rating for a population of 2,001 to 3,000. 
 
Communities entered for this award are evaluated on eight key 
criteria including tidiness, environmental awareness, 
community involvement, natural and cultural heritage 
conservation, urban forestry, landscaped areas, floral displays, 
and turf and ground covers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Rosetown and 
Outlook for achieving national recognition for their hard work 
and dedication that makes these communities among the most 
beautiful in Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

St. Patrick’s Day Greetings 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well last we heard, 

the ides of March is upon us. And as we saw outside last 
evening, winter’s not quite behind us. But soon the lawns and 
trees in our province will be lush and full. Maybe it’s because 
of my own Irish roots and optimism, but I’m looking forward to 
those familiar sights of spring — green leaves, fields, and grass. 
March in Saskatchewan is usually full of green, Mr. Speaker, 
but not only because of the plants. In March we also celebrate 
St. Patrick’s Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Irish settlers in Saskatchewan have made 
significant contributions in the building of this great province. 
When Saskatchewan was founded over 100 years ago, one of 
ten of our residents were either born Irish or of Irish origin. 
Communities like Limerick and Shamrock will always remind 
us of this origin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With their laughter, music, dance, rich storytelling traditions, 
and of course their understanding of leprechauns, the Irish have 
been a vital force in the evolution of our province and our 
culture. On St. Patrick’s Day we celebrate all of these 
accomplishments. 
 
I would like to wish all members the luck of the Irish, Mr. 
Speaker, and in closing offer a traditional Irish blessing: 
 

May the Irish hills caress you. 
May her lakes and rivers bless you. 
May the luck of the Irish enfold you. 
May the blessings of Saint Patrick behold you. 

 
So to all of you this Saturday, Mr. Speaker, Erin Go Bragh. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Murdoch Carriere Settlement 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our caucus office 
and constituency office have been flooded with letters and 
phone calls from people irate with the incompetence of the 
NDP government by the fact that it awarded a man fired for 
harassment and convicted of assault $275,000. And it’s not only 
citizens speaking out, but columnists, commentators, and 
editorial boards. I’d like to share a portion of the Leader-Post 
editorial from March 1 with this Assembly, and I quote: 
 

The NDP’s handling of this case before Tuesday’s 
announcement did nothing to inspire confidence in its 
managerial competence. 
 
Its refusal to disclose meaningful detail about the reasons 
behind the settlement — citing the usual legal 
requirements — does nothing to address concerns about 
the deal with its former civil servant. 
 
And now — with . . . prevarications stripped away — its 
plea to us is: “Trust us.” 
 
As taxpayers, and more importantly, as citizens who 
expect their government to do the right thing, settlements 
such as Tuesday’s erode the very trust to which Nilson is 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

appealing. 
 
What of provincial workers, who must also trust the 
government as an employer? 
 
We agree with the Saskatchewan Party labour critic Ken 
Krawetz, who says the settlement sends a disturbing 
message to women in the workplace. 
 
And of those directly involved with the Carriere matter? 
 
We share the sentiment of Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees Union president, Bob Bymoen: “We 
feel for those women.” 

 
End quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Minister’s Comments at Municipal Convention 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
days ago the Leader of the Opposition had the opportunity to 
speak at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention and was very well received, and I 
believe that was very good for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier spoke to SARM 
convention, accompanied by the Minister of Agriculture and 
some other cabinet ministers, and I believe that was even better 
for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the NDP Minister of Agriculture stood 
before about 2,000 SARM delegates and basically called one of 
them a liar. When a producer from the Southwest said the NDP 
has done nothing to help with the drought, the minister called 
his statements completely inaccurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has done absolutely nothing to help the 
producers in the Southwest and when someone points that out, 
the minister responds by insulting them. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
asking the Minister of Agriculture to apologize to SARM and to 
that delegate in particular on behalf of his government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I really never mind taking the brunt of things when I’m actually 
guilty of doing something that is wrong. In fact I think I need to 
be accountable. But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 
the member opposite or whether it’s somebody from SARM 
who’s standing up and saying things which are inaccurate, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not going to sit and just allow that to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why? Because it’s important in these issues that 

affect so many people that we seek to be clear, honest, and 
straightforward in what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. And so when 
someone stands up in an assembly like that or an Assembly like 
this and twists what one of us has said, then, Mr. Speaker, we 
need to identify the inaccuracies and we need to speak clearly to 
the people that are in that assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what I did. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier got one big round of applause yesterday at 
one spot, and it was when one of the delegates got up and 
wished him a good last year in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, for years and years this NDP 
government has ignored rural Saskatchewan, and now the 
Premier thinks he’s going to waltz into SARM after 
downloading them on since 1991 and make an announcement of 
a few infrastructure dollars and buy everyone’s vote with that 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people at SARM see right through this 
Premier and his government. But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Agriculture’s comments yesterday and his arrogance were the 
last straw. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier insist that that minister 
apologize to SARM and apologize to the members there for his 
attitude and his comments yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to be clear as well, what I did say to the members of SARM was 
that I had met three times with the folks from the Southwest. 
Our department has been in continual discussion with them. I 
have been speaking to the federal minister about the issue of the 
drought in the Southwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been pushing hard to get a program in 
place. And we have committed to funding 10 per cent of 
whatever the federal government will put in. Plus, Mr. Speaker, 
we have committed to funding a water program with the PFRA 
[Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any suggestion that we have done nothing is 
absolutely, clearly, honestly inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. But what, 
Mr. Speaker, would the members opposite do that’s different, 
Mr. Speaker? Well the member opposite who’s just got up and 
speaking says that it would be their opinion that 100 per cent of 
any disaster should be fully funded by the federal government. 
So if he’s going to point and attack somewhere, point it where 
the problem is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Government’s Settlement with Complainants 
in the Carriere Case 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in Prince Albert a 
meeting took place. Approximately 50 employees from the fire 
control office were invited to attend. We were told that the 
purpose of this meeting was to address recent issues related to 
the Murdoch Carriere situation and that there’d be an 
opportunity for an open forum to address questions. Can the 
minister confirm that this meeting took place and who 
represented the government at this meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the 
deputy minister and the assistant deputy minister for the 
Department of the Environment held a meeting at the fire centre 
in Prince Albert yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, my father would have said that 
putting 50 people in a room to share their feelings is like asking 
students to stand up in front of a classroom and discuss their 
problems with algebra — it’s a pretty intimidating situation. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, someone did ask about the settlement 
signed by the victims and why they weren’t given a copy. The 
government officials said that not giving the victims a copy of 
the settlement was a mistake — a mistake, Mr. Speaker. Does 
the minister agree with her department officials? Does the 
minister agree it was a mistake to refuse to give a copy of the 
settlement to the victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the opposition 
handed out a letter from the lawyer representing . . . in response 
to counsel for one of the women, a Mr. Gordon Wyant who is 
representing one woman. And the letter says very clearly: 
 

Firstly, you are correct in stating that my former partner, 
Martel Popescul, acted for [blank] . . . to the Murdoch 
Carriere matter. Because there are multiple clients, I need 
to determine whether the other clients must provide their 
consent to the release of the file. Further, as I have had no 
involvement with this file prior to my most recent 

conversations . . . I will need to extensively review the file 
to determine whether there are portions which may not be 
released to her due to solicitor-client privilege with respect 
to our other clients [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there were nine complainants. Nine complainants 
were represented by legal counsel, and, Mr. Speaker, as I 
understand it, if one were to release the file, one would need to 
speak to all of the people to the action because their personal 
information is contained within the file. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the minister showed us 
yesterday how much respect she had for these victims. We 
handed her a consent form for the government to sign to release 
the settlement — not the personal information contained in 
those files; the settlement — and the minister threw it in the 
garbage. That’s how much respect she has for these women. I’ll 
ask the minister again. Does she agree with her officials that it 
was a mistake that these women were not given a copy of this 
settlement? Not the personal files, the settlement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday on the floor of 
this Assembly a lawyer, the Justice critic, who represents the 
Saskatchewan Party in Saskatoon Southeast, indicated on the 
floor of this Assembly that I should sign a release form for one 
person when it contains information on other complainants. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously the members opposite don’t get it. 
They don’t get it. 
 
There’s called the freedom of information and privacy 
protection Act, which is . . . There’s the freedom of information 
and protection Act, privacy and protection Act that is a piece of 
legislation that all members of the legislature are subject to, all 
public institutions are subject to. And, Mr. Speaker, I find it 
surprising that I read in a scrum with the media the Leader of 
the Opposition indicating that information should be released. It 
is surprising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to again remind the minister of the words used by the judge that 
presided over the Carriere case. The judge said that he, and I 
quote, could “. . . not understand how Carriere’s conduct could 
have gone on for as long as it did without being detected by 
other supervisors.” We agree with the judge’s comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister know of any other harassment 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

complaints that were brought forward against Mr. Carriere prior 
to the women in the Gillies report? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — . . . appreciate it, because the members 
opposite have used the judge’s statement on more than one 
occasion, I’d really appreciate it if the member opposite could 
table the document — not what she’s reading from, but the 
actual document where the judge actually said this. Because this 
is an important point, Mr. Speaker, because we’re not clear that 
the judge actually said it. So we would appreciate receiving a 
copy of the actual document that the member is referring to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s review the facts. On April 1, 2003 the 
members opposite asked that Murdoch Carriere be fired. They 
asked on the floor of this Assembly. They asked it to the former 
minister responsible for the Public Service Commission. On 
April 2 the minister announced that he had been terminated, Mr. 
Speaker. And what did the members of the opposition do? They 
supported the decision of the government; they supported it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister. I’m sure with the resources available to government 
that this minister could get a copy of any report that she wanted 
to get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day when questioned by reporters . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. The 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, for the minister’s information, 
that was tabled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day when questioned by reporters of 
other prior complaints about Murdoch Carriere, the minister’s 
response was she could not answer the question with any 
precision. That sounds like a yes coming from the way the 
minister’s answered other questions in this case, so she needs to 
clarify her answer. The minister has had lots of time to review 
this file and to come up with some very important answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister have any knowledge of any prior 
harassment complaints against Murdoch Carriere, not including 
the women that were brave enough to come forward? And what 
year was the very first harassment complaint brought against 
Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member 
to reconsider her answer that the actual document was tabled in 
this Assembly. I’d like her to reconsider her answer. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member opposite — 
and this is important because I understand the members 
opposite want to become the government of the day — we are 
talking about personnel files, and personnel files are protected 
by the freedom of information and privacy protection Act, Mr. 
Speaker. There is information in the public domain. But what I 
find so startling, Mr. Speaker, on March 14 the Leader of the 
Opposition, when asked a question about the facts surrounding 
this case, and he says this, that: 
 

If that’s the reason that they are in contravention of their 
own policies legislation perhaps — and that’s also very 
serious — that goes directly to the competence to a 
government abiding by its own policies and legislation. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s say this. We have made it very clear we 
did not follow the process. They supported it. And we now have 
the result of the Murdoch Carriere settlement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan 
want is an answer from that minister, just once a clear and 
simple answer. This is a very simple question — and I’m going 
to say it very slowly; maybe you can understand it — how 
many women came forward with complaints against Murdoch 
Carriere prior to the women in the Gillies report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, 
personnel files are not to be in the public domain, Mr. Speaker. 
It is very clear — personnel files are not to be in the public 
domain. And I will not answer that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Ministers’ Knowledge of Disciplinary Action 
Regarding Murdoch Carriere 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
other day I asked a very simple question of the Premier, but the 
Premier would not get up and give an answer so I will try again 
today. Was the Premier ever briefed by any government official 
on the Murdoch Carriere harassment investigation and the 
subsequent disciplinary action prior to April 1, 2003? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, appropriately, no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that 
answer. Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said over and over again 
that you should know as a Premier what is going on in your 
office. Mr. Speaker, this is the deputy minister to the Premier 
who has been involved in a file, who has been involved in 
discussions, who’s been involved in discussions on transfer 
and/or termination. 
 
Is that what the Premier is going to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan — that he knew absolutely nothing prior to April 
1 of the charges that were being brought against Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to inform the critic who’s 
just been on his feet and the Leader of the Opposition who 
seems to want to advance this theory from his seat, the deputy 
minister to the Premier of the province is not part of the 
Premier’s office staff, Mr. Speaker. The deputy minister to the 
Premier in the Government of Saskatchewan, and I would say 
in all government structures, serves the people of 
Saskatchewan, works for the people of Saskatchewan and not 
for the Premier of the day. 
 
Now I know why the Leader of the Opposition thinks that every 
public servant works for the Premier, because that’s the school 
of public governance he attended when he worked in this 
building in the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, when I ask about 
individuals, ministers not knowing what’s going on in their 
office, there is the example of someone who either did know 
what was going on in the office when he worked in that office 
or didn’t. Now he ought to tell us that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier, if the 
Premier does not know what’s going on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The House shall come to order. 
Member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
Premier did not know what was going on as a result of the 
actions being taken by his deputy minister, the other person 
who must have known something is the former minister of the 
Environment. All of a sudden, just as we’re starting to gear up 
for the forest fire season, the director of fire management is 
suddenly suspended and transferred to Regina. It defies belief 
that no one would explain this to the minister. They must have 
had been told something. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when was the former minister of the Environment 
briefed about Murdoch Carriere’s suspension and transfer? And 
what was he told? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer the 
question. And, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to 
review the press immediately following April 2, they will find 
the answer in their press clippings. The minister, the former 
minister of the Environment has already answered that question 
quite publicly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier, and I can also provide a bit of an 
answer to him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Should the people of this province decide to change the 
Government of Saskatchewan later this year, and should there 
be a different premier sitting in the Premier’s office, here’s 
what would happen in that instance. So I can remove all doubt, 
here’s what the Government of Saskatchewan would do and 
what the premier would do. If somebody in the government, if 
someone in the Government of Saskatchewan was harassing 
nine women, someone who was later actually convicted of 
assault, Mr. Speaker, and they reported that to my deputy 
minister, I would want to know what the information was and I 
would want something done about that on behalf of the women 
of that government. You bet I would. That is exactly what 
would happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in April 2003 . . . In April 2003, the 
then minister of Justice said, in the event that there’s a lawsuit 
against the Government of Saskatchewan, it’ll be the position of 
this Government of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. 
Carriere was justified, and that this would be vigorously 
defended in the courts. What has changed since then? Why has 
the government lost its way? Why are they now rewarding 
those who do the harassment, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to review again, to review 
again, Mr. Speaker, when this came to our attention at the 
political level, and appropriately, I repeat, appropriately, I 
repeat, the senior public service of Saskatchewan are charged 
with dealings with matters of personnel. That is not, that is not a 
charge to this Premier or any future premier, that premiers 
should be involved with the personnel files of the public service 
of Saskatchewan. Let’s make that clear. 
 
When, Mr. Speaker, this came to the attention of the elected, it 
was our determination that the process had not been followed to 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

our satisfaction or had achieved the desired outcome, which 
was the termination of Mr. Carriere. On the recommendation of 
the minister, I directed that Mr. Carriere be terminated. Mr. 
Speaker, that was taken out. We know now that the process was 
not followed correctly, and we’ve ended up paying. I did that, 
Mr. Speaker, I did that in the knowledge, in the knowledge we 
were not following the process. We did it in public knowledge 
and with the support of the opposition. We did it, Mr. Speaker, 
in the knowledge that some day we would likely have to pay. 
 
Are we happy about this, Mr. Speaker? We are not happy about 
this. Would I change my decision made in April 2003? I would 
not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: 
does he not run the kind of government, does he not lead the 
kind of government where, if the senior-most official in his 
government — the one that reports directly to him — becomes 
aware that women are being apparently systemically and in a 
patterned way harassed by a senior manager of this government, 
does he not run the kind of organization where he’s instructed 
those officials to let him know so that action can be taken? And 
if he isn’t running that kind of government, if he’s not that 
interested in those kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker, then what good 
is he? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this case a court action 
was taken. Mr. Speaker, action was taken. And as a 
follow-through to this particular circumstance, we have 
significantly changed the harassment policies within 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But note what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting — 
that if he were the premier of the province, he would exercise 
the power of this office to hire and fire and intervene in 
personnel matters of public servants in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Is it any surprise . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The House will come to order. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder this 
Leader of the Opposition takes that position, because that is 
exactly what went on in government when he worked with this 
government in the 1980s. That is exactly what went on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we resolved, in taking government back 
from these folks, we resolved that never again in the history of 
Saskatchewan should the public service be threatened by 
politicians with hiring and firing as they did and would do 
again. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing what the Premier’s 
admitting to here today. He thinks it’s perfectly reasonable that 
the most senior official in his government, his deputy minister, 
the one that reports to him, when informed about this, about 
harassment in the workplace — nine different cases, maybe 
more; we can’t get an answer — that he doesn’t want to know 
about it. He’s told his deputy, I’m not interested in that; I want 
to be detached from that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province deserve a 
government that would want to know something about it and 
would do something about it, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 
would want. Or, or, Mr. Speaker, is it the fact that Mr. Carriere 
is connected with this government? Maybe that’s the reality. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: what is he hiding, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There we have it, Mr. Speaker. There we 
have it — the classic example of a right wing, a right wing 
party’s approach to the public service. There we have an 
example of a would-be premier, a would-be premier, Mr. 
Speaker, on his feet casting innuendo on members of this House 
and former members of this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a line. There is a line, Mr. Speaker, that 
the opposition simply does not understand — a line between the 
elected and the public service. I have instructed and this 
government have instructed there is a zero tolerance policy for 
harassment in this government — a zero tolerance harassment 
policy. That is the role of the elected — to set policy. It is the 
role of the public service, particularly, particularly when it 
comes to personnel matters, to enforce that policy. That’s 
what’s being done, and that’s what was done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of PSC [Public 
Service Commission] said from her seat, what the Premier has 
said in the answer to the question, do they think it is crossing 
the line for senior officials of the government to be notified that 
when there’s cases of harassment like this, that they should 
brief their ministers who are responsible and accountable? That 
minister said and that Premier says, yes, it’s crossing the line. 
We think this NDP has crossed the line of decency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier, that Premier would 
rather pay $275,000 to someone fired for harassment, convicted 
of assault. He would rather preside over a government that 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

won’t release the settlement, that won’t answer any questions as 
to why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question again to the Premier, on behalf of the people of 
this province who want answers, is simple: what is he hiding, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in matters in this import, 
you would at least believe, you would at least believe that the 
Leader of the Opposition would place the correct facts on the 
floor of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere has not received this payment for 
harassment. He was put through a process. He’s been through 
the courts. This settlement, Mr. Speaker, is clearly as a direct 
result of our decision to terminate Mr. Carriere, to terminate 
him from the public service, to remove him from the workplace, 
Mr. Speaker. And having not abided by policy at that time, Mr. 
Carriere took this matter to the courts. On the best legal advice, 
we were told to settle or it could cost considerably more to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve chosen that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is so illustrative in this debate is the 
attitude that that Leader of the Opposition and that party would 
take to public servants in our province. They want hirings and 
firings and discipline the purview of the Premier. It will not be 
under this Premier or this New Democratic Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Environment. 
 

Release of Saskatchewan’s First 
State of the Watershed Report 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to announce the release of Saskatchewan’s first state 
of the watershed report. Mr. Speaker, the state of the watershed 
report is an important monitoring tool allowing us to assess the 
health of our watersheds and ensure our water resources are 
sustainable. The report, Mr. Speaker, uses indicators to assess 
the stress being placed on watersheds, the ecological health or 
condition of the watersheds, and the management activities 
being undertaken to mitigate the stresses. 
 
Each watershed’s condition, stress, and response ratings are 
presented in an easy to understand report card format. Based on 
this assessment of Saskatchewan’s 29 watersheds, Mr. Speaker, 
17 watersheds were rated as having a high degree of 
management activities and intended to minimize the stresses 
and improve ecological health. These include Big Muddy 
Creek, Eagle Creek, and the Kasba Lake watersheds. The report 
also found four watersheds that were given a high-stress rating 
and 12 watersheds were rated as having impaired ecological 

health. However, Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that the 
health of the watersheds is impacted. Identifying which 
watersheds have lower health ratings or higher potential stress 
levels will help to determine which watersheds in the province 
need to be assessed further and targeted for management 
activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this is the first state of the watershed report, the 
information it contains will provide a benchmark which will 
allow us to compare the results in future reports which will be 
completed every three years. This will allow us to observe 
trends in watershed health, assess the effectiveness of our 
responses, and further develop and refine our work to protect 
our water for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, this report is 
another step in implementing the safe drinking water strategy 
and it supports Saskatchewan’s soon-to-be-released green 
strategy. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the release of the state of the watershed 
report is another example of our leadership in the protection of 
our natural environment and the development of a green 
economy, furthering our efforts to provide our residents with a 
healthy place to live, work, and raise a family. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — In response to the ministerial statement, the 
Chair recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 
the minister for providing me with a copy of the report this 
morning. It took the NDP government 16 years to have a report 
on the status of our watersheds. And it’s fabulous that we have 
a report, but we’re looking for some action on this front as well. 
The minister referred to this report as an important monitoring 
tool, which again raises the question why it took 16 years to 
create a report that was this necessary. It is extremely important 
to our environmental health of this province and the well-being 
of Saskatchewan that we know what the state of our watershed 
is. 
 
We see from this report that there are 12 watersheds rated as 
having impaired ecological health. Why did the government 
allow these watersheds to reach such a deplorable state? There 
are four watersheds with a high-stress rating. And what is the 
government doing to ensure that these watersheds do not reach 
the state of having impaired ecological health? What is the 
government’s plan on this? 
 
We see from this government that they like to write reports and 
set up committees, but we’re worried about the action side of 
things. And I’d like to quote the Sierra club. When the NDP’s 
green strategy framework was released, the Sierra Club had this 
say, “. . . [This was] a document that was full of rhetoric and 
environmental happy talk . . . talk but no action.” 
 
The Sierra Club also went on to say that “. . . [Saskatchewan] 
has . . . an environmentally regressive premier and [a] cabinet 
whose NDP orange verges on brown.” 
 
According to the Suzuki Foundation, greenhouse gas emissions 
are the highest of any province or territory on a per GDP [gross 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

domestic product] basis. Greenhouse gas emissions have grown 
more since 1990 than every other province and territory. With 
numbers like these, how can the NDP government believe that 
they are growing a green economy? And how is the 
environment one of their main pillars in a previous election? It 
is clear this government has no credibility on the environmental 
issue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 
2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 52, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 
2007 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes 
(Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 53, The 
Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and 
Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for the 
Environment that Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Environment 
Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 343 to 380 
inclusive. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 343 to 380 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Government’s Program Funding 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government has made some very significant changes in 
recent weeks to various programs that affect Saskatchewan 
people. Unfortunately for the people of this province, all of the 
changes seem to be for the worse. For that reason, I’ll be 
moving a motion calling on the federal government to undo 
many of the program changes at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the number of programs that the federal 
Conservatives have either cut funding from or altered is so 
great, it would not be possible for any one member to address 
all the implications. For this reason, I’ll be directing my focus 
primarily to the various changes to programs for women. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that any of the other 
issues that the federal cuts raise are any less important. For 
example, the Harper Conservatives had also cut funding to 
museums across Canada, and I think that this is significant. Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government obviously doesn’t see 
museums as necessary service providers. The Harper cabinet 
obviously sees them as extraneous. I think that cutting funding 
to museums reveals inept and ideological prejudice, Mr. 
Speaker. Conservatives have absolutely no reverence for the 
arts generally. Conservatives and neo-cons, the Harper 
government included, see no value in those organizations that 
don’t involved the drilling or refinement of oil, the jailing of 
criminals, or the military. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what about culture? How can we allow the 
federal government to forsake an institution that contributes to 
our Canadian culture? Of course we all know what the Sask 
Party thinks of arts and culture, Mr. Speaker. After all the 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

member for Wood River once said to a group of arts and culture 
associations no less, that he is, quote: 
 

. . . just curious as to why all of a sudden we have . . . 
singled out artists as somebody that we have to include in 
a Bill to satisfy — and this is why I’m at a loss — satisfy 
what? 
 

It’s clear from his comments, Mr. Speaker, what the member 
from Wood River thinks about arts. I wouldn’t exactly call him 
a patron. He thinks that legislation is wasted on artists and 
cultural organizations. You see, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue 
that spans beyond both Sask Party members and federal 
Conservative Party members. Conservatives are ideologically 
opposed to the arts and ideologically opposed to culture. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, I can see no . . . I can see other more 
practical reasons for the federal Conservatives to cut funding to 
museums specifically. They have absolutely no interest in being 
reminded of the past. Who would want to remember a past that 
includes association with the Mulroney government, a 
government that plunged our great country into almost 
unprecedented levels of deficit and debt. 
 
Who, Mr. Speaker, would want to remember a past that 
includes the Reform Party of Canada? The former leader of the 
opposition ought to remember that party as a former Reform 
MP [Member of Parliament]. The member for Carrot River 
Valley, another former Reformer, should also remember that 
group. 
 
In some respects I can’t blame the Harper government for trying 
to stop the preservation of history by cutting museum funding. I 
certainly wouldn’t want to be remembered as someone who was 
involved with a group of fundamentalists far-right ideologues 
like the Reform Party. That’s something the federal 
Conservatives and Sask Party have in common, Mr. Speaker — 
an aversion to history. I wouldn’t be surprised to see and hear 
that the Sask Party supports funding cuts to museum. They also 
have a vested interest in not preserving history, Mr. Speaker, 
not to be mention a distain for the arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to bother to detail all of the 
connections that the Sask Party has to the nefarious 
Conservative Party that governed this province in the past. I’m 
not going to bother to talk about their professional histories. 
After all, neither does the Leader of the Opposition. Actually, 
Mr. Speaker, I say that with one caveat. I would like to talk a 
little bit about the professional history of the newest member to 
the legislature because it is relevant to our debate today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Martensville was once staff to 
none other than the federal Minister for the Status of Women, 
Beverley Oda. This is significant because Minister Oda 
presided over some of the most regressive changes to programs 
for women that our country has ever seen. Minister Oda was 
agent to the closure of 12 of the 16 Status of Women Canada 
offices and to the removal of the equality clause from the Status 
of Women mandate. If I was the member from Martensville, a 
former staffer tasked with helping to actualize these tragically 
regressive policies, I wouldn’t want to be reminded of that 
history either. 
 

Perhaps one day, Mr. Speaker, there will be a museum 
dedicated to the chronicles of the fight of Canadian women for 
true parity. Perhaps it could include the pen that Bev Oda used 
to sign the closure notices for the 12 Status of Women Canada 
offices, next to a picture of the member for Martensville. Of 
course, Mr. Speaker, a museum like this will not be possible for 
many, many years. Not because it’s impossible for us to 
succeed in the struggle for parity, but because there isn’t any 
federal funding for it any more. It could take years to secure 
private funding for a museum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, aside from ideologically motivated cuts 
to museums, the federal Conservatives have made regressive 
changes to the Status of Women Canada. Twelve of sixteen 
regional offices are scheduled to close, and about half of the 
Status of Women Canada staff will lose their jobs. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all. Advancing equality 
for women has been removed from the mandate of the agency 
women’s program, and the program will no longer fund 
research and advocacy projects. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
has requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 
the member from Regina Walsh Acres for allowing me to 
introduce guests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery are 13 students from the 
Punnichy Elementary community school. They are grade 5 
students. They’re here this morning accompanied by their 
teacher, Tara Hartl, and chaperones, Sheldon Thomas and 
Sterling Brass. 
 
They’ve come to Regina this morning over, I know, 
snow-packed highways, particularly north of the Qu’Appelle 
Valley, because I drove over those same highways myself this 
morning. And I’m very pleased to see them here, and I will be 
visiting with them in a few moments time. We’re going to be 
going down to the staircase to have our pictures taken. And then 
we’re going to go and have a visit, and I’ll hopefully be able to 
answer their questions and those sorts of things. And I know all 
members will be well-behaved while they’re in the gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d ask all members to help me welcome them 
this morning. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — I would also like to welcome these students here 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

and hope that you’re going to enjoy today’s debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Elphinstone 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has asked for leave for introductions. Is leave granted? Leave 
has been granted. The member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
my thanks to the member from Regina Walsh Acres for her 
indulgence at this time. I’d like to make a couple of specific 
introductions, although I’d like to generally welcome the 
students from Punnichy. 
 
A few years ago I had the pleasure to be at the grand opening of 
the newly renovated and added onto Punnichy School. And it’s 
a great school, lots of good students and a lot of good things 
being done there. But specifically, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to 
introduce my brother, Sterling Brass, and my niece, Kaylee 
Brass — if they could give us a wave there. Yes, there we are. 
 
All right. Now you may be wondering, Mr. Speaker — these 
people are obviously much better looking than I am — so how 
could we be family? But a couple of summers ago I was 
adopted as a son into the Brass family, and Sterling is my 
brother. Kaylee is my niece. And I’m very glad to see them here 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Federal Government’s Program Funding 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, advancing 
equality for women has been removed from the mandate of the 
agency’s women’s program and the program will no longer 
fund research and advocacy projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to acknowledge the federal 
government has recently increased the budget of the women’s 
program but only after intense public outcry over the sweeping 
cuts that the federal government made to the budget months 
before. But, Mr. Speaker, the increase will do nothing to 
prevent the office closures nor will it prevent the loss of 
grassroots support for women’s organizations that those offices 
provided. 
 
No amount of money can compensate for the removal of the 
advancement of equality for women from the program’s 
mandate. The federal minister responsible for the Status of 
Women Canada ostensibly believes that women in Canada have 
achieved full equality with men. This must be the reason for the 
change to the mandate of the women’s program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is simply not so. If men and women truly 
enjoyed true parity, the professional lives of women would be 

truly uninhibited. This is certainly not the case for more 
mothers according to Stats Canada. The choices most women 
have in terms of the kind of work they do and the level of 
commitment that they can make to a job or career are shaped to 
a much greater degree by responsibility for unpaid family work 
and children than for men. Mothers experience more precarious 
employment, lower income, and less economic security than 
men. Because of children, women are typically less able than 
men to accept shift work, overtime, occupations that involve 
travel, and professional development opportunities. 
 
Many women are forced to choose occupations and hours of 
employment that accommodate unpaid work, which for many 
means working part-time. Part-time work typically means lower 
wages, lower overall earnings, and less access to benefits. In 
Canada women have represented about 70 per cent of the 
part-time work force since the 1970s. In 2005, 75 per cent of 
women in Canada who work part-time reported that they 
wanted to work full-time but were unable to do so because 
either of family obligations or because they were unable to find 
full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of single-parent families in Canada are 
headed by women. And in 2003, 49 per cent of single-parent 
mothers were living in poverty compared to only 20 per cent of 
single-parent fathers. Mr. Speaker, between 1995 and 2000 the 
wage gap in Canada grew between males and females working 
full-time and full years. It grew in every age category. The 
widest gap was between men and women with post-secondary 
educations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the previous census, Canadian 
women who worked full-time for a year with a university 
degree, diploma, or certificate earned on average only 67 per 
cent of what men with a similar education earned. Women with 
a college or trade certificate or diploma earned on average 70 
per cent of what men with similar educational credentials 
earned. It is clear by simple economic indicators alone, Mr. 
Speaker, that women have not yet achieved parity with men. 
 
Unfortunately, and quite contrary to the views of Minister Oda 
and the Harper government, economics are not the only 
problems still facing women. The funding cuts to the Status of 
Women Canada has eliminated the possibility of crucial 
research that was to be done with respect to violence against 
women, in particular violence against Aboriginal women at the 
community-based level. Tremendous work and steps had 
already been undertaken that unfortunately came to a grinding 
halt with the funding cuts by the Harper Conservatives. 
 
For example, some of these statistics are atrocious. Rates of 
stalking were twice the level for Aboriginal women than 
non-Aboriginal people and almost twice as high for Aboriginal 
women as for non-Aboriginal women. The rate of spousal 
homicide was eight times higher for Aboriginal women than for 
non-Aboriginal and 38 times higher for Aboriginal men than for 
non-Aboriginal men. And as I . . . You can hear, Mr. Speaker, 
the opposition clearly doesn’t want to hear these statistics 
because they don’t want to hear the reality of what’s happening 
to women in Canada, and they don’t want to hear the reality of 
what’s happening to women in Saskatchewan. They would 
prefer to shout out over the statistics instead of actually 
listening to them and maybe having some concern for them. 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — There is an article in The Parliamentarian, 
which is a group of parliamentarians from all across the world 
that get together to discuss issues. And their conclusion was, I 
quote: 
 

. . . delegates noted that to eradicate domestic violence, 
although penal provisions have an important role to play, 
they cannot be enough. What is more important is the 
enforcement and implementation of laws. Delegates also 
agreed that empowerment of women and children is also 
an important factor, hence Parliamentarians should take 
steps to educate women and children, promote their 
financial autonomy, reform social and religious practices 
and customs, raise political and social awareness, and 
ensure legal provisions for equal opportunities. 

 
One of those opportunities that would have achieved some of 
this is the Kelowna accord — something else the opposition do 
not want to hear about. We know that. So I’m just going to go 
over it quickly. 
 
The Kelowna accord was vitally important to the First Nations 
and Métis people, and much work was done to reach this 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. This agreement was especially 
important to the First Nation and Métis women and children 
with respect to improvements to health, education, and housing. 
 
Furthermore — and as though this isn’t disappointing and 
insulting enough — the Harper Conservatives must be suffering 
from the delusion that racism is no longer an issue and that 
therefore education and support that the Saskatchewan Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner provides is no longer necessary 
because the Harper Conservatives have shamefully not 
committed to new funding for the Saskatchewan Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner, and as a result has laid off its staff. And 
the office itself will likely be forced to close its doors at the end 
of the month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is going to continue to focus on meeting the 
needs of the victims of family violence, particularly women and 
children. Saskatchewan is working in partnership with other 
governments and with police forces and community 
organizations to develop policy, legislation, and programs to 
respond to and reduce violence against women. Saskatchewan’s 
strategy to address and reduce violence against women is led by 
the departments of Community Resources, Health, and Justice, 
and is supported by other departments including Learning and 
the Status of Women office. Unfortunately . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I apologize to 
the hon. member who’s on her feet. The interruption that’s 
coming on the benches of the opposition is at a level that is just 
too high to be able to hear the speaker. And there was also some 
noise level coming from the government side as well. And I 
would just ask members to be quieter so that the member who is 
on her feet can be heard. Thank you. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, and 

quite contrary to the views of Minister Oda and the Harper 
government, economics are not the only problems still facing 
women. And the province of Saskatchewan is dedicated to 
making sure that those issues are dealt with, as well as many 
other issues that are facing women with respect to these 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a personal note, I want to say that this is 
something I feel very strongly about, and I know the women of 
my caucus feel very strongly about, and is very strongly 
supported by the men of our caucus. And I am very proud to be 
with the NDP of Saskatchewan that stands firmly behind these 
issues and is doing everything in its power, in its creativity, and 
its will to make solutions happen for these problems that 
women and children, especially of First Nation and Métis 
cultures, are facing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and numerous others that time 
will not permit me to discuss, I would like to move the 
following motion that was seconded by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains: 
 

That this Assembly calls on the federal government to 
reinstate funding to child care programs, literacy 
programs, and funding for the Status of Women office, as 
well as return the goal of equality to the mandate for the 
Status of Women office. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . read the motion first? She’s got to 
read the motion. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I think the member of 
the opposition has a valid point and that the motion should be 
read, and I’ve just received it now. And the motion is as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly calls on the federal government to 
reinstate funding to child care programs, literacy 
programs, and funding for the Status of Women office, as 
well as return the goal of equality to the mandate for the 
Status of Women office. 

 
So that is the motion before the House, and I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. As I was mentioning, it’s with a 
heavy heart that I am rising today to speak to and address the 
motion before the Assembly on the breadth of community cuts 
that have happened throughout our society, Mr. Speaker, and to 
point out the areas that we are working on to try and help 
address the shortfalls from those types of measures. 
 
Many years ago working on city council, I was able to be in 
touch with a broad range of groups in community. And now 
with the work that I’ve been doing with the voluntary sector 
initiative, I know how hard and how diligent people are 
working in community to provide for a community throughout 
our province that is measured by the civil society having the 
ability to help everyone become active in the economy, to 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

participate freely and strongly in democratic processes, and to 
be able to organize their communities in a social manner that 
helps everyone to succeed. 
 
We believe as New Democrats that we are responsible to be an 
active part of and involved in organizing our society through 
the collection of tax dollars. This helps assist us and provide 
economic stimulus, provide the backdrop to the economy, and 
to assist all people to realize their goals and their dreams, a 
society where no one is left behind. 
 
And that’s today why I rise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an elected 
representative to speak out on behalf of community, but on 
behalf of the province, and to say how those cuts are affecting 
us particularly in areas that have a strong goal in helping to 
provide the basis for a strong economy, a strong society, and a 
civil society at that. 
 
And of course from a women’s perspective the cuts are . . . 
[inaudible] . . . felt because they’re in areas that most impact on 
the lives of women. And one that my colleague has most 
eloquently addressed is the removal of the goal of equality, the 
mandate of the Status of Women offices, and programs because 
who here — male or female — would believe that women have 
achieved equality? 
 
Couple that with the dollars removed from the women’s groups 
and organizations who advocate on behalf of 52 per cent of our 
population and are shamefully under-represented at all levels, at 
all levels. This sends a terrible, sexist, patriarchal message 
throughout society. 
 
As I was preparing for International Women’s Day, Mr. 
Speaker, I was looking on a website and I recognized one where 
there are two women who come from Saskatchewan 
communities — Pam Kapoor and Bernadette Wagner — and on 
their website they say: 
 

[This is all happening] at a time when everyone knows the 
stats about women’s lower income, women’s 
under-representation in elected office, and when women 
are proportionately poorer. 

 
They do this at a time when violence against women is 
commonplace. Recent reports of gruesome testimony from 
the Pickton trial make the Paul Bernardo case seem mild. 
We can’t seem to go a month in Canada without hearing of 
another woman murdered at the hands of her husband. 
Stories about missing women are so common, they’ve 
become like white noise. [And] Women’s lives — or the 
. . . [expediency] of them — are sensational enough for the 
evening news, but apparently not enough for the Harper 
government who would sooner mock women’s equality 
than support it. 

 
And so the question we should all be asking appropriately today 
on International Women’s Day, does the Harper government 
really believe in celebrating women or merely aiding in the 
ongoing denial of equality? 
 
Another site I looked at contrasted the concepts I’ve believed in 
and have tried to operate under, in that we as a government 
have the responsibility to organize ourselves to promote 

economic growth and development. But also from that comes 
social development and the progression of people in our 
communities. And contrasting that with an article that said, 
“‘Great Dismantler’ puts ideology into action” written by 
Dimitry Anastakis who says:  
 

Although he leads the weakest minority government in 
Canadian history, this has not stopped Prime Minister 
Stephen Harper from pursuing his real aim in government. 
Ultimately, all of Harper’s policies are designed to 
dismantle the capacity of the federal government as a force 
in Canadian economic and social policy. 

 
While he’s doing all of this seemingly under the radar because 
of course it’s an attack on those who are least able to vocalize 
these issues in community: 
 

. . . doing [all of] this under the radar, slowly and 
bit-by-bit, anyone who has listened to or read Harper’s 
writings over the last 20 years knows this has always been 
his sole and abiding goal. 
 
Now, after a year in government, we see his ideology in 
action. 
 
So, for example . . . the much-heralded . . . [cut to the 
GST]. While it may cut $5 billion annually from the 
federal treasury, it has virtually no impact on average 
Canadians. Unless, of course, the “average” Canadian 
buys lots of big ticket items, such as boats or luxury cars. 
 
But, more importantly for Conservatives, the phantom 
GST cut means the federal government no longer can use 
that $5 billion for any other program — such as literacy, 
or the Status of Women. Then, they dismantle social 
programs, even though there is a surplus. For example, 
they ended Ken Dryden’s hard-fought national early 
learning and development plan, and replaced it with their 
own Conservative so-called child-care plan. 
 
This “program” both cuts federal revenues and destroys a 
social program at the same time. By amounting to nothing 
more than $1,200 tax cut every year, the Conservatives 
have yet again cut billions out of the federal treasury and 
ended support for thousands of much-needed day-care 
spaces built . . . [on right] across this country. 

 
So right across the piece, when I’m looking at the motion 
before us, what’s been happening? In key areas for economic 
development and the foundation for people to be involved in the 
economy, Labour Market Partnership Agreement, $109.3 
million federal commitment under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
economic accord not going to be implemented. The federal 
government is saying we’ll get back to you. There’ll be some 
later date, some announcement that will be dealt with under 
fiscal imbalance. 
 
Well I’m waiting for next Monday’s budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Early learning and child care agreements, the previous 
Liberal government committed to transferring $1.15 million in 
each year for 2007-08 to 2009-10 to the provinces for early 
learning and child care agreements. The Conservative 
government’s agreed to transfer $650 million in 2006-07, but 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

has completely cancelled these agreements for the remaining 
three years. 
 
What does this mean for Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
community? It will cost the Saskatchewan communities $105 
million in those years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The early 
childhood development agreement and the early learning child 
care agreement both expire in 2007 and ’08. These are 
considered at risk, and they are cited by the federal government 
as inappropriate areas of expenditure. Those agreements are 
valued at $25 million per annum. 
 
The cuts to our community slice deep into the very fabric of our 
community, and the members opposite don’t want to talk about 
it. Have they brought forward to this House the cuts to child 
care? Have they brought forward to this Assembly the cuts in 
literacy? Have they brought forward what this does to the status 
of women? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — They have been silent in this Assembly on 
the cuts that cut deep in our communities. Literacy programs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, recently the federal government’s 
announced a cut of $17.7 million to literacy funding. This 
results in a reduction for Saskatchewan of $650,000 in 
Saskatchewan and a very significant negative impact on literacy 
programs and services to roughly 5,000 adult learners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine what that does to the foundation 
we’re laying for people to be able to access jobs and bridge to 
jobs? These are people who need the programs and services so 
that they’ll be able to access secure commitment to employment 
in our economy. 
 
And what have those literacy cuts done to community? Well in 
this article by the National Union of Public and General 
Employees, it says: 
 

The cuts have sent shockwaves through the literacy 
community. 

 
At a news conference on Wednesday, Wendy DesBrisay 
. . . [from] the Movement for Canadian Literacy, said “the 
cuts will decimate the infrastructure built co-operatively 
by all levels of government and the literacy community 
and will set us back years in our ability to meet the literacy 
challenges of [our] Canadians.” 

 
Shameful, shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s why I rise 
today . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is 
with great pleasure that I enter this debate. And I just have to 
comment that what I find shameful is that this government is so 
tired, so old, so out of vision, so out of ideas, it’s amazing to me 
that they have to bring forward a motion and debate on bashing 
the federal government instead of addressing what is very, very 

important to this province and a number of provincial issues. So 
I would be more than happy to help them out if they’re not 
aware of the provincial issues or what is important to the people 
of the province. 
 
And I would like to move an amendment, seconded by the 
member from Estevan. And the amendment reads, I move: 
 

That all the words following “on the” be removed, and the 
following be substituted: 

 
provincial government to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that all harassment complaints are treated seriously, 
regardless of who they are alleged against, that due 
process be followed, and that women who bring 
complaints forward are not further victimized by 
department’s actions or lack thereof. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP mismanagement from the start of 
the Murdoch Carriere actual scandal — it’s scandalous what has 
happened with that — demonstrates that this government is not 
only out of touch, they’re not only old, they’re not only tired, 
they’re not only out of ideas, but they have no clue what the 
values of the people of Saskatchewan are. They are absolutely 
clueless as to what is right or wrong any more. They are so 
disconnected from what’s right or wrong that they continue day 
after day, since this session has begun and before, to defend the 
absolute indefensible. 
 
It’s absolutely indefensible that the women who were harassed 
in their workplace were only paid $15,000, that they had to sign 
as a collective group, that they had any individual rights or 
opinions taken away from them, they had to sign as a group, 
and that the offender is paid $275,000, plus given a top-up to 
his pension. That is totally indefensible. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And they talk about . . . they give lip service to the value of 
women — women in the workplace, women in the community, 
women in the family, women in this province. And yet the 
Premier, which is the head of our province and his government, 
when questioned in this House whether he would do this again 
in the case of the Murdoch Carriere case, and he said, “You bet 
I would.” And what does that tell the women, the women of the 
workplace, the women of this province? What does that tell 
them? He said, “Would I do it again? You bet I would.” I would 
reward the wrong person $275,000 and a top-up to his pension 
while the women had to collectively agree and sign to $15,000 
each. 
 
What does that tell the women? What does that tell those 
women? Those nine . . . not only just those nine women, what 
does that tell all the women in this province? It tells them they 
have no value. It tells them they have no respect. It tells them 
that they can be treated with total disregard for their feelings or 
their desires or their individual rights, that there is no regard for 
them. 
 
And if anyone doubts this, if they want to argue with this such 
as the Minister for Learning wants to argue about this from her 
seat, then let’s just see what one of those women had to say. Is 
she going to laugh at what one of those women had to say on 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

the John Gormley show on March 12? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I ask for two things. 
First I’ll ask the hon. member for Humboldt to relate her 
remarks to the motion. And second I ask for quiet in the House. 
I’m reluctant to intervene when I’m cutting into the time of 
members, but I ask for order please so that the member for 
Humboldt can be heard. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m just 
going to quote from the transcript from the John Gormley show 
on March 12. And he was questioning the guest speaker. He 
said: 
 

I appreciate this is really tough on you. You’ve been 
hearing so much about this Murdoch Carriere stuff the last 
couple of weeks. How is this making you feel? 
 

And the guest on his show said, “I feel victimized all over 
again.” That’s how that woman felt. And that is how a lot of 
women in this province feel about the way that this case has 
been dealt with. They said in addition . . . She also said when he 
questioned her about her feelings and how the settlement was 
done, how it was handled, how they were treated by this 
government, she said: 
 

Angry. Feel totally worthless. We’re on a different scale 
from what he was obviously. To do the criminal things 
such as what he did and get paid for it doesn’t say much 
for us. 

 
And that’s the message that these nine women got. And that’s 
the messages that are going to all of the women of this 
province, is that is what this government and the members of 
this government feel about the women within this province — 
the working women, the mothers, the sisters, the families — the 
women of this province . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I ask the hon. member 
from Humboldt, I’m trying to give her some liberty and leeway, 
but her remarks do not relate to the motion. The motion relates 
to child care programs, literacy programs, funding for the Status 
of Women office, and I would ask her to relate her remarks 
please to the motion. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to point out that I made an amendment, and I am speaking 
to the amendment now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank 
you. We’re obviously running out of time, and it’s a 10-minute 
limit, so I would like to do, very, very quickly, a very quick 
review on how this government has treated these women and 
sent a message to all the women of the province throughout the 
whole Murdoch Carriere case. 
 
And it isn’t been a treatment of intimidation and of ignoring 
their desires or their rights. When the government first learned 
of this, what did they do about it? Did they fire Mr. Carriere? 
No, they didn’t. They merely shuffled him to another 
department. This was a man who had strong political ties with 
the NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when they first 
learned about it, instead of starting . . . They didn’t even initiate 
the process; they didn’t even initiate the process that he could 
be fired with due cause. No, instead they just shuffled him 

within the department and he kept his full pay. Did those 
women feel that they were valued at that point in time? I doubt 
it very, very, very much. 
 
And they didn’t address it until there was an investigation and 
the consultant’s report was leaked. It was leaked to the media. It 
was leaked to the official opposition. And that’s when they 
finally recognized that they would have to address it. They were 
dragged kicking and screaming and they were shamed into 
firing Mr. Murdoch Carriere. But had they started the process 
so that he could be fired with due cause? No they hadn’t. They 
had not addressed the issue in the proper process. 
 
So they fired him, and then what did they do next? Well when 
the nine women that actually brought forward the complaints 
and were in the report, when the nine women threatened to sue 
this government, they decided to make an agreement. Did those 
women have individual rights or individual opinions? No, they 
had to agree to something as a collective body of nine. If any 
one of them did not agree to the settlement that was offered to 
them, then none of them would get it. It was taken off the table. 
How is that respecting women? It was take it or leave it. And 
furthermore if you choose not to take it, then you will also take 
it away from the other eight complainants. How is that treating 
women fairly or acknowledging that they have rights, they have 
opinions, and they should have a personal choice in this issue? 
There were never given those rights. So what does that tell all 
of the women of our province? 
 
Then when there was a settlement made, the women signed an 
agreement. They signed it and were not given a copy of it. I find 
that absolutely amazing — absolutely amazing that they were 
not given a copy of the agreement that they had just signed. 
 
But then there was the settlement with Mr. Carriere, and they 
didn’t know about that either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
weren’t consulted. The government just decided, we’ll just 
make this settlement. 
 
What are they hiding? What are they hiding that they had to 
make that quick settlement? They never talked to the women. 
They never said, do you want us to fight this? Do you think that 
making a settlement of $275,000 plus topping up his pension is 
fair? What do you think? No, those women were not given that 
respect. They were not allowed to consult. They were not 
allowed an opinion. They were allowed a phone call after the 
fact a few minutes before it was announced. That’s the respect 
that those women were given. That’s absolutely appalling. 
 
So this government can sit there and give lip service all they 
want to how they feel about women. Their actions are what the 
people of Saskatchewan are looking at. Their actions is what’s 
telling the tale. 
 
So now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the women are asking, they’re 
going back and they’re saying, can we see the agreement? 
They’ve got legal counsel. Can we see the agreement that we 
were basically forced to sign? And they’re told no, the 
government has to get permission for you to see the agreement. 
How does that work? They paid their legal counsel. They paid 
their legal counsel. They had the agreement. They had a lawyer 
and yet the government has to give them permission, and the 
government is saying they can’t have it again until all nine sign. 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

They do not have any individual rights. 
 
It is absolutely appalling and I’d like to know what this 
government is hiding in this whole case. And this is 
unacceptable by this government, and the message it gives all of 
the women in Saskatchewan is appalling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I recognize the 
hon. member for . . . the Minister of Learning, the hon. member 
for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be able to rise on 
my feet today and join in this debate. And I truly had looked 
forward to an opportunity where this House would send a clear 
signal to our federal government about our disappointment with 
the cuts to programs and changes that have drastically affected 
the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it really has been a pretty difficult year for 
many groups across the province. And I’m not speaking just 
about the Government of Saskatchewan or those of us that sit in 
this Assembly but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people out and about 
right across this province have felt the withdrawal of funding 
for programs and the withdrawal of programs by our federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early on in the beginning, right after the federal 
election, there have been many years — and I mean many years 
— where women and community groups right across this 
province have worked to be able to establish a national child 
care program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that there was 
a great deal of enthusiasm for the project of the former Liberal 
federal government when they had committed to funding, five 
years of funding for a national child care plan. 
 
Each of the provinces put in substantial work, working with 
their community groups, working with partners, working with 
workers within the child care industry, that they would put 
together a plan that was appropriate for our province and that 
people and families and young people in this province would 
feel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we received two years of funding from the federal 
government for the national child care plan, and we had our 
agreement in, our memorandum of agreement signed, and we 
were prepared to sign the final deal for the remainder of the 
five-year funding that had been committed, when the election 
came and we had a change of government and that program was 
ended. 
 
Now part of the issue, I think, during that election campaign 
was the Conservative government or the Conservative 
opposition at that time made the commitment of $100 for each 
child under the age of six. And they portrayed this as giving 
families choice. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many people viewed this as an 
addition over and above the national child care plan but didn’t 
. . . I guess as human nature we often look at the points of a 
platform that we like and often don’t pay attention to a lot of the 

fine detail or listen to many of the speeches — as much as I 
hate to admit it as a politician that people don’t often listen to 
everything we say, pick and choose the pieces that appeal to 
them. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what happened. Many 
people felt that the $100 per month for a child under the age of 
six would also be on top of the national child care plan that had 
been announced a couple of years before. But that was wrong. 
 
And for all of those people in our communities that have spent 
30, 35 years working towards the goal of a national child care 
plan, that just went by the wayside — $100 per month sounds 
wonderful, and what parent wouldn’t turn it down to have 
another $100 per child in their jeans? 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people will start to realize the effect 
and how much they actually get to keep shortly when we file 
our income tax returns because that $100 a month isn’t like the 
national child benefit. It is taxable income, so parents will have 
to start putting that amount of money on to their income tax 
forms and doing the calculations. They’ll get a truer value of 
what they actually get to keep. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $100 in your pocket is not choice. 
To have choice, you need to have options to choose from. You 
have to have options to choose from. Mr. Speaker, that is where 
this program sadly goes by the wayside and really doesn’t 
provide any service to the families, the young families, the 
working families right across this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
one thing that I think we’re all distressed over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you a story about the difficulty of 
working with this new federal government. Quite often major 
events I think for all ministers are federal-provincial-territorial 
meetings where ministers from the territories, the province, and 
the federal minister have an opportunity to get together over a 
couple of days, put in place priorities, talk about issues that 
affect us nationally. Well this new federal government, 
sometimes they show up; sometimes they don’t. They have no 
input. They have total disregard for the provinces and the work 
that we do in the provinces. There’s very little source of 
co-operation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can live with that. That doesn’t . . . I mean, 
whatever. If that’s the way they want to work, that’s the way 
we’ll work. But the losers in this are the people of our province. 
And here are the Sask Party. They’re quite content to be distant 
cousins of the Conservatives in Ottawa. They’re back and forth 
to each other’s conventions, but they have no formal connection 
— I understand that. But, Mr. Speaker, these issues affect 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Here we are, we’re sitting at an FPT [federal-provincial-
territorial] meeting down in Newfoundland, waiting for the 
federal minister to show up, and what do we hear? The top 
priorities for the ministers of Education across Canada have 
been literacy and First Nations education. And as we’re sitting 
in a meeting in Newfoundland, and neither of the federal 
ministers have the time to come and meet with the provinces, 
they release their announcement out of Ottawa that they’ve cut 
$1 billion — $1 billion. 
 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

What were the targets? Literacy — which was all of the 
Education ministers across Canada and the territories, it’s been 
a priority for a couple of years that we have been working 
jointly together on — and First Nations education, along with a 
whole raft, a whole list of other programs. Was there any type 
of a heads-up to the ministers? No. Was there any type of 
heads-up to the provinces? No. It’s just gone. 
 
We don’t think this is a priority. How can literacy not be a 
priority? When you listen to, when you listen to the employers, 
when you listen to people in the community, there is an issue 
with literacy. People may have some skills but need to upgrade 
those skills for today’s economy. This affects many people in 
many ways. 
 
So now the federal government has actually talked . . . I’ll flip 
back to my previous kind of topic on child care. The new 
federal government has committed to putting $250 million a 
year, each year for the next five years, into the creation of 
spaces as tax credits, while that has been tried in two provinces 
previously and has been a dismal failure every time. We have 
made our point to the federal government that this isn’t the way 
we want child care to operate. And in an economy such as 
Saskatchewan where we have medium to small businesses, tax 
credits for employers to create child care spaces is not the way 
to go. 
 
Now I’m hopeful that come the budget on Tuesday we will see 
some changes in the federal government’s position on this. I 
know every one of the provinces have lobbied the federal 
minister. We have spoken to him, sent letters, and expressed our 
point. We have expressed our point that the federal government 
needs to work with the provinces so we can best maximize the 
resources that we have and provide the best services for the 
citizens in each of our provinces. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I truly hoped we would’ve been able 
to as a legislature send a one solid voice to Ottawa from the 
province of Saskatchewan saying, restore these services for the 
people of Saskatchewan; they are important. They are 
important. They are important for young children to have that 
early good start in life. They’re important for working families. 
They are important for single-parent families and, Mr. Speaker, 
in the long run they are important for us all, because that good 
start, those early supports, mean continued success throughout 
their life. 
 
Now I know the Saskatchewan Party says, well we’re not 
Conservatives, we’re not Conservatives. And I know that they 
travel back and forth between the Conservative and the Sask 
Party conventions when they have their party conventions. It’s 
covered in the news. And they’re . . . I mean, it’s talked about 
quite openly in the news. So what I would ask the Sask Party, 
what I would ask the Sask Party is that while they’re sitting in 
the visitor’s gallery at the Conservative convention, after 
they’ve done their glad-handing and chit-chatting, I wish they 
would please make the point and make a plea for Saskatchewan 
people. We need these programs restored, and we need better 
supports for Saskatchewan families, and we need these 
programs to be continued. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion wholeheartedly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
it was interesting listening to this motion brought forward by 
this government. Usually I am pleased to be part of any debate 
or of any issue that’s discussed in this Assembly. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s . . . I have a difficult time feeling pleasure 
because of the sanctimonious way this NDP government has a 
notion to . . . feels they can condemn a government for their 
treatment of anybody on women’s issues while their own record 
is at best dismal, and at worst, it’s disgusting on most issues 
when it comes to women. 
 
And I know that I’m going to talk to you for a few minutes later 
on about the Carriere issue. And I’m also going to bring 
forward an amendment to this motion, and if you would prefer I 
can discuss the amendment at this time. But I also wanted to 
bring forward the fact that women in this province have looked 
to this government for over 14 years now for leadership in a 
number of areas — I guess it was closer to 16 years — and the 
Carriere case is one of them. 
 
But we could also talk about the zero tolerance of children that 
were being sexually exploited in this province. We know that it 
was only under the work of a previous member, Arlene Julé, 
that we actually talked about the children on the street and the 
impact that had on women in this province. 
 
We also could talk about the FAS [fetal alcohol syndrome] 
issue in this province that affects women. That hasn’t even been 
on the radar screen till 12 years ago when we brought it up from 
this side of the House. And then all of the sudden the 
government said that they cared about this issue. Although I 
know at the recent conference in BC [British Columbia] last 
weekend, I awaited the minister’s appearance — but I didn’t see 
him there — to just talk about how important that issue is in this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to facilitate the proceedings in 
the House today, I am advising the House here that I’m going to 
be bringing forward a motion to amend the motion on the floor 
right now. And the motion will read: 
 

That all the words following “on the” be removed, and the 
following be substituted: 
 
provincial government to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that all harassment complaints are treated seriously 
regardless of who they are alleged against, and that due 
process be followed, and that women who bring 
complaints forward are not further victimized by this 
department’s actions or lack thereof. 
 

This motion will be seconded by the member from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also wanted to remind the people in this 
Assembly that we know that not all Sask Party members are of 
the same federal persuasion and allegiance, unlike the NDP 
opposite. But I wonder how anyone would want to admit that 
they were a federal NDP when the leader doesn’t know the 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

difference between SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] 
and BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy]. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts about women in this province 
that we were . . . on the issue that affects them in their home or 
in their workplace is well quoted in a number of statistics. And 
one of them is the violence against women. There was statistics 
taken from reports and others. In 1996 approximately 80 per 
cent of victims of criminal harassment were women. We also 
know that in a violence against women survey, 87 per cent of 
women have experienced sexual assault. That in itself is the 
kind of numbers that sends fear down the spines of many, many 
people because they know it. They know it, living in their own 
lives. 
 
I also for the record want people to know that of those women 
who admitted that they had been victims of spousal violence, 
only 26 per cent reported an incident to police. Women are 
three times more likely to report incidents to police if the 
children are watching. Women interviewed did not call the 
police for protection or help in ending violence; 57 per cent of 
these women were injured by their partners. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also think it’s important that people 
realize that 8 out of 10 Aboriginal women in Ontario reported 
having been battered. Mr. Speaker, at this time I want to stop 
and say hello to one of the First Nations women who are 
watching us right now. Her name is Brenda and to her this issue 
is very important. Because to talk about women’s issue and not 
mention the fact that there are other issues that are very 
important to women in Saskatchewan today would be just plain 
wrong. Between 75 and 90 per cent of women in northern 
Aboriginal communities are harassed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue that’s on the 
minds of the majority of women in Saskatchewan right now is 
not the issue that this government has brought forward. And I 
do believe that governments have a right or have a duty and 
responsibility to bring forward the issues that are foremost in 
the minds of people in the province. And right now, today in 
Saskatchewan, the majority of people are thinking about the 
abuse that went on in the Carriere case. More specifically they 
are thinking about this government’s decision to pay a male 
abuser 10 times more than women who were assaulted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these stats are alarming. But I know, in fact every 
woman alive knows, that that number is misleading because it’s 
low. Many women do not report sexual abuse or harassment for 
many reasons. They have the fear. They have embarrassment. 
They have shock. They have intimidation. But especially in the 
workplace, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fear of losing your job or 
of not being promoted is foremost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the attitude or the message sent by this 
government to the women of Saskatchewan regarding 
harassment is get over it. The message that boys will be boys is 
the message that is clear to the women. Women who are 
sexually assaulted or harassed cannot and do not get over it. 
The memories stay inside of them for the rest of their life. The 
fear and the humiliation and the disgust and sometimes the hate 
can eat up women. In some ways, usually unseen ways, life 
never moves on from the moment of the attack. It shapes your 
thoughts. It shapes every working moment. It shapes every 

sleeping moment in most cases for the rest of their lives. 
 
Right now I want to refer to some of the facts that we’ve dealt 
with in this legislature in the last couple of weeks about the case 
that is on the mind of people. On February 27 the NDP 
announced that it had reached a legal settlement to pay 
$275,000 to a former senior civil servant who had been accused 
of sexual harassment by nine female employees and later found 
guilty of common assault. The NDP government first learned of 
the accusations, and a senior official in the Department of 
Environment was called in to review. And it was determined 
harassment did occur, “both in terms of abuse of authority and 
in terms of inappropriate sexual behaviour.” The consultant’s 
report stated: 
 

Mr. Carriere used his authority to intimidate staff. He 
takes liberties with the staff that he has no right to. The six 
complainants were conscious of his frequent reminders 
that they owed their jobs to that man. 

 
The NDP moved Mr. Carriere to a new position in another 
department of government and provided him with a positive 
letter of recommendation and told the women involved not to 
talk about the investigation. End of the story. 
 
And once the report became public, the women who had 
accused Mr. Carriere of sexual harassment threatened to sue the 
NDP government, so this government opted to settle the case 
out of court. And they paid nine women $135,000. That worked 
out to $15,000 each. And what did Mr. Carriere get? $275,000 
out of their money that they paid in tax. These women all paid 
income tax, and just about all of it went to pay for the person 
that actually harassed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite talked about the difficulty 
working with federal government. Women in this province have 
difficulty working with this provincial government. They are 
the losers. The minister talked about the losers are the people in 
the province. Well in this case the losers are the women in this 
province. They are the women who have to go about living in 
this province and knowing that their tax money went to pay for 
their abuser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to repeat my motion. The motion 
moved by . . . move my motion, and I move that: 
 

All the words following “on the” be removed, and the 
following be substituted: 
 
provincial government to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that all harassment complaints are treated seriously 
regardless of who they are alleged against, that due 
process be followed, that women who bring complaints 
forward are not further victimized by this department’s 
actions or lack thereof. 

 
This motion is seconded by the member from Estevan, and I do 
hope there will be support in this House from women on both 
sides when it comes to supporting women in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:00] 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — We’re going to pause 
while I assess whether the amendment is in order or not. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, having . . . I heard the Chair 
wishing to assess the relevance of the amendment, and I rise on 
precisely that point of order, not to contest the opposition 
member’s right to choose the subject of debate, but whether it is 
appropriate in this debate in which we are now. 
 
And to inform the Chair about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I refer 
you and the House to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules, 5th 
Edition, items no. 425 and 426 which relate to amendments to 
motions. And if I may quote the relevance of the amendments 
needing to be relevant to the subject and then make my point 
there. First of all on the rule, rule no. 425 states that: 
 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a 
question in such a way as to increase its acceptability . . . 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
Government House Leader. I’d ask that the clock please be 
stopped so that the right of members to speak is not eroded. 
And with that in mind, I now recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 
just to repeat the rule 425: 
 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a 
question in such a way as to increase its acceptability or to 
present to the House a different proposition as an 
alternative to the original . . . 
 

And this is the key part of the phrase, Mr. Chair, 
 

. . . which must, however, be relevant to the subject of the 
questions. 
 

And then 426 on that precise same point states: 
 

It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be 
relevant to the question on which the amendment is 
proposed. 
 

Mr. Chair, it goes on to say: 
 

Every amendment proposed to be made, either to a 
question or proposed amendment, should be so framed 
that, if agreed to by the House, the question or amendment 
as amended would be intelligible and consistent with 
itself. 
 

I’m not arguing on that point. It’s the matter of relevance. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on that point of relevance, clearly, clearly by 
the rules of the Assembly the amendment must be relevant to 
the main question. 
 
I point out to the House that I’ve listened to the motion, the 
amended . . . the amendment proposed by the member for 
Kelvington, and the amendment clearly deals with provincial 
government for starters and then courses of action. 

If I can remind the Chair of the House that the motion before 
us, as moved by the hon. member for Regina, is that this 
Assembly calls on the federal government, calls on the federal 
government then to reinstate funding to child care programs — 
there’s a list, in other words — and calls on the federal 
government to reinstate funding to literacy programs, calls on 
the federal government to reinstate funding for the Status of 
Women’s office, and calls on the federal government as well to 
return the goal of equality to the mandate for Status of Women 
office. 
 
Clearly the motion is intended to provide for the Assembly the 
ability to make a statement from Saskatchewan about the 
actions of the federal government as they relate to issues of 
concern to women and families. And that is the intent of the 
motion. It is clearly the intent. 
 
And in order to be germane, I would suggest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the amendment must therefore deal with a matter 
of reference to the federal government, which this clearly does 
not. And on that ground, Mr. Speaker, on that ground . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . If the hon. members want to debate 
the point of order, I’m happy to do that. I mean I can understand 
why they may, why they may not want to criticize the federal 
government, but that’s not the point I’m attempting to make 
here. 
 
The point I’m attempting to make is one of relevance for the 
motion as proposed, and I would ask for your consideration on 
that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I would like to rise on the point of order proposed by the 
Government House Leader. Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly the 
government’s motion, at least in our reading of it, tried to 
express its concern about the well-being of women in this 
province and in this country. And certainly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is an important issue that needs to be addressed 
and needs to be talked about and needs to be debated. 
 
But I’m absolutely amazed the Government House Leader 
would stand in this House and suggest that our amendment 
would be out of order when we call on the government to be 
accountable for its own actions in regard to the harassment of 
women in this province. I would think he would be embarrassed 
before he would stand in this House and draw attention to the 
fact that their government has misrepresented women’s issues 
that they propose in their motion to defend. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly the rules established say that 
amendment can be made if it enhances the intent of a motion. 
Our amendment is intended to enhance the status of the motion 
whereby we ensure that women in this province are also looked 
after and their rights are respected in this province. And I would 
urge you to rule in the admissibility of this amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, thank you for your patience while I’ve had a 
opportunity to obtain the advice of the Clerks, review the rules 
of the House. 
 
This is a little bit of a grey area, but I am going to rule that the 
amendment is out of order. And I do that because of the issue of 
the main motion being directed towards the federal government, 
and this amendment being strictly directed towards the 
province. This motion is about federal policy, and the 
amendment eliminates all reference to the federal government 
and federal policy. 
 
I would indicate to members that in Erskine May Parliamentary 
Practice, page 339, the rules clearly state that “. . . no 
amendment should be used for importing arguments which 
would be irrelevant to the main question.” And the elimination 
to all references to the federal government, I think, by this 
amendment, violates this rule. So that is my ruling. 
 
And I take it that a member from the opposition is going to rise, 
so I recognize the hon. member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to stand today to speak on this issue. I find it very 
interesting that the previous speakers on the government side, 
they can’t defend . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, had the amendment been in 
order, then the opposition would clearly be in position to 
assume its place for the seconder of the amendment. With the 
amendment not being in order, and if they’re following the 
normal procedure of the House to rotate from side to side, I 
believe it is appropriate. There was a . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Order. The 
Government House Leader has the floor. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I recognize that you recognized 
the person who had previously stood, but there is a member on 
government side who was wishing to speak to the motion. And 
following the normal rotation of debate, I ask the Chair to 
recognize that it’s in order to recognize the government member 
to continue the debate, as the amendment is not in order. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly the government member didn’t 
stand up. You correctly identified a member from this side of 
the House that stood up. This member is recognized, and I 
would find it reprehensible if you reversed your position. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Well, hon. members, it 
may well be that I’ve made a mistake and did not see the 
government member rising, but at this point I recognize the 

hon. member for Estevan, with apologies to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased to stand today to speak on this issue. And I can 
understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why the government 
continually raises point of orders and that, because they can’t 
defend their own government. So that they want all the chance 
that they can to get up and attack the federal government. They 
should be embarrassed — not only embarrassed by their actions 
but also ashamed. They just continually get up, hammer the 
federal government. They should have their own House in order 
before they do anything like that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous speakers that have got up and 
have chastised the federal government for the cuts that they 
have made to the different federal programs, all they have to do 
is check their own record. Who cut library funding? 
 
As a return to equality, part of their motion says that they want 
to return the goal of equality to the mandate for the Status of 
Women office. What about the status of women for the nine 
women that were involved in the Murdoch Carriere case? What 
was the equality there? — $275,000 versus $15,000 each for 
these people. And on top of that they’re not allowed to speak 
out against it, Mr. Speaker; they have been muzzled. And this is 
this government’s treatment on women. This is how the 
government really feels towards women. 
 
So they can’t get up and speak out of both sides of their mouth, 
attack the federal government for what they are doing, when 
they are no better. And all they have to do is to talk to their, I 
guess, their cousin Jack in Ottawa and we all know where he 
stands on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I find it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it ironic 
also that on Tuesday the member from Wascana Plains rose in 
this House and she spoke on and recognized rural women — 
this March being Rural Women’s Month — and yet that same 
member votes for cuts in agriculture spending, votes for 
increased premium, reduced coverage in crop insurance, and 
doing this does create a hardship for rural women as they are 
forced to go work off the farm. And many of these women do 
not want to go out to work, but they are forced to. Their 
husbands are already out working, but because of the way the 
farming situation is today, there is no way they can make ends 
meet. So they are forced to go off the farm to subsidize the 
farm. 
 
What kind of a message does the things that have been 
happening provincially have on these women? Many of them 
have never been in the workforce before. And, you know, they 
must just give their heads a shake and wonder what is going on 
with this government and where they stand on the Murdoch 
Carriere case. 
 
The nine women who have been muzzled, who were pressured 
to sign the agreement, perhaps they have children, perhaps they 
are a single parent and may be in desperate need of finances, 
Mr. Speaker. They have been victimized by harassment and 
revictimized by this government. And, Mr. Speaker, this is not 
only dreadful, it’s absolutely shameful. It’s totally 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

unacceptable. 
 
This is a government that continually gets up here and pretends 
to have ownership of women’s issues, and then on the other 
side they defend the Murdoch Carriere in this situation. They 
keep on about equality for women, and I don’t know how they 
do their math but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes 18 times 
more money, the hon. member has said — $275,000 compared 
to $15,000 each for the women. They were pressured to sign the 
agreement under duress. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask the member to 
relate her remarks to the motion before the seventy-five minute 
debate. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that I just want 
to make the comparison that this government talks about what 
the federal government has done in relationship to child care 
programs, literacy programs — which they have cut the 
libraries’ budget in this province, I might add, and funding for 
the Status of Women — and how they pretend to care about the 
status of women and equality for women in this province. 
 
And what we’ve seen happen here in the last six days that 
we’ve been sitting in this legislature certainly is contrary to 
what they have risen and spoke in the defence of women, Mr. 
Speaker, and again it’s appalling the actions of this government. 
And I honestly believe that this government has decided to put 
this motion forward because they cannot defend the actions of 
their own government. So they attack the federal government 
and the cuts that the federal government has made to child care 
programs. 
 
And of course the Government House Leader is chirping from 
his seat, heaven forbid we criticize the federal government. 
Well heaven forbid that he would have to defend his own 
government, Mr. Speaker. Because there is not one of them 
over there, if they have any kind of a conscience at all, that 
could defend the actions that government has taken regarding 
women in this province. And every person over there should be 
ashamed, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the mover of the 
motion, the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the member 
from Estevan whether . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The debate continues on the 
main motion. The member may speak. The time for the debate 
on the main motion is now elapsed; we will now proceed to the 
question portion of the motion. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
not yet heard the opposition’s position at all with respect to 
equality and women and what their position is on that, and 
whether or not they support the funding cuts that the Harper 
Conservatives have perpetrated against all the women in 

Canada. So I’d like to ask the member from Estevan directly: 
does she support or not support the funding cuts by the Harper 
Conservatives to the Status of Women Canada offices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, what I will tell you is what this 
government has done provincially here, and that they have 
supported the perpetrator in the recent case with Murdoch 
Carriere and have not stood up for women. And it is very 
hypocritical for that woman or that member to get up and 
pretend that she supports women when she doesn’t. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
the motion talks about the goal of equality for women. And I 
would like to know if the member from Regina Walsh Acres 
believes that paying a perpetrator $275,000, and the women 
who were victims $15,000 — is that equality for women? Does 
she agree with that type of equality that her government has 
done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that I and the 
NDP of Saskatchewan support equality of women. We support 
equality of women through child care, through programs for 
women in learning, etc., not to mention housing. There is no 
question that the NDP of Saskatchewan and I support pay 
equity and equality of women in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena if, when we’re talking 
about impact on community and talking about women who have 
been victimized who need to have bridging programs to be able 
to be active in the workplace, if she supports the funding cuts to 
Saskatchewan alone of $650,000 for literacy programs that will 
impact on 5,000 adult learners — many of them women who 
want to be actively involved in the economy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I know that the 
women out in my community weren’t very impressed at all 
when the provincial government cut funding to the libraries. 
Because out in rural Saskatchewan that had a huge impact. So 
that, and also the Status of Women in Saskatchewan — I 
haven’t seen any increase in that forever. So I don’t believe 
your government has any, has any legs to stand on when it 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

comes to supporting any women in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a question for the member from Estevan. And 
just to clear the air a wee bit, there has not been a reduction of 
funding to the library system in Saskatchewan. But I have a 
question. I have a question for the member from Estevan. The 
member from Estevan stood on a number of occasions and 
requested and put in petitions on behalf of her constituents 
about the request for child care spaces in her constituency. I 
want to know from the member from Estevan if she opposes the 
cuts that the federal government has made to child care right 
across Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite are so 
interested in federal politics perhaps they should run in a federal 
election. But what I will tell them is that the $275,000 that this 
government give Murdoch Carriere would go a long way for 
child care spaces. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the member from Walsh Acres. I think many of us believe that 
actions speak louder than words. And despite this government’s 
harassment policies, how do you believe this Murdoch Carriere 
case was handled, and do you believe that it sends the wrong 
message to women in the workplace? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad for the question because 
there is no question about how the NDP of Saskatchewan feels 
about harassment in the workplace and its stance on that. 
Clearly we would never see the legislation that we currently 
have in The Occupational Health and Safety Act if it wasn’t for 
us in power. There’s no question about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — So that is my position. But here’s something 
else I want to make known, especially since we’re supposed to 
be speaking in referral to this motion. This is a quote by 
Heather Mallick in the Chatelaine magazine of March 2007. 
She says about the Harper government: 
 

Look at his cabinet, his track record and his failure to act 
— Stephen Harper is crushing Canadian women. 

 
Then she goes on to say: 
 

I grew up absolutely confident of my rights as a woman. I 
am no longer so sure . . . 

 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. Next 

question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the member 
from Walsh Acres a question. For a person that gets up and 
continually blasts the federal government and then expects . . . 
How can she expect to have a working relationship with the 
federal government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — I have no reason to blast the federal government 
if they wouldn’t give me the reasons to blast them on certain 
issues, Mr. Speaker. And continuing on with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I have a question for the opposition: 
 

Thirty years later, Stephen Harper has crushed the Status 
of Women. The federal agency no longer fights for 
“equality,” that dirty word having been removed from its 
official mandate. 

 
I’d like to know how the opposition feels about equality. Do 
they feel that women in Canada have achieved equality — yes 
or no? 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. To the member 
from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They refused to answer the 
question, Mr. Speaker, so I guess it’s up to me to just ask 
another one. And I would really like to ask the member from 
Estevan if she agrees . . . I mean and this is serious because 
each of these cuts affects people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re doing. We’re here doing what 
we need to do as representatives in Saskatchewan — represent 
our constituents and fight for the best we absolutely can for 
them. Does the member from Estevan agree with the federal 
government cuts to services to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, what’s serious in this province is 
the situation that this government has got themself in, in 
equality to women and the way they have treated the women in 
this province and the way they continue to treat women in this 
province. That is what’s a very serious situation in this province 
at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

this has been a very interesting debate about the value of 
equality in Canada for women. Mr. Speaker, in this province 
we’ve clearly seen a demonstration by the provincial NDP 
government that they do not value women in this province. We 
have seen an example where women who are victimized in the 
workplace, in a provincial government workplace, are 
compensated $15,000 for harassment in the workplace. And yet 
we see the perpetrator of that harassment receive a benefit from 
this NDP government of $275,000. 
 
Is that equality, Mr. Speaker? Is it equal? Is it of equality to 
women in this province to be valued for their harassment at 
$15,000 when the perpetrator gets 275,000? And I ask that 
question to the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that that 
member that just asked that question also voted against the 
harassment policy under The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. So is it flip-flop or not? I mean, I find that quite 
interesting. 
 
Second of all, they are constantly trying to confuse the issue of 
that payment. It had nothing to do with the settlement of the 
issue at hand. It was a labour relations issue in terms of the 
settlement with Carriere. End. Full stop. And that has been 
explained many times and unfortunately they don’t understand 
it. 
 
As for the member from Kelvington, I find it interesting that 
she said that none of us have spoken to First Nations and Métis 
issues in this debate. Well unfortunately either she wasn’t 
listening or elsewhere, but there was great focus on the issue of 
how funding cuts affect First Nations and Métis women in 
particular — women in general but especially First Nation and 
Métis women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Final question. The member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I was quite excited about seeing a man get 
up to enter the debate and I was hopeful that there was going to 
be one man in the opposition that would speak to the issues that 
are affecting community and affecting women in community. 
But I’m going to ask the question from the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
When we have Saskatchewan women who are joining Code 
Blue for child care campaigns; when we’ve got Saskatchewan 
women during International Women’s Day calling for a return 
for equality for women to the mandate of the Women’s 
Secretariat; when we’ve got child care issues and labour market 
issues for women being severely cut in partnership agreements 
between the federal government and the province, does she see 
a responsibility for women in this province — particularly in 
elected office — to speak out against those cuts? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m glad that the member noticed that a man 
from this side of the House stood up to ask a question because 
the men on this side of the House, quite frankly, are very 
interested in female issues, women’s issues, which is more than 
I can say of the men on that side of the House, because not one 
of them has entered this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member 
opposite would like to take a look at her own backyard, her own 
house, to make sure it’s cleaned out before we start attacking 
the federal government for all of their issues. 
 
We are not in federal politics here; we are in provincial politics 
and it is her and her government that has buried the stand-alone 
Women’s Secretariat office into the Department of Labour. It 
lost its status right here in this government with their office. 
Has the Women’s Secretariat office made any comments on the 
Murdoch Carriere case? Is her . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. We thank the members for the 
seventy-five minute debate which time has now elapsed. On the 
agenda we go to private Bills, second readings. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible 
Institute Amendment) Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 301, 
The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) 
Act be now read a second time and referred to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill No. 301, The Eston College (Full 
Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) Act be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to the 
committee. 
 
[12:30] 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I would 
move second reading, I’d just sort of want to let the Assembly 
know that this Bill represents a name change only. But it is a 
change that is important to the industry because it reflects the 
new name, the Saskatchewan Hotel and Hospitality Association 
and that’s reflected in the nature of business and the broadening 
of their membership. 
 
And with that, I move that Bill No. 302, The Hotels Association 
of Saskatchewan Amendment Act be now read a second time 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains that Bill No. 302, The Hotels Association of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act be now read a second time and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill and referral to the 
committee. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Loss of Confidence in the Government’s 
Ability to Manage 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when I look at the motion 
that the hon. member will obviously be proposing, because it’s 
listed on the blues, I would ask that you would rule whether it is 
in fact in order. 
 
I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that there is a long-standing 
principle that in fact in Beauchesne’s is referred to an old rule 
of parliament, it’s been around for so long that it . . . I think it’s 
the only time we’ve ever seen in a rule that . . . it begins by 
saying there is an old rule of parliament. It’s a very basic 
principle that says, and I quote: 
 

“. . . That a question being once made and carried in the 
affirmative or negative, cannot be questioned again but 
must stand as the judgment of the House.” 

 
And I would make the argument, Mr. Speaker, that the question 
that the hon. member is intending to propose to the House has 
already been negatived by this House within, in fact, within the 
last week, Mr. Speaker. I remind the House that on Thursday a 
week ago, a week ago today, that the House made a decision on 
a motion which read, and I quote: 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 
Premier and his government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have confidence? Mr. Speaker, is 
it surprising they don’t have confidence, Mr. Speaker, in the 
government? You know the Sask Party’s all about one thing. 
It’s all about pursuit of power. That’s what it’s about. Of course 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I believe the 
member has made his point. Speaking to the point of order, the 
Chair recognizes . . . Order please. Order please. Order please. I 
believe the member has made his point of order. He was 
starting to get into considerable debate. If the member has 
additional comment to make on the point of order, I would 
invite him to do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I’d be happy to do so, Mr. Speaker. And 
let me proceed directly to that without getting into the debate 
that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I quoted the motion that was already 
decided by this House in this session, I refer to the fact that the 
motion proposed by the opposition, that was defeated by this 
Assembly therefore affirming confidence, but the motion was, 
by the opposition moved, that there is no confidence in the 
Premier and his government. It is an entirely sweeping motion, 
Mr. Speaker. It is impossible to make a stronger statement 
about confidence — or in this case, proposed lack of confidence 
by the opposition — than that. It is the existence of the 
executive government under the leadership of the Premier that 
was challenged in the contents in all of that. Now what is 
proposed in the motion today that contradicts that is that is it a 
different notion? Clearly it is not a different notion in the 
proposed motion that is before us. It is a less comprehensive 
motion because it refers to specific actions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the opposition is 
intending to get around, attempting to get around the motion — 
with this House having already expressed within the last week 
entire confidence in the Premier and his government because 
that was the subject — is intending to get around the rule of the 
House by saying, well then, we don’t have confidence because 
of something that’s less than that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to propose an action that is less than 
something that has already been ruled on by the House, I 
suggest, is not in order, and I would ask that you would find the 
motion out of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Opposition House 
Leader to speak to the point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to 
this point of order raised by the Government House Leader. Mr. 
Speaker, clearly the motion is different, and clearly the 
precedence and habit of this House is to express and to allow a 
fair bit of latitude on private members’ day to make sure that 
members have their right to propose legitimate motions of 
concern that reflect the current issues in front of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I may point out that the motion that was on the floor of the 
House has been there for some length of time and was indeed a 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

very sweeping motion, in general a non-confidence in the 
Premier, specifically, and the government. What is the motion 
proposed today is much more specific, related to issues that 
have developed in the near-term past, and addressed certain 
issues that are very, very important to the taxpayers right now. 
 
Certainly just this week we had the census numbers released, 
and that’s a current issue. Certainly the issue of population 
decline is an issue that’s of very grave concern to the people 
across this province. And certainly the poor accountability in 
regard to the Carriere affair is very much a concern and a 
disappointment to people in this province. 
 
The motion by the official opposition expresses that 
disappointment in a way that is very clear and succinct. And I 
would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to rule in the affirmative and allow 
this motion to go forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, this motion 
having appeared in the blues has given me an opportunity to 
consider the admissibility of the motion. I would like to 
mention to the members that the confidence motion is not 
considered in the same sense as a motion on policy when it 
comes to admissibility for debate. The concept of responsible 
government and accountability of executive government is a 
topic that should not be precluded indefinitely from debate in 
the Assembly. 
 
The general precedence is that wording of a second confidence 
motion should be different than a motion which may have 
previously been disposed of. There is precedence for this, which 
has occurred on a second confidence motion in this Assembly 
on July 2, the year 2002. I therefore declare that this motion is 
in order. Debate proceeds. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A very good ruling, 
and I thank you for that. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. Order. The 
question before the Assembly is the debate on the motion. I 
would ask members, all members, not to comment and reflect 
on rulings of the Speaker. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — That motion states: 
 

That this Assembly has lost confidence in the 
government’s ability to manage the province given the 
most recent population census numbers and numerous 
examples of poor accountability to taxpayers, including 
the mismanagement of the Carriere affair. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this motion will be seconded by the member from 
Cannington, and I would like to just go into my argument on 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have practised law in this province for some 30 
years. I quite literally have represented doctors, lawyers, and 

Indian chiefs. I have represented, in the courts of this province, 
matters dealing with everything from first-degree murder down 
to traffic tickets. And in my entire legal career I have never seen 
two legal cases more atrociously . . . and more bungled than the 
two that we are seeing since I have been elected in the House — 
the first one being the Hillson affair and the second one being 
the Carriere affair. 
 
My reaction, Mr. Speaker, when I heard about the Carriere 
affair was, what were you thinking? I couldn’t believe and was 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, astounded by the conduct of the 
government with regard to that. 
 
I’d like to make some comments with regard to the settlement 
that was paid to Mr. Carriere. The members opposite have said, 
how dare we raise the issue that he was somehow being paid to 
do these acts. Well, Mr. Speaker, this was well-known 
throughout the government circles what was taking place. They 
chose to promote him. They chose to give him a positive letter 
of recommendation. They had him on the government payroll. 
The allegations took place in government facilities. Either it 
was a terribly bad system or they were wilfully blind. And 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, it was done under the watchful eye — or 
supposedly watchful eye — of this government. And frankly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it could only be described as an 
embarrassing train wreck for this government. 
 
And when I look back at some of the things that took place 
during the course of this litigation — this negotiation and the 
settlement that was paid out — I could not help but be amazed 
and overwhelmed that the government would voluntarily 
choose to pay severance that amounts to some 44 months pay in 
lieu of notice. I just cannot understand and I cannot fathom it. 
It’s one of the situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that defies any 
kind of logic, any kind of common sense, and there is 
absolutely no tie to the established jurisprudence and common 
law in this province. 
 
The previous minister of Justice made the statement at the time 
that the matter of the . . . [inaudible] . . . that it would be the 
position of the government that they would want to assert that 
there was just cause and that they would want to fight this one. 
At that time the members on this side of the House thought, yes, 
it’s one of the things that’s a matter of principle. We’re 
prepared to stand behind the government if they want to fight 
this one. But no, what do they do? They fold their tent and 
decide to pay one of their own 44 months — $275,000 — in 
salary. 
 
This is a government that unfortunately has lost their way so 
badly they can’t even fire anyone adequately. And I don’t know 
whether their concern was that they were afraid of defamation, 
whether they had no ability to assert there was just cause. I’ve 
practised law. They’ve got a number of lawyers on that side of 
the House. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that practise 
law will have told them that a normal settlement for just cause 
in this province, the cap is generally around 18 months. That 
would be sort of for somebody that’s at the top of their career, 
little or no chance for re-employment. 
 
Had they chose to settle it — and we weren’t supporting that 
they settle it — why wouldn’t they have made an offer of some 
18 months or something in that range? It defies any logic that 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

they would go up to 44 months on the thing. There is absolutely 
no sense to that, unless there’s something in this settlement or 
something there that they are hiding or that they are covering 
up. And sometimes it is an unfortunate and rather damning 
indictment for somebody that when they try to cover something 
up, what they do is they leave themselves in a position that the 
public’s imagination and the media runs away with the story. 
And the speculation may be significantly worse than what the 
reality they’re trying to hide would actually be. 
 
The best advice I could give this government right now would 
be to come clean, give up the legal opinions that they’ve 
received, tender all of the documents that are there — certainly 
with reasonable protection to the employees that are involved 
— and do something realistic and something meaningful for 
this. At this point in time they are losing a public relations battle 
that in the eyes of the media and the eyes of the public is 
shameful and is incredibly embarrassing to this government that 
they would reward Mr. Carriere with a payment of this 
magnitude for something where he’s received a criminal 
conviction. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk briefly for a minute or 
two about the abysmal treatment of the women victims in this 
particular matter. We realize that they received a settlement of 
some $15,000 — a token, a fraction, a small sum compared to 
what Mr. Carriere received. Even collectively the total amount 
that they received was roughly half of what Mr. Carriere 
received. 
 
[12:45] 
 
We can well understand the outrage that the public feels with 
regard to this. And the public should feel outraged, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because all the dollars that went to Mr. Carriere and all 
the dollars that went to the victim is money that was taxpayers’ 
dollars. People in this province work hard to earn their money, 
they work hard to pay their taxes. And to know that as a result 
of this they’ve had to pay out $15,000 to each of nine women, 
and then the embarrassment to pay out $275,000 to Mr. 
Carriere, is something that for members of this public and 
members of the province is something that is absolutely 
unacceptable. 
 
The calls that I’ve received in my office are things that say, 
what is this train wreck? What’s going on? Where are they 
going? It’s something that is absolutely unacceptable in the eyes 
of the public. The people have come forward and they’re 
phoning in to talk shows, they’re writing letters to newspapers, 
they’re phoning MLAs. And if the members on that side aren’t 
receiving the same kind of phone calls it’s because the members 
of the public have already made a decision that come the next 
election they are going to turn them out and put them 
somewhere else for the rest of their careers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the abysmal treatment that they received goes on 
even further. First they’ve received a small sum. But the 
manner in which the government approached settling with them 
is something that this government should be embarrassed by 
and should apologize to each and every one of those nine 
women for. First they require them to attend all in one room 
together, and then they’re told, you all have to sign; you all 
have to sign today. You can’t go out and get independent advice 

on the thing. You all have to rely on the same lawyer, and you 
can’t take the document home. You’ve got to sign today or it’s 
going to be gone. And everybody’s got to be all here together; 
you all have to get on. And no chance to think it over. All tied 
together. I’ve never seen such bully boy tactics on anything in 
my life. 
 
I can’t believe that they wouldn’t give that kind of treatment to 
anybody in this province. I’m sure they didn’t treat Mr. Carriere 
that way. I’m sure Mr. Carriere got a chance to think about the 
offers that were going back and forth, to review the documents, 
take them home, look at them, think about them, have a private 
conversation with his solicitor. 
 
And I’ll bet you something else, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll bet 
you anything that Mr. Carriere, in his file at home he has a copy 
of the settlement documents. Those women don’t have that, and 
those women have to go through some kind of a foolish shell 
game that the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission is putting those people through. 
 
And I’d like to comment on something else. I want to talk about 
the process that these women went through. They were dragged 
into this room and told this. They were represented by Marty 
Popescul, good counsel, one of the best in the province, now a 
Queen’s Bench judge. And he probably gave them the advice, 
this is the only offer you’re going to get. Because he has been 
around this province enough to know that that government over 
there plays those bully boy tactics and that they were sincere 
and they were serious. This is a one-shot offer — take it now or 
that ship is going to sail. He probably gave them the advice, 
you’d better take it or that ship will sail. 
 
And that’s exactly what the members across put forward to 
those women, and that’s what their lawyer understood, and 
that’s something that happened to them. And that’s something 
that they owe those women an apology for and they owe 
members of the public an apology for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t imagine going 
into a settlement agreement where you refuse to give the parties 
to the agreement a copy of the document. If you have 
confidential information relating to one of the parties that are 
there, why not do nine separate releases for each one of the 
people that are there? I’ll bet you Murdoch Carriere got a copy 
of the document. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker? You go to a bank to get 
a mortgage. And the bank says yes we’ll give you a mortgage. 
By the way, this is the rate it’s going to be; this is the 
amortization and you got to sign it. You got to sign it right now, 
and no we’re not giving you a copy of it. We’re going to snatch 
it back, put it in our vault, and you got to get a consent from 
everybody on your block that’s dealt with this . . . [inaudible] 
. . . What a ludicrous thing to say. I can’t believe that that 
government over there would put that across. 
 
I hear the Justice minister beaking from his seat that this is a 
good idea. He likes that kind of thing. I challenge him to stand 
outside of the House and say he supports the idea that these 
women shouldn’t have a copy of their document. Murdoch got a 



March 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

copy of the document. Why doesn’t he produce a copy for these 
women? Blot out the names and do it. I can’t believe that. 
 
And then the Minister for the Public Service Commission, she 
gets up in her seat and she says there is no gag order. Well then 
we learned Lorne Scott had gone to these people before and 
threatened them with the heavy hand of the government, told 
them all this and everything else. Then we learn about the trust 
conditions that were imposed on the thing. 
 
And then what happens next, Mr. Deputy Speaker? She loads 
up a plane full of her government officials to go and take those 
women aside, the people that work in that very office, and try to 
bully them some more. I’d like to know what she said to them 
up there. She said this government doesn’t act that way, but 
she’s sending deputy ministers up there to talk to these people. 
Those 50 people or whatever she rounded up yesterday, she 
owes them an apology for it as well. What kind of pressure did 
she put under those people? 
 
Unfortunately this has become nothing more than a public 
relations disaster, an absolute fiasco for this government. It’s 
not like trying to run uphill. It’s like trying to swim uphill when 
you’re in a shower. You’re just going to get drowned. Those 
people have no credibility, no chance on it, and I’m wondering 
where that bully boy tactics are going to go next. 
 
You know, we say earlier this year when the member for, the 
Deputy Premier tried to bully members of FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and tried to bully other people on 
the thing. Well unfortunately he’s not here to do the bully boy 
work, and now we’re wondering who’s doing it for them next. 
 
The Minister for the Public Service Commission officials that 
she sent . . . You know something, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This 
was handled so embarrassingly badly for this government, the 
best thing that they can learn from this is when they’re in legal 
trouble again, what they should do is find Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere’s lawyer and hire him to get them out of trouble 
because what they’ve got so far just digs them in a hole deeper. 
 
They had a bad situation when they started, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They got some reasonably good advice from the 
person who’s now the minister for economic . . . [inaudible] . . . 
told them, yes we were going to fight this out. But they botched 
it so miserably that they had to pay out over a quarter of a 
million dollars to try and bail themselves out of it. 
 
You would think they would learn from the poor experiences 
that they’ve had before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They had a dismal 
and embarrassing experience with the Hillson matter. And I’d 
like to comment briefly on the Hillson matter if I could, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I heard the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission answer one of the reporters’ questions yesterday. 
The reporter asked the minister, well in the Hillson matter, 
didn’t you get your butt kicked on that? And her answer was, 
well yes we did. Well this is another situation where they chose 
not to get their butt kicked, to use that quote. 
 
But what they did was they got their entire personality, their 
entire image kicked, just in the same manner as they did legally 

because this has destroyed their reputation and their integrity. 
It’s a sign that these members have lost their moral compass. 
They are absolutely out of touch with the members of this 
province, with the members of the public. They have no sense 
of relation that the people of this province work hard for their 
money. They have a set of values. Then we pay out $275,000 
because these members couldn’t have a policy and a practice 
where sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace wasn’t 
accepted. What they’ve done now is they’ve rewarded this 
individual and they have paid out substantial amounts of money 
for that. 
 
And what they’ve done is they’ve shown that they don’t care 
about women. They don’t care about workers. They don’t care 
about what happens in the workplace. It’s something that 
doesn’t matter. What matters to that government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is political expediency. Let’s get this done before the 
next election because if we lose the next election, this whole 
matter is going to come out. Let’s cover it up everywhere we 
can. Let’s use trust conditions. Let’s use gag orders. Let’s use 
confidentiality. Let’s use everything we can to bury this matter 
as deep as we can so that we never have to pay a political price. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it didn’t work. It backfired on them 
because the public know right now they’re covering something 
up. They’re not bringing it forward, and what they’re doing is 
absolutely inexcusable and unacceptable. 
 
In the Hillson matter, the government went into a paralysis or a 
stupidity or a stubbornness mode. They saw somebody at the 
Legal Aid Commission broke The Labour Standards Act. 
 
The first sign that there was trouble was the labour standards 
officer goes in there and says no, when somebody goes off to 
serve a term in the legislature, you have to give them their job 
back. That person should be commended. That person actually 
writes a letter saying that Mr. Hillson was entitled to get their 
job back. What do they choose to do when they receive that? 
Nothing. They sit back and say oh, Legal Aid Commission’s 
independent. We’re letting them deal with it. It’s a matter of 
legal interpretation. There’s no legal interpretation. Somebody 
chose to break the law wilfully. And we made a conscious 
decision this is law; that isn’t going to apply to us. So that was 
mistake number one. 
 
Mistake number two was they have a Chair of the Legal Aid 
Commission chose not to do anything about it. 
 
But where does the buck stop? The buck stops right there with 
the Minister of Justice. The Minister of Justice is made aware of 
what the labour standards office . . . is made of the situation. 
He’s been a lawyer for several decades in this province, as have 
I. He should full well know what the thing is there. 
 
But no, they sit there and say no, we’re paralyzed. We’re not 
going to do anything. We’re just going to let this play itself out. 
And what’s the net effect of it? It goes to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. At the end of the day, Court of Queen’s Bench rules Mr. 
Hillson’s entitled to his job back. 
 
And what’s the dollar cost to the province? Once again, 
hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars. People that go out 
and work for 5, 10, 15, $20 an hour, eking out a living in this 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2007 

province. Farmers that are cash-strapped, and they’re going out 
trying to earn a living in this province. And the effect of it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is they know full well that these money is hard 
to come by and then they take those tax dollars, and they have 
to spend this on games that can at best be regarded as foolish 
and embarrassing. 
 
And frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a legislator, I’m 
embarrassed to be in the same room as some of the members 
over there that have actually condoned some of the action that 
have caused this kind of litigation and this kind of problem for 
this province. 
 
As legislators, we owe a bigger duty to our constituents and the 
residents of this province. To sit back now and look at what 
happened in the Carriere situation and look back at what 
happened in the Hillson situation, two lawsuits . . . the first one 
they refused to do anything, the second one they get skittish and 
go exactly the opposite. And they pour money on it quickly to 
make the problem go away. 
 
What’s wrong with sitting back right from the outset and 
looking at matters and deciding what is the correct thing to do, 
what is the right thing to do, what’s in tune with the people of 
Saskatchewan? Where’s your moral compass? Where’s your 
agenda? What do you want to have happen? Are you going to 
stand up for the women of the province? Are you going to stand 
up for the citizens of the province? Are you going to stand up 
for the taxpayers of the province? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during the tirade over the last few minutes, the member 
opposite has on several occasions accused members on this side 
of covering something up. And, Mr. Speaker, that goes to 
impugning the character of the individuals, the members on this 
side of the House. And very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that is not 
permitted under the rules of this House. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — On the point of order, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on the point of order. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member’s point of order I believe is not well taken. The 
member from Saskatoon was referring to a number of cases 
where he believes that not the entire information has not yet 
been provided to the House and is encouraging the government 
to do so, and until that occurs, then that information is not 
known. It’s not available. It’s not hidden to the members of the 
Assembly or to the general public at large, and it’s in that sense 
that he’s referring to something is not known or is hidden, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I want to thank the 
member for Regina Dewdney for his point of order, and I want 
to thank the member for Cannington for his comments on the 
point of order. 
 
I want to caution members with respect to the use of the words 
cover up, that this should not be used to impugn inappropriate 

activity by other members of the Assembly, and it should not be 
directed against individual members of the Assembly. 
 
And therefore, I want to ask the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast to use care in terms of how he phrases allegations, 
not to impugn other members. If he’s talking more broadly 
about the government, that’s, I think, a different question. This 
should not be directed towards an individual member, and I 
would ask him therefore not to do that in the future. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that. I will try and 
use a little more caution in my words. My intention, Mr. 
Speaker, my intention is . . . My concern now, Mr. Speaker, is 
with the conduct of the government in a general sense in the 
information that they have not provided to us. What the 
government has not provided to us is copies of the documents, 
copies of the legal opinion. And as such, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
move: 
 

That this Assembly has lost confidence in the 
government’s ability to manage the province given the 
most recent population census numbers and numerous 
examples of poor accountability to taxpayers, including 
the mismanagement of the Carriere affair. 
 

This motion is seconded by the member from Cannington. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It has been moved by 
the hon. member from Saskatoon Southeast and seconded by 
the hon. member for Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly has lost confidence in the 
government’s ability to manage the province given the 
most recent population census numbers and numerous 
examples of poor accountability to taxpayers, including 
the mismanagement of the Carriere affair. 

 
I find the motion to be in order. And before I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington, I note that it’s 1 o’clock. And so I 
recognize the hon. member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Clearly the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, it being 1 o’clock, this House stands adjourned until 
1:30 p.m. on Monday. And I wish you all a good day tomorrow 
and a good weekend. Thank you. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................851 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................852 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................852 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................852 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................852 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ..................................................................................................................................................852 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Member Named Honorary Elder by Yellow Quill First Nation 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................852 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................853 
 Member Marks Third Anniversary as Opposition Leader 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................853 
 The Ides of March  
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................853 
 National Recognition for Community Beautification 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................854 
 St. Patrick’s Day Greetings 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................854 
 Murdoch Carriere Settlement 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................854 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Minister’s Comments at Municipal Convention 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................855 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................855 
 Government’s Settlement with Complainants in the Carriere Case 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................856 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................856 
 Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................856 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................857 
 Ministers’ Knowledge of Disciplinary Action Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................857 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................857 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................858 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................858 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................858 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Release of Saskatchewan’s First State of the Watershed Report 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................860 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................861 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................861 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................863 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Federal Government’s Program Funding 
  Morin .................................................................................................................................................................................861, 873 
  Hamilton ............................................................................................................................................................................864, 873 
  Harpauer ...........................................................................................................................................................................866, 873 
  Higgins ...............................................................................................................................................................................868, 874 
  Draude ...............................................................................................................................................................................869, 873 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................871 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................871 
  The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble) (point of order) ...............................................................................................................872 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................872 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................874 
PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) Act 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................875 
 Bill No. 302 — The Hotels Association of Saskatchewan Amendment Act 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................876 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Loss of Confidence in the Government’s Ability to Manage 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................876 
  Gantefoer (point of order)........................................................................................................................................................876 
  The Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................877 
  Yates (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................880 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................880 
  The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble) (point of order) ...............................................................................................................880 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................880 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


