






















































Hansard: May 07, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 57A  MONDAY, MAY 7, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1517 
 May 7, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the 600 children under six years 
old in the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency regarding a 
much needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of 
Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek and Willowgrove. 

 
The petitioners today come from the Sears Cove, Wright 
Crescent, and Eastman Cove area of northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at 
the Lafleche and District Health Centre will cause undue 
hardship to residents, particularly seniors. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Woodrow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of central Saskatchewan and in my constituency that 
are very concerned with the potentially dangerous situation 
arising in our health care system there, and that is with the lack 
of doctors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are all from the fine 
community of Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned that closures of schools 
would cause undue hardships in their communities, especially 
those of young students. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Nokomis. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition from the citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
with the conditions of Highway 368, starting 4 miles south of 
Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. Brieux, and has seriously 
declined over the last number of years. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake 
Lenore and Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that are concerned about the underfunding to 
schools: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bund, your petitioners will pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis and Lanigan, Regina, Govan, Drake, and Duval. I so 
present. 
 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present a petition requesting an allocation of funding for a 
school in the neighbourhood of Stonebridge in Saskatoon 
Southeast. The prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Stonebridge. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Gordon 
Road in Stonebridge in Saskatoon Southeast. I’m pleased to 
present it on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
rise today with a petition that the citizens of Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake and surrounding areas are well served by 
the schools in their community. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 

And this petition is signed by the good people of Nokomis and 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to rise and present a petition calling for increased 
highway signage, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to increase highway signage at the 
junction of Highways 6 and 39. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Radville, 
Saskatoon, Ogema, Lake Alma, and Midale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition to improve safety and security at Cochin, 
Saskatchewan. There’s been a significant increase in the 
number of break and enters and vandalism within their village. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the severity of the crime 
problem in the resort village of Cochin is recognized by 
the provincial government, and that the provincial 
government will work actively with the community to find 
a solution to the problem. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators are from Battleford, North 
Battleford, Cochin, and Saulteaux First Nations. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from the citizens of Wilkie who are 
concerned about their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good people from Wilkie and district. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
$45 rebates for Energy Star qualified programmable 
thermostats were given out during the duration of the 
rebate program? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 62 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
wall-mounted household thermostats that contain mercury 
were turned in to SaskPower’s mercury thermostat 
recovery program during the time SaskPower was offering 
$45 rebates for Energy Star qualified programmable 
thermostats? 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: what was the 
number of applicants for the crop insurance program for 
the year 2005? 
 

Also a similar question for 2006 and also 2007. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to be joined today by a group of grade 5 
students who are in the west gallery. They’re here from 
Deshaye Elementary School and they’re joined with their 
teacher, Mrs. Rockthunder and Mrs. Weber. They also have 
three chaperones with them, Mrs. O’Connor, Mrs. Grad, and 
Mrs. Probe. 
 
And I would ask that all members join with me in welcoming 
them here. I look forward to meeting with them and talking 
with them a little bit about the legislature later on today. So 
again please join me in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to this Assembly I’m pleased to introduce a group of visitors in 
the east gallery from Turtleford Community School. We have 
24 grade 8 students accompanied by their teachers, Colleen 
Nelson and Christie Milne, and seven parent volunteers. I look 
forward to meeting with them for pictures and for a little visit 
after, and I would ask that the Assembly welcome them to their 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is an honour today to be able to introduce to you and through 
you to members of this House a former colleague in ministry in 
the United Church, Stewart Mills. Stewart served in many 
pastoral, or for many years here in Saskatchewan as a United 
Church minister from ’63 to ’99 and then retired to Calgary. 
 
Stewart is accompanied today by his partner, Charles 
Thompson. Charles was born in Vancouver and has been a 
fashion designer in Calgary for many years. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome them here. I would note that Stewart in 
his time in Saskatchewan served charges in Milestone and at 
Knox Met here in Regina. So please join me in welcoming them 
to our Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to the Assembly two people in your gallery, 
both employed in my office here in the Legislative Building 
recently. 
 
And first of all I’d like to introduce Gaylene Anaquod from the 
Muscowpetung First Nation. Someone will recognize the name 
if you’re from southern Saskatchewan. Anaquod, her father 
Glen Anaquod is an elder from Muscowpetung and I think he’s 
quite well respected in First Nations. As well Gaylene worked 
for the First Nations University of Canada for quite a number of 
years I believe and currently now is obviously working in my 
office. We’re thrilled to have her working here in the 
Legislative Building. 
 
As well again, Mr. Speaker, seated beside her is Mitch 
Villeneuve, who is our summer student for the second year in a 
row. He’s, I believe, finishing his third year or just finished his 
third year at the University of Saskatchewan. He’s an ardent 
student of politics and challenges our office on a daily basis. 
We are thrilled to have him back again. Would you please join 
me in welcoming both of my guests to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Women of Distinction Awards  
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Thursday night the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] hosted its annual Women of Distinction Awards 
here in Regina. The judges sifting through the nominations did 
not have an easy job as more than 73 nominations were 
received from across southern Saskatchewan for just 12 award 
categories. 
 
This year’s award for leadership in community enhancement 
went to Sandy Wankel, the founder of North Central Family 
Centre. Mr. Speaker, I know that many of my colleagues in this 
Assembly have visited the North Central Family Centre and 
witnessed the incredible work that Ms. Wankel is doing in 
Regina’s inner city. She is a tireless worker and a selfless 
woman with a vision and direction when it comes to helping 
children and families in north central Regina. 
 
When accepting her award at the event, her thoughts were again 
of the centre’s clientele. She said, and I quote: 
 

I accept this award on behalf of all the exceptional women 
who walk through our doors — volunteers from all walks 
of life who work so hard at the centre. Their passion is just 
unsurpassed. 

 
This year’s Life Achievement Award went to Renu Kapoor. 
Other award recipients included Lynn Severt, Brenda Joyce 
Niskala, Val Skamanis, Neelu Sachdev, Marjorie 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

Dressyman-Lavallee, Darlene Rude, Margaret Skeel, Darleen 
Jelinski, Jackie Hall and Peggy Black, and this year’s Young 
Woman of Distinction, Candyce Bakke. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating all of 
these women of distinction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 7 to 13 is 
National Nursing Week — the time set aside to recognize the 
significant contributions that nurses make to the health of 
Canadians. 
 
In Saskatchewan we are fortunate to have highly skilled nurses 
committed to providing the best possible care to their patients. 
Anyone who has come in contact with the health system as a 
patient or in support of family or friends can attest to the vital 
contribution that nurses make to our health care system and in 
our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are in short supply around the world. Here 
in Saskatchewan we are addressing this issue with our health 
workforce action plan, a comprehensive, detailed strategy 
developed in consultation with nursing organizations and other 
health provider groups and designed to improve health care in 
Saskatchewan by keeping and attracting health care 
professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our efforts are working. In the first six months of 
the recruitment grant program, 75 nurses accepted grants. And 
of the past two graduating classes from the nursing education 
program of Saskatchewan, over 90 per cent accepted positions 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend a heartfelt welcome to nurses coming to 
Saskatchewan, as well as to new Saskatchewan nursing 
graduates. At the same time I offer my sincere appreciation to 
all nurses currently working in Saskatchewan’s health system 
for their hard work, commitment, and dedication. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking our nurses for 
their ongoing contributions to the health system and in wishing 
them the best this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Nurses Show Dedication Despite Workplace Problems 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join with the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] in recognizing National Nursing Week, May 7 to 13. 
It’s a week that we recognize the many contributions that nurses 

make to our daily lives and to health care, as well as to promote 
nursing as a career opportunity. But that’s about where it ends, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all too familiar with the work environment 
faced by many nurses in Saskatchewan under this current 
government. Many nurses would like to work full-time, 
permanent positions but are faced with part-time positions and 
dozens of calls per week asking them to come and work 
overtime. Our nurses face burnout because of too many 
overtime shifts, not enough nurses, and work-related stress and 
injuries. According to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in a 
recent press release, and I quote: 
 

Out-migration, chronic illness and long-term disability, 
coupled with looming retirements will force the closure of 
hundreds of beds and scores of facilities . . . [across this 
province, Mr. Speaker] in the next three to five years, with 
[the] sharply reduced service access to service and much 
longer waiting lists. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government has neglected our nursing sector 
for far too many years, Mr. Speaker, and as the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses have said, it’s a decade of inaction by this 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition would like to thank all 
nurses in this province, be they registered nurses, psychiatric 
nurses, or licensed practical nurses for their dedication and 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan despite the working 
conditions they are faced to work in under this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 

 
Congratulations to Northern Nursing Graduates 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to share 
with the members of the Assembly that 26 new nurses have 
graduated from the First Nations University of Canada, 
Northern Campus, through the nursing education program of 
Saskatchewan, also called NEPS. Mr. Speaker, NEPS is a 
four-year program. Graduates earn a Bachelor of Science in 
Nursing that certifies them to work anywhere in the world. 
 
I am particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, that 19 of these new 
nurses are from the central and northern regions of the province 
and more than half of the 26 nurses are First Nations and Métis 
women. Each of these students have chosen to take positions in 
hospitals and community clinics that are close to home. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that three are from my 
home First Nation, Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, and one is 
from my home community of Deschambault Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the program’s first graduating class 
consisted of seven graduates. This year’s numbers are almost 
four times that and speaks to the overall reception and success 
of this program in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the Assembly to join me in congratulating 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

the members of the 2007 nursing education program of 
Saskatchewan graduating class. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon Business College Centennial 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Business College 
is one of a few businesses in Saskatoon celebrating its 
centennial in the year 2007. Founded in 1907 by Mr. E.A. 
Marshall, the Saskatoon Business College has been owned and 
operated by the Chapman family since 1951 when it was 
purchased by schoolteachers Fred and Helen Chapman. Today 
it is in the third generation of the Chapman family and they are 
still at the helm as the college enters its second century. 
 
Times have certainly changed from when the college was 
founded, and the college has always managed to keep up with 
technological advances. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon 
Business College started teaching its students to use computers 
before any other vocational school in the province. 
 
In 1987 the college became the province’s only nationally 
accredited vocational college. Today the Saskatoon Business 
College offers classes in 16 different diploma programs and 
trains more than 300 students a year in business, computer, and 
health-related programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Chapman family 
and the Saskatoon Business College on the occasion of its 100th 
anniversary, and to thank the college for turning out 
well-educated and well-rounded students, for providing 
Saskatchewan business with top-notch employees, and for 
giving back to the community by participating in such things as 
Shinerama fundraising for cystic fibrosis. I’d ask that all 
members do the same. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday evening 
I, along with a number of my colleagues from the Assembly, 
had the great pleasure of attending the Regina YWCA Women 
of Distinction Awards. Mr. Speaker, it was an extremely 
successful evening, both enjoyable and inspiring, and I want to 
thank the organizers and volunteers of the event and each and 
every one of the nominees for their ongoing contributions to the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s YWCA Women of Distinction are: 
Sandy Wankel for community leadership and enhancement; 
Lynn Severt for contribution to a rural community; Neelu 
Sachdev for cultural heritage; Marjorie Dressyman-Lavalee, for 
education; for entrepreneurship, Darleen Jelinski; for leadership 
and management, Val Skamanis; Margaret Skeel for science, 
technology, and environment; for teamwork, Peggy Black and 

Jackie Hall of Hall & Rae; Darlene Rude for wellness, 
recreation, and healthy living. And this year’s Young Woman 
of Distinction is Candyce Bakke. Brenda Niskala received the 
Jacqui Shumiatcher Arts Award. And, Mr. Speaker, the winner 
of this year’s Woman of Distinction Lifetime Achievement 
Award is Renu Kapoor. 
 
Congratulations to all nominees and recipients. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Broadcaster’s Comments 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After last 
week’s theatrics by the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government in this Assembly over the cover-up of fraud in the 
NDP caucus office in 1992, I thought it would be appropriate to 
share the following commentary with members opposite. Here’s 
what Rawlco’s Murray Wood had to say in his Wood File last 
Friday. And I quote: 
 

The NDP is punching back when it should be accepting 
Glenn Hagel’s resignation from cabinet and moving on. 
Why? Well, it probably speaks to political strategists in 
general. 
 
The problem is they think we’re gullible when really it’s 
just that most people are cynical and don’t really expect 
them to be honest. Everyone but those with the NDP 
kool-aid coursing their veins can see the fifteen year old 
fraud case was mishandled. 
 
The NDP should have been more open and honest in 1992, 
they should have turned the information over to police and 
there should have been a public statement made. 
 
Now for the NDP to go into this angry attack in the 
legislature over the theft of $20 or something from 
someone’s purse in the Saskatchewan Party caucus room, 
to insist it’s the same thing is of course ludicrous. 
 
One was public money, the other was out of someone’s 
private purse or do [you] . . . think maybe they don’t 
understand the distinction. They think we’re that gullible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve more than deflection from this NDP 
government. They deserve an apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

School Closures 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is a very sad and devastating day for many communities around 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

the Regina area. Nine schools have announced to be closing as 
of the end of this school year, and who knows how many more 
announcements are pending. School boards have been put in a 
very difficult position as a result of this NDP government’s 
underfunding of the K to 12 education system and its 
overreliance on property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government failed so many 
rural communities? Where is the leadership from this NDP 
government on such an important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the 
member opposite; this is a very difficult day for many 
communities. But in his comments about funding . . . this NDP 
government has increased the foundation operating grant by 52 
per cent over the past decade — that’s over $200 million. And 
during that time, Mr. Speaker, we have continued to see a 
decrease in enrolment. And we can talk about 15 per cent or 
fifteen and a half, there abouts, but that equates into 27,000 
students. It’s a huge drop in enrolment. And, Mr. Speaker, 
during that time also we have continued to see mill rates 
increase. So, Mr. Speaker, the school boards are seeking to 
reach that balance, providing the services in the best way that 
they can with the resources at hand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has been in 
charge of this portfolio for the past two years and has done 
absolutely nothing to prevent school closures in this province. 
The Finance minister used to be the minister of Learning when 
he rammed down school board amalgamations down 
everybody’s throat in rural Saskatchewan. He said at the time 
that it was needed to have more effective and efficient delivery 
of education. How in the world is closing nine schools in one 
school division effective education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I 
have learned in this portfolio is that there’s a great deal of 
communication and discussion which goes on amongst the 
boards, amongst the department, amongst the various levels in 
the education sector. This we have worked towards, the point in 
time where we have regional pooling of resources. We have 
seen that steady decrease in enrolment right across the province 
and a shifting in the demographics in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Everyone involved realizes that we needed to 
make some changes in the school divisions, and this 
amalgamation has begun that process of change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they can talk to the 

member from Canora. There’s a number of statements where he 
talks about the school system not being sustainable when he 
was directly involved, and he understands this process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about nine schools in one school division will be 
facing closure. Does this minister have any idea of the 
devastating effect that is going to have in each and every one of 
those communities, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has this government done to create any sort 
of economic regeneration in rural Saskatchewan? Absolutely 
nothing. And because of it, schools in this province are closing 
under their watch. Mr. Speaker, how can she stand in her place 
and defend that nine schools are closing in one division? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in May of 2004 when 
the Boughen report was brought forward with a number of 
recommendations, as we are working our way through that, the 
opposition stood in this House day after day after day and 
tabled petitions against Boughen. Then they say, well you had 
Boughen; why didn’t you implement it? 
 
In January of this year out in this rotunda, the member from 
Melfort said, we have this wonderful plan of schools of 
necessity. Mr. Speaker, he didn’t tell anyone that that was just 
repackaging a factor that has been within the foundation 
operating grant for a number of years. They’ve expanded that 
and added the geographic factor. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he’s home in Tisdale, and what does he say? 
Well this may not work. It may not save these schools. And 
then he turns around and — which I find the most offensive — 
the Save our Schools rally he stands out there and says, 
communities should be involved and parents should be 
involved. But on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
Radio he says, let the school boards make the decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that minister 
would bring up the Boughen Commission. They were told as a 
government not to cherry-pick the Boughen Commission, and 
that’s exactly what they did. And what they did cherry-pick is 
raising the PST [provincial sales tax] by 1 per cent, and it didn’t 
go back into education, Mr. Speaker. It’s ironic that she would 
be bringing it up. 
 
This government has failed to provide leadership on this file, to 
give school boards support. This government has failed to give 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

school boards the tools necessary to keep some of these schools 
open. The government has done nothing but fail rural 
Saskatchewan, and it’s not a wonder why when you see how 
many rural seats that government represents, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
all about politics for this government. 
 
When will this government do the right thing and provide tools 
for school divisions so that their only option is not rural school 
closure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve continually 
increased the funding to the foundation operating grant and 
made a number of changes where we will be able to continue 
improving on the accessibility and the viability of our education 
system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I ask the opposition . . . They dance on both 
sides of this one. It depends on the crowd they’re in front of. 
One day they want parents to be involved. Next day they say, 
well leave it alone; the school boards shouldn’t be involved. 
Then they’re saying, well implement Boughen. Well no, we’re 
tabling petitions that we don’t like Boughen. 
 
When their policy states that they will look at a continual 
decline in the cost of government, and then they talk about 
streamlining education and getting rid of the duplication, they 
need to explain what they mean. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Caucus Personnel and Personal Information 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday a number of media outlets were reporting that the 
government was in the process of negotiating a severance 
package with Jim Fodey who resigned in the wake of the NDP 
fraud scandal. Unfortunately the Premier didn’t seem to know 
any details when he was asked by reporters to respond on 
Friday morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bigger issue is, if Jim Fodey truly resigned, 
why is he receiving severance? Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: 
will Mr. Fodey be receiving a severance package and if so, how 
much? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would like to advise the 
Assembly that the question is out of order. However I will 
allow a response if there’s a minister that wishes to respond. 
The Chair recognizes the member, the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a bigger 
issue than Jim Fodey. And the bigger issue is this: we have a 

Leader of the Opposition that is trying desperately to become 
the next premier of Saskatchewan. We have a group of men and 
women over there that are trying desperately to form the next 
government. 
 
But here’s what I heard from the members opposite, particularly 
their Justice critic. And he said that the decision to post the 
police report on the website, the decision to talk about the 
police report was that they thought somehow that the police 
hadn’t done their work. Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a separation 
between state and the police. And why is it that the members 
over there act like a star chamber and that they should decide 
who gets charged in this province and who doesn’t — not the 
police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question was about a 
severance package being given to Jim Fodey, and I find it rather 
odd that the NDP would even talk about negotiating. That’s 
because last December the Board of Internal Economy 
unanimously passed a new directive which specifically outlines 
how much severance caucus employees are to receive if they 
were in fact eligible to receive a severance. This new policy 
applies to all caucus employees both in government and in 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP negotiating a severance package 
with Jim Fodey? Why aren’t they just following the directives 
of the Board of Internal Economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, these men and 
women want to become the next Government of Saskatchewan, 
and their Justice critic talks about a judgment call. It was their 
judgment, the Sask Party’s judgment, to post people’s private, 
personal information on the website. It was their judgment to 
release a confidential police report, Mr. Speaker, that was 
illegally obtained. That was their judgment. They talk about 
judgment over there. And we have the member for Canora 
saying he’d do it again. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t live in a province where Big 
Brother’s in charge. Now, Mr. Speaker, what we need to know, 
what we need to know is what gives them the right to decide 
whose information should be posted on a website and whose 
information shouldn’t? And what would they do if they had 
access to all of our personal information, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the minister 
that there is a specific policy for calculating severance for any 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

caucus employee. It was passed by the Board of Internal 
Economy on December 14, 2006, and it applies to all 
employees of all caucus offices. In fact Mr. Fodey was one of 
the people who drafted this policy. And the Government House 
Leader introduced the motion in the December 14 meeting. 
 
Why is the government ignoring a Board of Internal Economy 
directive? And why is the NDP ignoring the rules of this 
Assembly by negotiating a severance package with Mr. Fodey? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The question is the behaviour and the 
judgment shown by the members of the opposition under the 
leadership of the member from Swift Current. These are the 
men and women that are lusting for power. They want to be in 
charge of the public purse, so they can hand it over to their 
friends. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some bigger principles at 
stake here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it their job to conduct the police investigation? 
No, it isn’t. Is it their job to determine whether or not the police 
did a good job? No, it isn’t. Then why is it, Mr. Speaker, why is 
it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. The Chair . . . 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that their 
Justice critic — the only lawyer in their entire caucus — would 
say on May 2, wouldn’t it be appropriate, wouldn’t it be 
common sense that they would want to go ahead and lay 
charges, and he was talking about the police, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope the public understands that these 
people want to be able to direct the police and direct the 
prosecution in terms of charges being laid. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here’s 
another pretty big problem for the NDP. The NDP has 
consistently said that Jim Fodey resigned in the wake of the 
NDP fraud scandal. The Government House Leader has 
repeatedly stated that he received inaccurate information from 
Mr. Fodey, and as a result Mr. Fodey did the honourable thing 
and resigned. 
 
However the Board of Internal Economy severance policy 
clearly states that severance is only payable to a caucus 
employee who is terminated without cause. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP said Jim Fodey resigned. The severance policy says 
severance is only payable to employees who are terminated 
without cause. Why is Jim Fodey entitled to severance? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, here we have it. We 
have a Justice critic, their only lawyer in their caucus. He’s an 
experienced lawyer. He’s an officer of the court. He’s a member 
of the bar. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The member 
has a right to be heard. Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — He’s a member of the bar. He’s a 
former CEO [chief executive officer] and chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, and he’s a legislator. But 
he’s unable to recognize a police report when he sees it. He 
feels he has no duty to report this illegally obtained police 
report to the authorities. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, he feels 
he has no ethical responsibility to uphold people’s private, 
confidential names, phone numbers, and addresses, and instead 
he posts it on their website, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
apparent that the minister does not understand the policy 
because there have been no answers to my questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jim Fodey would have been well aware of the 
board of internal . . . policy. In fact he was one of the people 
who drafted it. He would have known that, in order to receive a 
severance, he would have to be terminated without cause. Yet 
the NDP says he resigned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very simple question to the minister: did Jim 
Fodey truly resign? And if so, will the minister table his letter 
of resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I spent the entire weekend all over the city of 
Saskatoon and my colleagues did as well. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
here’s what they’re talking about. Here’s what they’re talking 
about. They’re talking about a group of men and women who 
are lusting for power and they’ll do anything to get it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know what else? They will put 
anybody’s private information on their website, Mr. Speaker. 
They even have little secret cameras in their caucus office, Mr. 
Speaker, spying on people to try to find out who’s stealing. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t go to the police, Mr. Speaker. 
We . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Minister for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, what do they do? Do 
they go to the security people at the legislature? Absolutely not. 
They put a secret little camera in someone’s office spying on 
employees, Mr. Speaker. Then they find out . . . Well it really is 
Big Brother over there spying on employees. Then they find out 
someone stole. And what do they do? They let her go, Mr. 
Speaker. They didn’t go to the police, Mr. Speaker. Did they 
contact the next employer to say, you might have a problem on 
your hands? 
 
They talked about criminal record checks. We’re all supposed 
to have them, Mr. Speaker. But they didn’t do their due 
diligence . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time is elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Flooding at Fishing Lake 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year, as a part of a 
summer tour, I had the pleasure of visiting with the residents, 
permanent and temporary, at Fishing Lake. They wanted to talk 
about Highway 310. But a number of them also raised concerns 
about the potential damage of flooding in subsequent years and 
already some flooding that was occurring last summer when the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena and I were there. 
 
I was there again last Thursday to see first-hand the flood 
destruction, Mr. Speaker. I know the Premier has been there as 
well. Property owners there — the Premier will know — are 
very frustrated by the lack of a plan, a coordinated plan from 
this government to protect their lives and the belongings and of 
course their investment. They’re upset because this didn’t have 
to happen. There was a long-term solution available to this 
government and more importantly to the people of Fishing 
Lake. 
 
Question to the Premier is this: will he commit today to begin 
work on the drainage ditch at Fishing Lake as soon as the water 
levels subside, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people at Fishing Lake 
have a major problem with the amount of water that’s there. 
They’ve been working with the local people and the Fishing 
Lake watershed authority at a number of different projects 
including the one that the member talks about, but that’s not the 
only project that they’re working on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fishing Lake watershed authority has been 
seeking advice from various places to figure out what to do. 
The proposal that the member opposite raises had a number of 
other problems that shifted the water downstream and caused a 

lot of problems for other communities. Those kinds of issues 
are being dealt with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I ask that that leader stay out of this place 
because they’re going to solve it themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Are you . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the 
Fishing Lake area are very concerned because that’s been the 
attitude of this government for 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Solve it yourself. There is a long-term solution 
that’s available to this particular destruction. Mr. Speaker, we 
know as regards the ditch, the drainage ditch, that First Nations 
are on side. We know that most of the farmers, the vast majority 
of the farmers are ready to sign the easements that are necessary 
for this to happen. 
 
The government could have acted sooner; it chose not to. Now 
the Premier made some announcements not too long ago about 
helping the folks with the damage, and those are welcome. But 
what’s needed is action, immediate action on this long-term 
solution. Will the minister or the Premier, better yet, stand in 
his place and commit to that action starting this year, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
this, that the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, the 
Minister of the Environment were in Fishing Lake, also 
Waldsea Lake. I was there. The Leader of the Opposition has 
been there. The member has been there. Mr. Speaker, there is 
no question — there is no question — that we are resolved, 
together with that community and with the neighbouring 
communities, to lower the level of Fishing Lake, to get the 
water drained as best as we possibly can this summer. And to 
that effect, Mr. Speaker, to that effect, I have appointed a 
professional engineer to lead this on behalf of the province, to 
work with the communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are determined to bring the water levels down 
in Fishing Lake in a manner that is environmentally sustainable 
and that works with the local community. But make no mistake 
about it; we are determined to lower the water of the lake at 
Fishing Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Flooding Disaster Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

Speaker, once again we see this NDP government caught 
flat-footed. The north-central region is flooding as their leader 
has just said, and many, many acres are under water out there. 
And we also even have saltwater lakes that are overflowing 
onto the land and into dugouts, Mr. Speaker. There’s a disaster 
in the making. Will the Minister of Agriculture today tell us 
what he’s prepared to do to help the farmers in that area? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, at this point we have made clear that we are not 
planning on any additional funding. We have revised our crop 
insurance program. The federal government’s cover crop 
program is still in place, and we believe that the amounts that 
will be provided through this program will help for the 
un-seeded acreage piece. 
 
With regard to flooded pastures, Mr. Speaker, we have been in 
contact with producers in the area who are facing issues of 
flooding, and we have made available to them lists of pastures 
available. We’ve assured them that there are community 
pastures available with room for 1,000 cow-calf pairs. There are 
a number of First Nations that have pasture available, and in 
The Western Producer there’s also a significant listing of 
people who have pasture available for people who are facing 
flooding in their pasture lands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister’s aware, last year this government saw 
fit to put a $10 acre payment in place on top of the $15 federal 
dollars that came in. And that was on top of what crop 
insurance would cover. Why does the minister seem justified in 
his thinking today that farmers don’t need that this year? 
Farmers last year in the Porcupine area needed that drastically 
and called on that government to help, and the government 
came to their aid — $10 an acre. Why does the minister see fit 
that that’s not needed in the area this year where flooding is 
taking place? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that has been 
explained in the paper, and I am sure the member opposite has 
read the explanation in terms of the amount of money that’s 
going out. 
 
But I’m surprised that the member opposite also pushes on this 
because, when asked in terms of what they would do around 
support for weather related issues — should the government 
jump in and put support in? — the member opposite says no, 
not necessarily, that shouldn’t happen. And I’ve got a number 
of quotes where he doesn’t think the government should step in 
to provide support. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve revised crop insurance to make a difference 
for these people. They will not be paying the deductible on their 
whole farm, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be paying it only on the 
quarters that are affected. And we think the revisions there will 
be helpful, and it will be comparable to what others, who are 
putting in crops, are getting in return for their crop insurance. 
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when this year’s budget came out, and we all know 
that this government spent about 700 million more than they 
took in, but on top of that, they made cuts to the Agriculture 
budget in Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, and I think farmers are beginning to 
wonder is that why this government’s not willing to put their 
$10 an acre in place on top of the other programs that are out 
there. The need is the same as it was last year. There’s no 
disaster plan in place. And from my understanding, that 
minister is one of the main ones that’s dragging the disaster 
plan from being put in place because he won’t get to the table 
and honestly negotiate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So will the minister answer us one way or the other? Is he not 
putting $10 an acre in because they cut the Ag budget, or is he 
not putting money in because he doesn’t value our farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite is obviously very ignorant about what has happened, 
Mr. Speaker. He simply does not know the work that has gone 
on in this field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no dragging of feet. Mr. Speaker, 
we have clearly looked at this issue, and we have provided 
support and will continue to provide support through the 
structure in the system. And if he doesn’t know about it, that’s 
no reason to get up here and cast innuendo on this side of the 
House or on this member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have worked hard to make sure where there is need that we 
put that support in place. And we have worked hard to press the 
federal government to put their proportional support in place. 
Mr. Speaker, this government is in front of the issue, and we are 
making sure that the needs are met. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling responses to written questions 1,307 through 
1,316 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,307 to 1,316 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, prior to making my remarks 
for second reading on Bill 68, I would ask leave of the House to 
make introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there are several guests who 
are with us today in the gallery and on the floor — in your 
gallery and on the floor, Mr. Speaker, — who take significant 
interest in the workings of the committee and also the 
development of the legislation that’s before us. 
 
I’d like to introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you 
to all members of the House. I would ask that they would just 
simply give a wave when I acknowledge them by name, and 
then we can welcome them all together when I’ve introduced 
them all. 
 
First of all I’d like to introduce three members of the minister’s 
advisory committee on the status of the artist, and here together 
with us are the Chair, Barbara Young, Patrick Close from 
CARFAC Saskatchewan [Canadian Artists Representation le 
front des artistes canadiens Saskatchewan Inc.] and Allen 
Lefebvre. 
 
Here as well from the Saskatchewan Arts Board is the executive 
assistant for legislative services and access and privacy officer, 
Sandi Desjarlais; and Sabrina Cataldo, who is communications 
strategist for the Arts Board. From SaskMusic is the executive 
director, Noreen Neu, and from the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance 
are the executive director, Marnie Gladwell, as well as Sheila 
Roberts, the consultant researcher on status issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say thanks to the many organizations 
from the cultural sector who have come here for this second 
reading, and the guests in the gallery and the floor are here to 
represent a wide range of the arts and culture sector. I want to 

particularly acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the contributions of the 
minister’s advisory committee on the status of the artist. It was 
their vision and sustained effort that have been instrumental in 
laying the groundwork for the Bill. I would ask all hon. 
members to join together to ask, to say welcome to these 
prominent representatives of the arts and culture sector here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, having introduced our 
guests, I am pleased to take my place today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 68, The Status of the Artist Act, 2007. Mr. 
Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
making life better for Saskatchewan artists and to ensuring 
artists can build and maintain viable careers right here in 
Saskatchewan. A thriving arts community is essential to our 
high quality of life in Saskatchewan. It is also important that 
individual artists have access to the supports that acknowledge 
their contribution to the provincial economy. 
 
The ministerial advisory committee on the status of the artist 
has done some very thoughtful work in support of artists and 
the arts sector. The result of the committee’s work was a 
comprehensive strategic plan to improve the living and working 
conditions of the artists, and I deeply appreciated that work 
when it was presented to me some many months ago. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have adopted the committee’s 
recommendations as our plan of action for artists. We see this 
as a multi-year process. The one element of this plan requires 
legislative changes, legislative changes relating to individual 
contracts and artists’ access to collective bargaining — these 
both for professional artists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last fall I introduced Bill 40, The Status of the Artist 
Amendment Act, 2006, and I introduced it for the first reading. 
Simultaneously I referred the Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services for public hearings and I would like to thank 
the Chair and the members of the committee for the good work 
they did in providing access to those with an interest and vested 
interest in the arts and culture sector to bring their comments 
forward and to put them on the public record. 
 
I asked the committee to review the proposed Bill as well as to 
discuss several matters related to collective bargaining for 
professional artists. I’m pleased today to give second reading 
then to The Status of the Artist Act, 2007. This statute is based 
on proposals recommended by the ministerial advisory 
committee on the status of the artist, and by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. With this new legislation, 
Saskatchewan becomes only the second province in Canada to 
provide self-employed professional artists access to collective 
bargaining mechanisms and processes. As I’ve said, this 
legislation introduces the model of professional relations where 
artists are able to engage in collective bargaining with engagers. 
 
Some of you may be aware that there is a federal model of 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

professional relations for artists. And rather than reinvent the 
wheel, we have chosen to model a system here in Saskatchewan 
after that federal system. The system will provide for the 
negotiation of scale agreements, scale agreements; agreements 
that lay out the minimum terms by which an artist can be 
engaged — not the maximum, but the minimum. Artists will be 
free to negotiate individually for contracts above these scale 
agreements, above these terms. 
 
The system will be one based on sectors, generally defined by 
artistic disciplines. However based on the advice given to us by 
both the minister’s advisory committee and the Standing 
Committee on Human Services, there are also some distinct 
differences. Artists’ associations wishing to pursue the 
negotiation of scale agreements will be required to provide 
written evidence of support from their members when applying 
to represent a sector. Therefore artists themselves — artists 
themselves — will determine when and under what 
circumstances they will engage in collective bargaining. While 
the system is defined by sectors, Mr. Speaker, the negotiation of 
scale agreements will take place between artists’ associations 
and engagers’ associations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation appoints the Saskatchewan Labour 
Relations Board as the regulatory body for professional 
relations in the arts in Saskatchewan. The expertise of the board 
will greatly benefit participants in this new system of 
professional relations. The legislation also includes a 
requirement that an engager, when retaining the services of a 
professional artist, enter into a written contract with that artist. 
Without documentation, the contract is difficult to enforce. 
Written contracts provide a measure of security for artists, and 
that is important. 
 
Last fall I made a commitment to artists that I would have this 
Bill considered by the legislature in this spring session. Because 
of the complexity of the proposed Bill, there was not enough 
time to translate it and still introduce the Bill in this spring 
session. I have chosen to propose the repeal of the current status 
of the artist Act, Bill 40, a bilingual statute, and table a new 
status of the artist Act, 2007, a unilingual statute. At the first 
opportunity I will table an amendment to this Bill to make it 
again into a bilingual statute. 
 
This Act is one more step in our continuing efforts to strengthen 
the arts sector, bringing increased diversity and vibrancy to our 
province’s quality of life. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
accordingly and with great pride I move second reading of Bill 
No. 68, The Status of the Artist Act, 2007. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 68, The Status of the Artist 
Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to members. I’m 
pleased to join with our minister today in welcoming the 
individuals who have worked tirelessly for all sectors of the 
artists in our province, especially since the minister has 
introduced Bill 40 last fall. On behalf of the official opposition, 
we commend all of you for your commitment to artists and your 
commitment to enhance the lives of artists in Saskatchewan. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Draude: — I have learned a lot about the lives of artists in 
the number of years since I was given the opportunity to 
shadow the minister of arts and culture, and especially more 
since we’ve had the introduction of the Bill last fall. We’ve had 
the opportunity to focus on the lives of artists, and I can tell all 
members of the legislature that we’re in unanimous agreement 
that many if not all of the artists in Saskatchewan have a 
standard of living that is not acceptable. 
 
The minister’s own committee put forward many, many 
recommendations that would hopefully improve the lives of 
artists, and we spent hours in committee listening to testimony 
from individuals in all the sectors. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We were disappointed with the original Bill, that the Bill only 
talked about collective bargaining and the other side of the issue 
— the side that would talk about marketing and improving the 
economic atmosphere in the province and the number of people 
who are living here and therefore capable of buying the many 
works of arts or listening to our artists — was not addressed. 
 
The process that the minister used in putting forward the Bill, 
allowing individuals to put forward their ideas, was very useful. 
As a committee, it didn’t allow us to come to a consensus on 
this particular Bill but it did allow us to learn a lot about the 
needs and concerns of people in the artistic sector in our 
province. 
 
The Bill that was given to the Assembly last sitting day is a new 
Bill. It’s not Bill No. 40 that was withdrawn as the minister just 
stated. And the committee, in camera, we had many hours of 
discussion over the Bill that the artists had spoken to us about. 
As much as I care and my colleagues care, none of us are artists 
or none of us are engagers on the big scale. 
 
We’ve had the opportunity to send the Bill that the minister 
brought into the House last Friday to people who were 
involved, and we’re looking forward with much enthusiasm to 
hearing back from them in an expedient manner. The second 
reading process is well known to most members of the artists’ 
community and members in this House. Once the opposition 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

has heard from those involved, we look forward to discussions 
in this legislature on the status of the artist in Saskatchewan. 
And at this time, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
68 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join in on the debate, the adjourned debate of Bill 
No. 31, An Act to amend The Regional Health Services Act. 
This Bill has been before this House in adjourned debates for 
quite a length of time. It was introduced in the fall session. It 
was a specified Bill that could be carried over and has gone 
through this spring sitting. 
 
And you know, it’s interesting. There’s been quite a long period 
of time where stakeholders, I know, have been raising their 
concerns with the Bill. And after that length of time that we’ve 
had from the fall through all winter through this spring session, 
we’re still hearing the same concerns. They haven’t been sorted 
out or rectified on behalf of the stakeholders, for the 
stakeholders. Mr. Speaker, there is still some huge concern 
regarding this Bill moving forward. And I have just recently 
spoke to a couple of those stakeholders and certainly understand 
the concern that they may have. 
 
Last week when this Bill . . . And, you know, the issues are the 
same. They are the same from when this Bill was introduced in 
the fall because this Bill talks about some issues that were in a 
previous Bill, and that Bill had been pulled. It was never pushed 
through the House. It was never passed because there were such 
concerns with that piece of legislation — The Ambulance Act. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there have been changes in this regional 
health services Act that mirror those same concerns that caused, 
you know, these stakeholders to have huge concerns. 
 
It’s interesting that they, even though they didn’t pursue it, I 
guess it would have been about a year or so ago, they’ve 
reintroduced it in this Act to make those changes. And it comes 
up with the same number of concerns. So it has been ongoing, 
those concerns. They’re legitimate, and the government has 
failed to deal with them. The member from Cypress Hills last 
week spoke to this Bill and went over the concerns that the 

stakeholders have and really did identify them very, very well. 
 
There are some positive parts to the Bill, though. First of all I 
should acknowledge that. The Provincial Auditor has pointed 
out that the formal service agreements need to be in place with 
service providers. That’s not the issue. It’s later on in the Act. 
 
Now we certainly don’t disagree with the auditor. And we 
believe that there needs to be service agreements put in place, 
and those are extremely important. However there are parts of 
the Bill that go past that, and they specify some time frames that 
will just not sit well with service providers. 
 
And the first one is the fact that a one-year notice can be given 
without cause to terminate a contract or for a contract not to be 
re-signed. Now as I said, the member from Cypress Hills talked 
about this very, very well and went through the problems that 
would have as a business owner knowing that you could have 
your contract terminated within a year. But my question is — 
and what I still haven’t heard a answer for it — is, why does the 
government want to put these in place? 
 
I agree that there needs to be agreements, service agreements, 
put into place. But why are they specifying that only a one-year 
notice needs to be given? The other huge problem area is that, 
you know, if there are some issues with a provider, for example, 
a 14-day notice to stop payment, to cease payments is required. 
That’s hugely problematic for the service provider. And my 
question is, why do they want these put into place? It really 
seems like it’s a hammer hanging over the head of these 
contractors, for example. 
 
And the one that comes to mind and the one that I’ve talked to 
is the ambulance operators through their organization of 
SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 
Association]. Why does the government want to have the 
hammer hanging over their head? Has there been a lot of 
problems with the ambulance services provided — be it public 
or private but mainly private in this situation? Has there been a 
lot of problems with the private service providers in the 
ambulance area over the last number of years? And I’d be very 
interested in hearing the government’s rationale as to why they 
need this. 
 
I have been the Health critic for two years and I haven’t had 
really too many concerns. I mean, the concern may be when a 
person is sent a bill after using an ambulance that they maybe 
didn’t realize or they don’t have insurance or whatever. There 
are those concerns. But those aren’t the concerns that are being 
addressed in this Bill. 
 
And I can’t speak for the member from Melfort who was the 
critic for five years prior to myself becoming critic, but I don’t 
remember there being a lot of concerns that can’t be worked out 
on a mutually agreed basis with our private ambulance 
operators. 
 
And yet this is the second time in my memory that the 
government has come forward with amendments to the Act to 
try and put these provisions in place. And it really does seem 
like a hammer. That’s what they’re saying: it’s like a hammer 
hanging over our head. It’s going far too far, way too far. If 
there are problems — for example the service is not complying 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

— they need to improve. 
 
I mean there is nobody in the ambulance business that wants to 
see that. There’s lots of peer pressure, I’m sure, within the 
private providers and through SEMSA to make sure operators 
are following along and providing proper services. There is no 
one in the province that wants to see an operator not doing the 
job that they’re supposed to be doing. 
 
But to come in with an Act like this and with a hammer like 
this, that if they are not providing the proper services, the 
government can cease payment within 14 days, it doesn’t give 
them time, you know, if they are having issues, to get that 
worked out. And I know the ambulance operators have talked to 
people in the department and just on a casual basis they say, yes 
but we won’t be using . . . I don’t think we’d ever have to use 
that. That seems, yes, a little severe but, you know, I can’t see 
us ever implementing it. Well if you’re not going to implement 
it, why are you putting it into the legislation? It is a threat 
hanging over their heads. 
 
It’s the same as the one-year termination of a contract. They 
say, oh I can’t see . . . And the evaluation of companies. Well I 
can’t see health authorities wanting to just assume companies 
. . . But we would like to have that in there anyway. Well if you 
have that, those clauses put in the Act and you don’t plan on 
using them, I’d far rather see them dropped from the Act. And I 
would ask the minister as we move this Bill forward to 
seriously look at that, to seriously look at dropping section 36.1 
from the Act that talks about compensation for termination or 
non-renewal of a written agreement — dropping that section 
from the Act because that is the issue that ambulance operators 
are having a huge problem with. The evaluation of a business 
under fair market value is a huge concern because they’re only 
given the 12-month contract. 
 
The other area is section 37, the cessation of payment if a 
dispute arises. Now I don’t know — I’ve been here long enough 
I should know, but I don’t know — all the implications of, all 
the implications of dropping those two sections of the Act, of 
dropping 36.1 and also 37. 
 
Because if the minister would say that yes we can drop those; 
we don’t need to have that hammer hanging overtop of private 
operators; we could drop those — and it still addresses the 
concerns that the auditor has put forward — we would strongly 
agree with that. 
 
I haven’t heard the department or the minister’s point of view as 
to why they have to have those sections in this Act. But if it’s 
because operators are not doing the work that they’re supposed 
to be doing, I believe there are other ways to deal with those 
operators — not having the heavy hand or the hammer, as I’ve 
referred to it, hanging over their head. 
 
As I said, there are many sections, many pieces in this Act that 
we agree with that follows along with the auditor’s 
recommendations. But there are problem areas and those are the 
two problems areas. The member from Cypress Hills, as I said 
last week, outlined why those are problems. 
 
But my biggest question again and again — and I still haven’t 
had an answer; I still can’t seem to get it through my mind — is 

why the government wants to put these onerous pieces of 
legislation into force. Because I don’t see it doing any good for 
the whole industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving this Bill to committee, and at 
that time I’m certainly going to be spending a lot of time . . . 
And I would ask the minister, who is listening intently — he’s 
nodding at least, he’s listening intently — that I would ask the 
minister to look at those two pieces in the Act and see what the 
ramifications are if they just dropped those two sections. The 
Act can go through as it is, but those two sections are extremely 
problematic. And I’ll be interested to know what the minister 
has to say. 
 
Are those two amendments to the Act, section 36.1 and section 
37, targeting something other than ambulance operators? 
Because what I see of that is it really is targeted towards the 
ambulance operators. Now if it’s also targeted to meet some 
other private contractors, I’d be very interested to know that 
because right now it looks like the only people that these two 
sections will affect will be the operators, the private operators in 
our province. And if that’s the case, I can’t see any problem 
with dropping them. 
 
We’ve gone through this before in this House with legislation 
that was introduced, and the minister at that time decided — or 
maybe the House Leader at that time decided — to pull the Bill. 
And it wasn’t then put through to committee or then of course 
passed through the process to third reading and then to 
proclamation. 
 
But it seems like they’re bent on putting this through. And so 
I’ll be very interested to ask the minister why specifically 
ambulance operators, if that’s what these two amendments are 
targeting. If they’re targeting other private contractors, I’d be 
very interested in knowing that. But if it’s just targeting 
ambulance operators, then I would love for him to have the 
evidence of all the problems they’ve had in that industry that 
calls on a government to put such a heavy-handed approach into 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I will move this Bill to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 31, The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 31, The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 
(No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 31 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 31 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 59 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill makes some very significant changes to the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, and particularly in how the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation relates to the legislature in 
that sense of, is it a Treasury Board Crown — which it is today 
— and how it reports to the legislature, or should it be a CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], a Crown 
Investments Corporation Crown, which would report to the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations but whose money 
would go first through CIC rather than going directly into the 
general funds of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And that’s a significant change, Mr. Speaker. And I guess in 
listening to the minister’s comments on this particular Bill, 
there was no real good explanation as to why that was a 
desirable thing to do. What was the benefits to Saskatchewan of 
doing that? There was certainly some discussion, or when you 
read through the Bill you see some opportunities for employees. 
But while it may be good for individual employees there, what 
good is it to the province of Saskatchewan? What benefit does 
making this change give to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
From what I can see in reading the Bill and listening to the 
members, the minister’s comments, there was no clear evidence 
given as to why there was a benefit to Saskatchewan . He had 
some opinions on why it might benefit, but no clear evidence 
that would substantiate making a major change like this. What 
benefit is it to the province of Saskatchewan if the net income 
of the Gaming Corporation comes directly to the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund]? What is the benefit to Saskatchewan of those 
funds being filtered through CIC? 
 
If they come to the General Revenue Fund, they go into the, 
basically into the tax revenues collected by government, and 
government then distributes them for whatever purpose 
government designs — the General Revenue Fund money for 

hospitals, health care, highways, social services, whatever the 
case may be — the general expenses of government. If it goes 
through CIC, then those revenues can be utilized for other 
measures before it gets into the General Revenue Fund through 
the issuance of a dividend by CIC. 
 
So what it can mean is that the money coming from the Gaming 
Corporation could be utilized in one of the other Crown 
corporations as a subsidy to the other Crown corporations. We 
saw that a couple of years ago where CIC provided a $31 
million subsidy to SaskWater. So the money from gaming could 
be going to fund SaskWater Corporation. It could be going to 
fund expansion of the grain car fleet. Now the government is 
going to paint a number of the grain cars green, so money for 
gaming could be going to that rather than going into the General 
Revenue Fund to be utilized for the construction of highways, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the government has not presented a good argument as to 
why this change needs to happen, to go from a Treasury Board 
Crown to a CIC corporation, a subsidiary of CIC. So I think 
there is some explanations there that the government needs to 
put forward as to what benefit is there to Saskatchewan. 
 
When you read through the Bill, there’s a number of other 
issues, Mr. Speaker, as well. By making this change, it allows 
the corporation to change its head office to anywhere else in 
Saskatchewan. So does that mean that the government is 
contemplating moving the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
head office out of Regina to some other location in 
Saskatchewan? It’s not clear, but it certainly makes that 
opportunity available to the government to make that kind of a 
move. 
 
And is that going to be of benefit to the employees, or is that 
going to be an impediment to the employees that are already 
employed at the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation? Is that a 
benefit or an impediment to the landowner . . . excuse me, the 
property owner where they’re renting space, be it the Crown 
itself through SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation] — SPM [Saskatchewan Property Management] 
now — or some other agency, Mr. Speaker? And if it moves, 
then who benefits? 
 
There’s some questions there that the government hasn’t even 
addressed at all in the minister’s statement on this particular 
issue. So I think that’s an issue that needs to be brought 
forward. It needs to be clarified. 
 
There are also some other issues in this particular Bill in 
relationship to the Gaming Corporation that I think the 
government needs to give some very clear explanations on. And 
one of it deals with the officers and employees that not . . . and 
the Bill itself says, notwithstanding The Public Service Act. 
And then they go on to list some things that they can make 
changes to their compensation. They can make . . . their 
remunerations. They can make changes to their pension 
benefits. All of this can be outside of The Public Service Act. 
 
Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why are these employees either 
being advantaged or disadvantaged, as the case may be, in the 
changes that would be available to the Gaming Corporation that 
are not available to other sectors of the government, Mr. 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2007 

Speaker? Why are they being given an exemption from The 
Public Service Act in terms of remuneration or in terms of 
pension benefits, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It also says that the corporation can appoint or engage any 
professional, administrative, technical, or clerical personnel that 
it requires. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would assume that as a Crown 
corporation, Sask Gaming Corporation already has that ability. 
Obviously they have employees. They have employees in the 
necessary technical areas. They have employees that understand 
the gaming industry and the mechanics of the gaming industry. 
They have professionals when it comes to accounting and to 
law, to legal matters. They have administrative personnel. So 
why does this need to change? Again I think the minister needs 
to be able to explain why this is included in the Act and who 
benefits. Why is this in there? 
 
It also gives the corporation the ability — notwithstanding The 
Public Service Act — to give an exemption to determine the 
salaries and remunerations of the personnel appointed, 
appointed, or engaged, Mr. Speaker, in relationship to clause (a) 
which is the appointment or engagement of any professional, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill begs very significant answers from this 
government as to what they’re changing and why they’re 
changing it, and what’s the rationale for making those changes, 
Mr. Speaker, because clearly the Bill itself and the explanatory 
notes that the government provided with this piece of legislation 
do not provide those answers. 
 
It also goes on, Mr. Speaker, in our other section, to talk about 
the gaming corporation’s ability to participate in joint or other 
ventures with any corporate body, organization, partnership, 
firm, or entity. Well, Mr. Speaker, up until this point in time, 
we’ve really only had two entities in the gaming industry in 
Saskatchewan. We have the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
on one hand, and we have SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority] on the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s already a partnership agreement there. There’s 
arrangements between those two entities in place for . . . 
particularly dealing with the net returns on gaming from either 
entity. But does this envision, Mr. Speaker, allowing now more 
parties to come into gaming in the province of Saskatchewan? 
Does this allow MGM or Harrah’s or any of the other major 
syndicates, gaming syndicates, to enter into the province and 
now become owner-operators of casinos in this province in 
partnership with the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation? 
 
And if you think back to the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] days, partnerships become a 
very loose definition of arrangements that this government is 
prepared to make with corporate entities. It seems like, if you 
go back to SPUDCO, that there was a 50/50 relationship within 
the partnership. And for six years, that was the assumption 
made by everyone in this Assembly until we found out that it 
was actually . . . the share values of these corporations, I 
believe, was $149 by government and $1 by the other corporate 
entity or that kind of a ratio anyways. 
 
So when you’re talking about partnerships or when you’re 
talking about joint ventures with other entities, it really brings 

into question, Mr. Speaker, exactly what the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation may be entering into —what kind of 
relationship and a relationship with what entities, with whom, 
Mr. Speaker? Because I believe there’s a huge gaming industry 
around the globe, and not all of them would be welcome in 
Saskatchewan in my opinion. So I think the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation, in entering into ventures with outside 
entities, needs to be extremely careful. And under the current 
system, that was not available. You had two entities, 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and SIGA, that were active 
in this province, and it was limited to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill also talks about, and the government talks about, the 
acquisitions and disposals of property with Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation, and this line bothers me, Mr. Speaker. It 
says, “(a) acquire, by any means.” Acquire by any means, Mr. 
Speaker. Exactly what does that mean? Any means seems very 
ominous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this province under the NDP, we have seen this government 
acquire corporate entities by any means of nationalization and 
expropriation. Does that mean that the government is 
envisioning expropriation of property at some point in time? 
Are they going to invite partners? Are they going to invite joint 
ventures into the province and then turn around and expropriate 
them, nationalize the industry, Mr. Speaker? That’s going to be 
encouraging for people looking to invest in Saskatchewan if 
that’s what the government’s interest in this particular area is. 
 
I think that’s a very dangerous wording in this particular piece 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker; “acquire, by any means” I think has 
very dire consequences for investment in Saskatchewan if those 
particular words are allowed to remain in this particular Bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other issues that need to be 
dealt with on this particular Bill. 
 
When it talks about the amounts payable to the General 
Revenue Fund, previously the net revenues of the Gaming 
Corporation were returned to the GRF, the General Revenue 
Fund. Once it becomes a CIC Crown, that will no longer take 
place. Rather the money will be passed on to CIC, and CIC will 
make a determination then whether or not any of that revenue is 
actually passed forward on to the government in the 
Consolidated Fund through their dividend payments. So there 
will be no direct transfers of money, and some of that money 
may be utilized for other purposes within in CIC, such as 
capital investment perhaps through the Victoria Capital 
corporation that receives money from CIC for investments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think there’s a number of areas in this Bill that need to be 
very seriously reviewed by the government, and to give them 
the opportunity to do that, Mr. Speaker, we will allow this Bill 
to pass on to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister Responsible for Gaming that Bill 
No. 59, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 



May 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister Responsible for 
Gaming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Gaming that Bill No. 59 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 59 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the standing committees on Human Services, 
Crown and Central Agencies, and Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1518 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1527 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1528 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women of Distinction Awards  
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1519 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 National Nursing Week 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Nurses Show Dedication Despite Workplace Problems 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Congratulations to Northern Nursing Graduates 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
 Saskatoon Business College Centennial 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
 Broadcaster’s Comments 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1521 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 School Closures 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
 Caucus Personnel and Personal Information 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1523 
 Flooding at Fishing Lake 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
 Flooding Disaster Assistance for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1525 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1527 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1527 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1528 
 
 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1529 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1531 
 Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1531 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1533 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


