




















































Hansard: December 11, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 2A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 11 

 December 11, 2007 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 

The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 

of the Legislative Assembly has received, from the Chief 

Electoral Officer, a certificate of the election and return of 

Jeremy Harrison as a member for the constituency of Meadow 

Lake. I hereby table the return of the writ. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 

you Jeremy Harrison, member for the constituency of Meadow 

Lake, who has taken the oath and signed the roll and now 

claims his right to take a seat. 

 

The Speaker: — Mr. Harrison, as you take your rightful place 

in this Legislative Assembly, I am sure that your time here will 

be one that serves as a record of honour to yourself and your 

constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 

hon. member take his seat. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just give notice to fellow 

members in the Assembly that, after some initial introductions, 

I’ll be asking leave for an extended and special introduction. 

But before I do that, it’s a pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly some very special 

guests who have joined us in the Speaker’s gallery. 

Accompanied by Amy Boudreau of the protocol office is His 

Excellency Guillermo Russo Checa, the ambassador to Canada 

from Peru. And he’s joined by his son, Mr. Guillermo Russo 

Ismodes. 

 

These gentlemen have been in our province, the first official 

visit of His Excellency to the province of Saskatchewan, now 

for . . . This is the second day. Yesterday they were in 

Saskatoon where they toured the University of Saskatchewan. 

They were touring the VIDO [Vaccine and Infectious Disease 

Organization] centre as well as the synchrotron and talking 

about innovation and agriculture. 

 

This morning I had the great pleasure of meeting with the 

ambassador here in the Legislative Assembly where we talked 

about the trading relationship between our two countries, the 

fact that there’s a free trade agreement currently under 

negotiation, near complete, between Canada and Peru — about 

the fact that $73 million worth of trade from Saskatchewan 

finds its way to Peru. And we also talked about synergies and 

potential partnerships as this country seeks to further develop 

mining and make continued progress in what is already a very 

robust agricultural sector. 

 

So I want to thank the ambassador for coming to our province, 

for initiating something I think will be a lasting and fruitful 

partnership on a number of issues. And I’d ask all members of 

the Assembly to join with me in welcoming him and his son to 

the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would want to join 

with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in 

welcoming His Excellency and his son to the province of 

Saskatchewan. We hope that your visit will further strengthen 

the ties between our great province and your great nation. We 

look forward to even a stronger relationship as the result of the 

work that you’re doing with government and with all of the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. Welcome on behalf of the official 

opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, another introduction if I may. 

Joining us as well in the Speaker’s gallery is a friend of mine 

from way back in my broadcasting days, a former resident of 

the province, a former resident of Swift Current, and currently 

the play-by-play voice of the Kelowna Rockets in the BC 

[British Columbia] division of the WHL [Western Hockey 

League]. His name is Regan Bartel. He’s been a friend for a 

long time. And I want to welcome him, together with his old 

colour man, my assistant Everett Hindley, who’s also in the 

Assembly. So welcome to these two gentlemen. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly to 

make a special but extended introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier asked for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the members for that leave. Tomorrow people are going to be 

gathering in the city of Regina to celebrate the life of a 

remarkable young man in Chris Knox. 

 

Shortly after being diagnosed with terminal cancer, Chris 

expressed a desire to attend a Riders’ Labour Day classic. And 

of course, a lot of people went to a lot of work to make that 

happen for Chris, including the Saskatchewan Roughrider 

football team. Following the game, he was invited to the team’s 

locker room and there was a bond between Chris and the Riders 

— and I think perhaps the whole province — that was born on 

that occasion with the attendant coverage in the media that 

occurred. 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

When the Riders won the western final against British 

Columbia, the Lions, there was a small group of very dedicated 

people, amazingly dedicated people, who went to work on 

behalf of Chris. They didn’t know him, by the way. They were 

strangers to Chris, but certainly had read his story and knew a 

bit about him. They thought he should go to the Grey Cup and 

so, it seems, did everyone else who heard them initially on a 

talk radio show — I think it was the Drew Remenda show — 

heard this suggestion being made and the province literally 

rallied, the Rider nation rallied behind the cause. 

 

And so joining us in our gallery today, Mr. Speaker, are two 

very, very special visitors that represent everything that is good 

about our great province. They were the driving force behind 

that effort and I want to introduce them here to the Assembly 

today and say remarks, but as I introduce them if they would 

stand, I’d appreciate that. Trevor Lowey is here. He is a 

paramedic from Kelvington and was key in this effort as was 

Kelly Schermann, who teaches in Nokomis but is a resident of 

Strasbourg. And maybe just before I continue, we should just 

give them a warm welcome to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — What began as an effort to get Chris to the 

football game though grew into a much, much, much bigger 

effort. Trevor and Kelly asked for help for their plan and in true 

Saskatchewan fashion the people of the province responded and 

within a few hours of getting the word out, they had raised 

about $12,000 with more coming in. There was substantial 

corporate donations we should acknowledge this afternoon from 

Greystone Managed Investments, from Co-operators, from 

Cameco, from the Four Seasons Sports Palace, and from 

Transwest Air. 

 

There was such a lot of money raised and goodwill raised for 

this, by the way, that it allowed Trevor and Kelly to organize a 

Grey Cup trip for 10 other young cancer patients from the 

province of Saskatchewan, together with family members and 

the attendant personnel that was needed for them to go to the 

trip. And one of those very young, brave Saskatchewan 

individuals is here and I’d ask the Assembly to welcome 

Breann Clarke to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There are other guests I’d like to introduce 

before I go on and I hope I’m not going to miss everyone. I 

know some had to leave for another appointment, but Breann’s 

mom, Sherri, is here. Trevor’s wife, Tammy, is here and Larry 

Hart is here, who is the father of Brennan, another of the 

patients that got to go. And we also want to welcome all of 

them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Through the efforts of Trevor and Kelly 

they got to enjoy a game and most importantly, at least for that 

game, that particular weekend, they got to enjoy a win. And the 

Riders invited them down onto the surface, playing surface of 

the Rogers Centre and met all of the patients, met the young 

people. And many will know that after the Grey Cup was won, 

the Riders also made a point of bringing that grail up to Chris’s 

room so that — and people will have seen that picture — so that 

he could have his time with the Grey Cup. 

 

I want to just read something into the record if I can. It’s 

something that Trevor wrote recently that I think best expresses 

the nature of these individuals that have done this. He wrote 

this: 

 

Kelly and I have discovered over the past couple of weeks 

that our efforts have reached much farther than our 

intended targets. We had hopes of providing an experience 

for the children that they may never have the opportunity 

again to realize. 

 

These families who have children that are terminally ill 

will treasure every happy moment they have been able to 

share. 

 

Kelly and I are fortunate to have been given the glorious 

opportunity to be able to share in some small part, these 

memories. 

 

They there were being thankful for the opportunity to do what 

they did. Pretty amazing, Mr. Speaker. I had a chance to meet 

with them briefly beforehand, and the Riders had sent over 

some gifts that they wanted our visitors to have today. But on 

behalf of a grateful province, thank you for demonstrating what 

Saskatchewan heart is all about, and welcome to your 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to extend 

thanks to the Premier for welcoming these guests to our 

Chamber, and with the Premier to extend our deep thanks to the 

significant efforts that you made to make these dreams come 

true for victims of cancer and patients of cancer. 

 

I want to take this opportunity — just since we have this chance 

— to thank the Premier for his efforts. We know he was 

involved. And we would want to thank the Premier for his 

efforts in ensuring that Chris Knox and the others had the 

opportunity to be at the Grey Cup. Many of us wished we 

could’ve been there, and we thank you for making it possible 

for some to be that otherwise couldn’t have been. And so we 

thank you, Mr. Premier, and we thank those who work so hard 

in our province and in our communities to make these dreams 

come true. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great honour to introduce a group of people from Weyburn 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 14 

students from the Southeast Regional College, 14 students of 

the adult basic education program, and they’re here to watch the 

activities of the proceedings of the House and then I’ll be 

meeting with them later on. And also with them, accompanying 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

them, are their teachers, Anna Fish and Cheryl Popplestone. 

 

[13:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that Ms. Fish has a 

practice during election campaigns of allowing candidates to 

come speak to their students, and I’ve had the privilege of doing 

so over the last year and half, twice. And with our government 

introducing fixed election dates, I sure hope it’s not another 

four years that I’ll have to wait to visit with these students. And 

so I would like all members to welcome them to their Assembly 

today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on to statements by 

members, I would just like to say to the guests in the Assembly, 

we’re pleased that you’re here, and you’re welcome to be here 

as observers. We’re pleased to have you come in, but we ask 

you not to participate to the clapping of hands or 

acknowledgement of hands. Just a reminder of the procedure of 

the Assembly. But thank you so much for coming and joining 

us. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Thank You to Civil Servants During Transition 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, following the recent provincial election this 

building was a flurry of activity. With the election of a new 

government, many tasks had to be completed within a very 

short time period. Entire offices were packed up and moved; 

new offices were established; new computers and phone 

numbers were set up — just to name a few of those tasks. 

 

As the head of this government’s transition process, I would 

like to take a moment to thank the many civil servants within 

this building and outside of this building who worked so hard to 

make the transition as smooth as possible. I know that in the 

first few weeks of this government, many of our civil servants 

put in long hours and often worked late into the night and on 

weekends. 

 

On behalf of our new government, I would personally like to 

thank Steve Bata and his team at Government Services here in 

the building for all the long hours they put in to the physical 

move of both government and opposition offices. I would also 

like to thank staff at ITO [Information Technology Office], 

corporate services, and SaskTel for their work in ensuring all 

new offices were equipped and connected. I know that much of 

this work continues. Finally, I would like to thank all other civil 

servants in all ministries and branches of government for 

helping to ensure the transition is as smooth as possible. 

 

It is an honour to serve the people of Saskatchewan alongside 

all of you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

Violence Against Women 

 

Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am saddened to stand in the 

Assembly today and remember that almost 20 years ago on 

December 6, 14 young Canadian women were murdered simply 

because they were women. Mr. Speaker, I am saddened today 

because since that time more Canadian women have been killed 

or murdered simply because they are women. I am saddened 

today because I know that over the years to come we’ll hear of 

more Canadian women who will die simply because they are 

women. I am especially saddened that so many of these women 

will be First Nations or Métis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge the good work that was done by 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] government and the First 

Nations and Métis leadership to address the causes of violence 

against Aboriginal women. We must continue to address the 

conditions that foster violence, poverty, access to education, 

safe shelters for women and their children, family supports, 

social and economic supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must continue the work to deal with the root 

causes and the inequalities that exist in our society. We must do 

better to create a safer and healthier future for women and their 

children. Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us must do our 

part to eradicate violence from our society. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Asia-Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 

Canada and the province of Saskatchewan announced on Friday 

that as part of the Asia-Pacific gateway and corridor initiative, 

the Government of Canada will contribute up to 27 million to a 

proposed strategic infrastructure project estimated at 93 million. 

This project will benefit Regina and all of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, through improved traffic flow and enhanced 

transportation safety and security. 

 

This infrastructure project consists of building a new Canadian 

Pacific Railway intermodal facility west of Regina right in my 

riding of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, the upgrading of Pinkie 

Road connecting to Highways No. 1 and 11 — both highway 

system routes — and connecting to the city of Regina road 

network which will provide direct access for international trade 

traffic to this facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the upgraded road and rail grade crossings will 

also result in environmental benefits of reduced congestion and 

fewer vehicle emissions. Overall, Mr. Speaker, this project will 

improve Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. Projects like this are 

made possible when all levels of government work together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

Human Rights Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, December 10, was 

Human Rights Day and marked the launch of a year-long 

campaign leading up to the celebration of the 60th anniversary 

of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 

or UDHR. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the UDHR is extraordinarily significant, that it’s 

the first international document to recognize that all human 

beings have fundamental rights and freedoms. The theme of the 

campaign is Dignity and Justice For All of Us, and it is about 

reinforcing the declaration not as a luxury or wish list, but as a 

commitment to realizing the ideals of universal dignity and 

justice to which the declaration speaks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan occupies a special place in the 

development of Canadian human rights. This year marks the 

60th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. In 1947 

under the leadership of the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation] premier, Tommy Douglas, this province introduced 

The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act, the first general human 

rights Act in North America. Saskatchewan’s Bill of Rights 

predated the Canadian Bill of Rights by some 13 years and is 

seen as the first step towards the 1982 Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can be proud of the history of human rights 

law in Saskatchewan, but there is still much more to do. Human 

Rights Day reminds us of the need to embrace our neighbours 

regardless of their faith or race, and remember that we all have 

the right to be treated with fairness and respect. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatoon Citizens Save a Life 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

recognize four outstanding Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Last week on Friday morning in Saskatoon a city bus driver, 

Diana Thompson, stopped at a bus shelter to pick up a 

passenger on her route. This passenger informed Ms. Thompson 

that there was a man at the stop who looked to be in very poor 

condition. The bus driver realized that she had passed this man 

on her previous circuit two and a half hours earlier. She flagged 

down another city bus driver, Chris Clarke, who radioed for an 

ambulance when she brought the man on to her bus. 

 

Two MD Ambulance paramedics, Cary Serviss and Eric 

Jelinski, arrived at the scene only minutes after receiving the 

call. The man had no pulse when they arrived. Wearing a coat 

but no hat and gloves, the man also had severe hypothermia. 

The man, who had been reported as missing earlier in the day, 

is now expected to make a full recovery. He is very lucky to be 

alive. 

 

I wish to acknowledge these four Saskatchewan citizens and 

their quick and decisive actions on December 7. They saved a 

life. On behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, I ask all 

members to thank them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Role of Opposition 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, today . . . and my 

colleagues take our place in opposition and assume our new 

role in this legislature. And to all of those who supported us and 

have given us the privilege and the responsibility of sitting in 

these benches, I want to extend our deep thanks and, Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize that they have given us a job to do. 

 

In opposition we will continue to work hard on behalf of the 

people of this province, and see to it that this new Sask Party 

government is held accountable on each and every one of their 

many, many commitments. We will put our energy and 

experience to work to ensure that the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people are represented. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the role of opposition extends 

far beyond the blaming and complaining we saw from the Sask 

Party while they were in opposition. We know that our role is to 

hold the government of the day accountable and responsible, to 

oppose those policies and initiatives that will not serve the 

interests of Saskatchewan people, and to propose substantive 

alternatives and policies that do. 

 

I can assure Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

precisely what I and this New Democratic Party caucus will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan Roughriders 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are several characteristics that unite the people of 

Saskatchewan, that define who we are — hard-working, 

hopeful, generous, determined, just to name a few. Mr. Speaker, 

we are not for the most part a superstitious lot, but the people of 

Saskatchewan were not about to take chances, especially with 

the 95th Grey Cup on the line. And so with a new government 

in place and a legion of Riderville fans with them in Toronto 

and all across Canada, our beloved Roughriders captured just 

their third Grey Cup championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And while many would point to a new 

provincial government as the turning point — because after all, 

Mr. Speaker, the Riders have never won at all under the NDP 

— most will agree that it was the new leadership at Mosaic 

Stadium, specifically the general manager, Eric Tillman, and 

head coach, Kent Austin, that finally put them over the top. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to replay how the game went. 

Seeing and hearing it once was enough for anyone’s blood 

pressure but, Mr. Speaker, when the final pages of this season 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

are written, the Roughriders 2007 Grey Cup winning season 

could be summed up by those characteristics I mentioned earlier 

— hard work, determination, hopefulness, and generosity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are proud of our 

football team not only for the winning season but for 

exemplifying the best our province has to offer. Mr. Speaker, 

congratulations to CEO [chief executive officer] Jim Hopson, 

general manager Tillman, head coach Kent Austin, and all the 

coaches, players, and Roughrider personnel on their 

championship season. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I realize we are at oral 

questions, but somehow I think I have to respond to the last 

member’s statement, you know. You know I’ve always 

believed that, I’ve always believed that what happens over there 

at Mosaic Stadium has much more to do with the players and 

the coaching staff and so on, the fans, than what happens over 

here. But all right, Mr. Speaker, if I had to take one for the 

team, I took it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, many of us have watched with 

some interest over the last several days and weeks the activities 

of this new government. So my first question is going to be to 

the member from Swift Current in receiving his first question as 

Premier of the province. Mr. Speaker, because it’s the first 

question, I’m going to make it very simple. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier today, through you, what value 

does the Premier of Saskatchewan put on the process of 

consultation, conversation, and communication with citizens, 

with the people of our province before public policy decisions 

are made and announced? What is the value that this Premier 

puts on consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and may I say to 

the Leader of the Opposition that I welcome this first question. 

 

I know one of the leading political observers in the province has 

recently written that it might take some time for the Leader of 

the Opposition to get used to his new role. It might take some 

time for me to get used to my new role as it relates to question 

period in this Assembly. And I want to assure that Leader of the 

Opposition, I want to make this assurance to him. We are going 

to work very, very hard over here to ensure that he has a very 

long time to hone his skills in opposition just as we will need 

some of that time to hone our skills in government in this 

Assembly. 

 

I will also say this in answer, in direct answer to the member’s 

question, the direct answer to the member’s question is this. 

This side of the House very much values consultation with the 

public, consultation with the voters, with the taxpayers of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I note with interest, Mr. Speaker, 

and the leader may want to note this as well, that we just had a 

consultation process — a general election on the November 7. 

We made some commitments in that election, and as a result of 

the consultation, we’re going to implement those commitments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in this case I wish that the 

Premier’s actions matched his words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a reason why the people of northern 

Saskatchewan, and particularly Prince Albert, worked for two 

years with government, with the citizens, with First Nations, 

and with Domtar to create a deal that would result in the 

reopening of the P.A. [Prince Albert] mill. They did it, Mr. 

Speaker, because the permanent closure of the P.A. mill will 

have dramatic and drastic consequences on the forestry in this 

province and on the citizens of Prince Albert and communities 

surrounding Prince Albert. 

 

[14:00] 

 

There was an independent study done, Mr. Speaker, by Meyers 

Norris Penny that tells us that the total impact of permanent mill 

closure would be over $400 million in reduced annual GDP 

[gross domestic product], over 950 million in reduced 

production, and almost 4,000 in reduced employment. 

 

The Premier’s decision to simply tear this deal up will have a 

very negative impact on many, many Saskatchewan people and 

communities. So my question to the Premier is this, Mr. 

Speaker: with whom did the Premier consult? Who did the 

Premier consult with before he decided and announced to scrap 

the deal with Domtar? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I know the people of this 

province, the people of this province remember well this 

last-minute, desperate deal — and I use quotation marks, Mr. 

Speaker, because there was no deal. 

 

This was about pulp fiction. This was about a desperate attempt 

on the part of that party, trailing in the polls, to try to get elected 

to save their political skin in Prince Albert and across the 

province. That’s what it was. It was transparent. The media saw 

through this, Mr. Speaker. I would argue as well, given the fact 

that our party actually saw that breakthrough with a brand new 

member from Prince Albert in that constituency, that the people 

of P.A. saw through it as well. 

 

Let me be very clear. This government is committed to doing 

the work necessary to get the mill reopened to ensure that our 

forestry industry is healthy. I was just talking to Domtar 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

officials this week. The minister has spoken to Domtar officials 

this week. We are going to do the work necessary. But what we 

won’t do, we will not risk up to $100 million on a fictional deal 

as a part of a desperate attempt that is driven more by politics 

than by economics. It’s cruel to the people of Prince Albert, and 

they deserve better. They’ll get better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier was 

very direct and very simple. Whom did the Premier consult with 

before he made this decision and before he made this 

announcement? 

 

Now he volunteers today that he has at last spoken to Domtar. 

Mr. Speaker, has the Premier spoken to Mr. Raymond Royer, 

CEO and president of Domtar, who worked long, hard hours 

with the team to put this deal together? Has he spoken to the 

president and CEO of Domtar? Did he do that before he made 

his announcement? Did he speak to the community of Prince 

Albert before he made his announcement? Did he consult or 

not, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for years it has been the 

policy of this party, in opposition and now in government, that 

the risking of taxpayers’ dollars in mature industries — like we 

saw this government do at the Meadow Lake pulp mill where 

they lost $800 million taxpayers’ dollars, like the 35 million 

that they lost on SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], and the list goes on — that that kind 

of practice by a government, whatever its stripe, is no substitute 

for proper economic development policy. 

 

And in coming to that conclusion we consulted, Mr. Speaker, 

with chambers of commerce. We consulted with community 

economic development agencies. We developed policy as a 

party. We were very clear all along. And even after the Leader 

of the Opposition, then the premier, made this very desperate 

announcement in September, we were clear that we would not 

risk taxpayers’ money in this deal. We would work to open the 

mill short of government money. 

 

In the intervening time, Mr. Speaker, there was a general 

election — an election that saw a member from Prince Albert 

elected to our party, 37 others elected for the Saskatchewan 

Party, and a brand new government. That’s pretty good 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Here the Premier’s been in office a couple of 

weeks; already he seems to be getting hard of hearing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is as follows: who did the Premier 

consult with before he made the decision to scrap the MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] with Domtar? Did he talk to 

people in Prince Albert? Did he talk to people in the task force? 

Did he talk to people at Domtar? 

 

He says initially he values consultation. He says his government 

values consultation. Well I say it’s too bad his actions don’t 

match his words. Again I ask the Premier, who did he talk to? 

Who did he consult with before making the decision to shut 

down the MOU and shut down the future of the P.A. mill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that the NDP 

opposition has completely forgot about November 7, an 

intervening general election. And all the time, and all the time 

that went before that general election, Mr. Speaker, when this 

party in developing our policy that said a Saskatchewan Party 

government would not invest, would not risk taxpayers’ money 

in mature industries, that consultation then occurred over the 

years in places like Swift Current. It occurred in Moose Jaw. It 

occurred in the northwest part of the province. That 

consultation occurred in Regina and in Saskatoon and 

constituencies across this province. 

 

And then on November 7, the people of the province had the 

opportunity to weigh in on which view they liked better — 

direct investment risking taxpayers’ money, as we saw from the 

NDP in government, or getting the fundamentals right and the 

proper vision, the proper economic plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan. Asked and answered, Mr. Speaker. The 

consultation happened on November 7. We can send the Leader 

of the Opposition the clippings of the result if he would like. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, now the Premier seems to be 

adopting the same point of view as the part-time Minister of 

Labour, who was talking to the press the other day. And when 

asked did he consult about issues like essential services 

legislation, what did he say? Well no, we had a consultation; it 

was called an election. Now we have a mandate to do as we 

please. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier believes that an election mandate is 

to do simply as he pleases without consultation, we’re all in for 

trouble here, Mr. Speaker. Now if in fact the Premier had made 

a decision on ideological basis that this MOU was going to be 

scrapped after the election, why did he not tell his candidate in 

Prince Albert the same thing before this candidate ran ads 

during the election campaign which say — and I’m quoting the 

ad, Mr. Speaker — Darryl Hickie says, “a vote for Darryl is a 

vote for the mill open and people working.” 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, he might have at least consulted 

with his caucus colleagues and his future caucus colleague from 

Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that that 

member would characterize that announcement that occurred in 

September a deal when nobody else in the province with 

common sense would characterize that announcement as a deal 

to reopen the mill including, including, Mr. Speaker, the 

officials at Domtar, where the vice-president of corporate 

communication said, and I quote: 

 

We feel that it is premature at this time to give people false 

hope and say to them by next summer you’re going to start 

working again. It’s not possible and Domtar does not work 

that way. 

 

Domtar officials changed their position three times. It’s also 

interesting to note as a part of this fictional deal that the 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation said for the public record that that 

member, when he was on this side of the House, failed to 

consult . . . [inaudible] . . . with them when they have a direct 

stake in what’s happening over there. He says, Chief Lionel 

Bird says there was no consultation that came from the 

government. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, what the new member for Prince 

Albert said campaigning, what I said campaigning is that we 

will work hard to ensure that that mill reopens and forestry is 

healthy. But we will not risk taxpayers’ money on a fictional 

deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — If only the actions matched the words, Mr. 

Speaker. If only the actions matched the words. 

 

The now minister from Prince Albert didn’t say he’d work 

toward. No. He said to the people of Prince Albert, quote, “a 

vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people working.” 

Mr. Speaker, who understood this to be a deal? I’ll tell you who 

understood it to be a deal: the people of Prince Albert, the task 

force in Prince Albert, CEP [Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union of Canada], the working people, the 

families, the executives of Domtar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this Premier for ideological reasons has decided 

to tear up all of this work, then it is incumbent upon him today 

to tell the people of Prince Albert, tell the people of northern 

Saskatchewan — Big River, Carrot River, Hudson Bay — to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan what is his plan. What is his 

plan to reopen the mill in Prince Albert? And, Mr. Speaker, 

what is his timeline? For a failure to produce a timeline will 

represent a failure of his government to the people of Prince 

Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier’s plan, and what is the 

timeline to see the mill reopen as guaranteed it would be by the 

candidate and now the member from Prince Albert? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about a timeline because, 

when he announced this deal, he had his own timeline. 

Remember that? He said it’s going to open by the summer. 

 

But then Domtar officials got word of this, and their comment 

was no; we’d better not be saying it’s going to open by summer. 

The quote here I read from Domtar officials was about false 

hope. And all of the punditry and all of the journalists, business 

journalists, weighed in on the province and said there is no deal 

here. 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. I invite the 

Premier to finish his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And so, Mr. Speaker, what the people of 

Prince Albert and area with the forestry can, what those folks 

can expect from this new government is a sincere attempt to 

find a real solution for the mill — not a fictional one. We are 

going to work very hard with the city officials. The work of the 

task force is certainly not lost. We are going to consult with 

First Nations, by the way, who have a stake in this — unlike our 

predecessors. And more to the point, Mr. Speaker, we will not 

leave Big River out in the cold as his plan, his fictional plan 

intended to do. 

 

What the people of Prince Albert and area can expect from this 

new government and that member and this minister is to get the 

right deal for P.A. and area for that mill. That is our intention. 

I’ll be in Prince Albert on Friday to meet with the chamber and 

the mayor to begin work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Saskatchewan 

Party had to say before the election on the Domtar deal. Quote: 

 

“The forestry is a vital and often overlooked part of our 

economy, and the way we manage this important resource 

for future generations will determine the long term 

prosperity for many people . . . Key to this future is the 

important role to be played by First Nations who must be 

involved in every step of the deliberations.” 

 

Well the way they managed this important resource was to 

scrap the deal — some management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for First Nations people being involved in every step of the 

deliberations, I question if they were involved in any step of the 

deliberations. 

 

To the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations: did she 

consult with First Nations people before her government made 

the decision to tear up the deal? Were First Nations part of any 

deliberations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there were . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. Order. The 

Minister of Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to consultations . . . I think we won’t be taking 

any lessons from the members opposite. Referring to the 

Domtar deal: 

 

“There’s a legal requirement for them . . . to consult with 

us,” Bird said, adding that the province . . . [proceeding 

with the plan] “without any care or desire to deal with any 

concern the Montreal Lake Cree Nation has.” 

 

And that is with respect to . . . Chief Bird has said that. So when 

it comes to consultations, absolutely we will consult with the 

people in Prince Albert, and we will be happy to do that on an 

ongoing basis, something that the members opposite never did 

when they cooked up the deal in the 11th hour just prior to an 

election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — The Saskatchewan Party have a lot of 

explaining to do to the people of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of my constituency are feeling misled by the 

members across the way — misled. None more so than the 

working men and women of the pulp mill. It’s no wonder why, 

Mr. Speaker. Here’s what the Leader-Post reported November 

10, three days after the election. And I’ll quote: 

 

Darryl Hickie . . . said he spoke to the local head of the 

mill workers’ union and to the plant manager on Thursday 

and he’s hopeful that negotiations will begin soon with 

Domtar. 

 

It appears the union was given assurances by the member for 

Prince Albert Carlton that the mill would reopen. No wonder 

this promise breaking came as such a surprise to them. My 

question is to the Minister of Labour: did he happen to consult 

with union before they tore up the deal with Domtar? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, indeed the reviews on this 

whole deal are coming from across Saskatchewan. In a 

StarPhoenix editorial on September 14, the editorial board in 

The StarPhoenix says: 

 

This deal needs to be seen for exactly what it is — a 

political equation for the NDP rather than an economic 

one for the rest of . . . [the people of Saskatchewan]. 

 

And everyone in Saskatchewan knows, Mr. Speaker, that at the 

11th hour, at the 11th hour a deal put together by the former 

Premier of this province was not a good one for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that is why the reason on November 7 of 

this past month the people of Saskatchewan said in an 

overwhelming fashion that that’s where you need to be sitting 

now, sir, and not on this side of the House with the government 

that we have today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that this 

new government consulted neither with First Nations or with 

the unions on killing the Domtar deal, this despite the 

Saskatchewan Party’s wringing of hands and shedding of 

crocodile tears at the negative effect this will have on the P.A. 

economy, the provincial economy, and of course to the people 

directly affected. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton made the outrageous claim during the election 

campaign that a vote for him was a vote for the mill open and 

people working. 

 

Given that the Saskatchewan Party made these promises to the 

people in my constituency, and given that they didn’t consult 

with First Nations, with unions, or with the people they 

represent, my question’s to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’ll try somebody else. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Yes, we’ll try. Did he consult with the people 

of Prince Albert, with the city of Prince Albert before killing 

the deal to reopen their pulp mill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has had a 

discussion with the Domtar officials. I have had a discussion 

with the Domtar officials. And the members opposite can be 

rest assured that we will be doing everything we can in talks 

and in negotiations with Domtar to do just as what the member 

has suggested, that we will want to work with them to ensure 

that the mill stays open, and we’ll be doing that at ongoing 

basis. 

 

But what we won’t be doing, what we will not be doing, is 

putting $100 million of taxpayers’ money at risk for a deal 

cooked up on the 11th hour just before an election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P. A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — So Mr. Speaker, this government has taken 

upon themselves, it’s obvious, to kill the Domtar deal. No 

consultation whatsoever — not with First Nations, not with the 

people of Prince Albert, the unions affected, and not even with 

Domtar. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Forestry finally. Now that he’s 

killed this deal, can we see the details of the plan that he has to 

open a mill? 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — What we will be doing, what we will be 

doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’ll be consulting with a broad number 

of people all across Saskatchewan. But what we won’t be doing 

is some of the things that your government did in the past. The 

Shoal Lake First Nation chief, Marcel Head, said on September 

13, “There just doesn’t seem to be any . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — I think there’s too much debate going on. 

We’d like to hear the response from the minister. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Shoal Lake First Nation chief, Marcel 

Head, on September 13 said, “There just doesn’t seem to be any 

co-operation,” referring to your previous administration. 

 

There just doesn’t seem to be any co-operation. We’ve . . . 

been left [entirely out] in the dark about this. 

 

And that is something that we will not be doing, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll be doing everything we can to work with Domtar to make 

sure that the mill remains open in Prince Albert. And we intend 

to do that as soon as we possibly can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the members of . . . or 

the people of Prince Albert would love an explanation as to how 

the members of that government, members of that cabinet could 

tell them that a vote for the Saskatchewan Party was a vote for 

keeping the mill open and then have the Saskatchewan Party 

leader turn around and drive a stake through the heart of the 

deal. 

 

Here’s what the P.A. Herald said about this flip-flop on 

December 10, and I’ll quote: 

 

Now comes an interesting test for the 

cop-turned-politician. His constituents have raised their 

voices: will Hickie speak for Prince Albert to the 

government, or will he be a voice of government to Prince 

Albert? 

 

I’d like to ask the minister the same question as did the media 

of Prince Albert. Will he be a voice for the people of Prince 

Albert, or will he sell them out to his political masters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

said earlier, the Premier’s already had discussions with Domtar. 

I’ve already had discussions with Domtar officials. We’ll be 

working hard with them. We have said in a number of ways that 

we are prepared to work with them on things like infrastructure. 

We’re prepared to look at cogeneration opportunities for them. 

We’re prepared to look at possible other incentives that we 

would be prepared to work with them on it. 

 

And the Premier’s indicated to them — and he’s going to be 

meeting with some folks in Prince Albert later on this week — 

that we’ll be doing everything we possible can to reopen the 

mill in Prince Albert and make sure that there are good jobs and 

employment for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address this question to 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton. In his newspaper ad, 

when he said that a vote for him and Saskatchewan Party was a 

vote for the mill open and people working, was he aware of the 

Saskatchewan Party plan to tear up the deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s really quite instructive here. The people opposite, 

the members opposite are suggesting that somehow or another 

there was a deal, when in fact there was an MOU that was 

non-binding. And everyone understands that. 

 

You put in place 100 million, at risk $100 million of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money, and that’s something that the 

people on this side of the House are not going to do with the 

taxpayers’ money. We’re going to be responsible. We’re going 

to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan . . . that managed 

properly the finances of this government. 

 

And we will not do something like the members opposite did in 

this past few months. We will not put $100 million at risk in an 

MOU moments before an election campaign is announced here 

in Saskatchewan. That’s maybe what you people on that side 

would do, Mr. Speaker, but the people of this . . . The people 

that represent . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the minister to make his 

comments through the Chair. Final comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. We 

will not be risking taxpayers’ dollars as was at risk in the MOU 

that the previous administration handled. And I think the people 

of Saskatchewan in the election campaign in a whole-hearted 

fashion said yes; they agree with what we’re doing in this 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to attention. Order. I call 

the member from Canora to attention. 

 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

pursuant to rule 43 it is your duty at this time to elect a member 

to serve as Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the 

Whole. I now ask the Clerk to initiate proceedings. 

 

Clerk: — Pursuant to the procedure specified under rule 42(1) 

and rule 45(4), the following member has declared his intention 

to stand as candidate for election to the office of Deputy 

Speaker and Chair of Committee of the Whole — Mr. Greg 

Brkich, the hon. member of the Legislative Assembly for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask leave to make a few 

brief remarks? 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

congratulate you on the election of Speaker. I know with your 

many, many years of service to the House you’re going to do an 

excellent job, and I look forward to working under you in any 

way that I can in serving this House. 

 

I want to thank all members present for expressing their 

confidence in me as Deputy Speaker. I will fulfill that office 

with the very best of my ability. The times when I am asked to 

assume the Chair, I will do it with fairness and impartiality. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure 

to inform you that you have elected Greg Brkich, the hon. 

member of the Legislative Assembly for Arm River-Watrous, 

as your Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the Whole. 

Any further comments? I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Moved by myself 

and seconded by the Government House Leader, with leave of 

the Assembly, I move the following: 

 

That Mr. Tim McMillan, member for the constituency of 

Lloydminster, be appointed to preside as Deputy Chair of 

Committees of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So moved, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Premier, seconded by the 

member from Melfort, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That Mr. Tim McMillan, member of the constituency of 

Lloydminster, be appointed to preside as Deputy Chair of 

Committees. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Motion carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — My apologies, members. I should have given 

the member the opportunity to have a word if he so wished. 

And so I would ask leave of the Assembly to allow the member 

to respond. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

thank the Premier and the House Leader for their confidence, 

and I’d look forward to the responsibility that this position 

entails. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to ask leave of this Assembly to move a motion setting the end 

of this session. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Member may proceed. 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

move, seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourn at the end of the sitting 

day on December 20, 2007, it shall stand adjourned at a 

date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 

seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved, 

seconded by the Opposition House Leader by leave of this 

Assembly: 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day on December 20, 2007, it shall stand adjourned to a 

date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member 

. . . 

 

Order. Would members come to order, please. I will read the 

motion again. By leave of the Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day on December 20, 2007, it shall stand adjourned to a 

date and time set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government and that Mr. Speaker will give each member 

seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

humbled to rise in this Chamber to move the first Throne 

Speech by a Saskatchewan Party government, and I will be 

making the official motion at the conclusion of my remarks. 

 

But before I respond to the Throne Speech, there are a few 

comments I would like to make. I would like to congratulate 

you, Mr. Speaker, on your new role. I can’t think of anyone 

more suited to this position than yourself, and I know you will 

serve in a fair and diligent manner. Mr. Speaker, we all know 

that you have been in this Assembly for many, many, many 

sessions, and you have acquired much knowledge from your 

experience. So it is fitting for you and again congratulations. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I also want to congratulate all MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] on their election and re-election. To the 

new MLAs on both sides of the House, this is work that is very 

rewarding, constant interaction with people. And as any veteran 

MLA will tell you, the time commitments and time away from 

your families will sometimes exceed what you thought. Being 

an MLA is also an opportunity and an experience shared by 

very few citizens of this province. We are 58 people out of a 

province of approximately 1 million people. So it is indeed 

special. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all MLAs owe a great deal of thanks to their 

constituency assistants. They are the first people that people see 

when they contact us, and that forms a first impression of the 

MLA. To my CA [constituency assistant], Rosalie George, who 

has been with me for about eight months and prior to that, 

Leanne Fox, I am so thankful for the courteous and professional 

manner in which all my constituents are treated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to extend my congratulations to 

the member from Swift Current as he assumes duties as 

Premier. Saskatchewan people have come to realize that this 

Premier has new ideas, energy, and the ability to help 

Saskatchewan realize its potential. I am so proud to part of his 

team. 

 

And congratulations also to those who were appointed to 

cabinet — I think that they will work their hardest to do a very 

good job for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take a moment to thank my family, 

my husband Vic, my kids, and grandkids for their never-ending 

support. Not unlike my colleagues in this Chamber, my family 

has made many sacrifices so that I can do my job efficiently and 

effectively. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, my family has been 

facing health issues for the past four and a half months. I thank 

my colleagues from both sides of the House for their thoughts 

and prayers. They along with family and friends have been so 

supportive, and we have gained a lot of strength from that 

support. 

 

I would also like to extend appreciation to my mom who lives 

in Estevan, and I know she will be watching this today. She 

watches it every day, Mr. Speaker. So I just want her to know 

that I love her and appreciate her support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the people of 

the Estevan constituency for again electing me as their 

representative to this honourable Assembly. This was the third 

time I was elected. The first time — in 1999 — I received over 

48 per cent of the vote. In 2003 I received 51.3 per cent of the 

vote, and on November 7 I garnered over 66 per cent of the 

vote. So thank you again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Eagles: — So thank you again to all the people of my 

constituency. I am so honoured to represent them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did notice yesterday when the Swift Current 

Comp Chamber choir sang their first selection, they mentioned 

the different places in Saskatchewan, and they did mention the 

city of Estevan two or three times. They also mentioned several 

other towns in my riding: Bienfait, Midale, Torquay, and even 

Hitchcock. I was thrilled, and I’m sure those watching from 

their homes were as well. Thank you to the Comp Chamber 

Singers from Swift Current on a job well done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is in a very vibrant corner of this 

province. Estevan is the largest centre and the only city in the 

riding, but our boundaries extend west to include Radville. The 

southern boundary of my riding is to the United States border. 

The Estevan constituency boasts a vast agricultural base, 

thriving oil industries, and many small businesses — all of 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

these areas contributing greatly to the well-being of our 

province. 

 

They are a proud people. They are hard-working people, people 

you can trust, people of their word. Having said that, Mr. 

Speaker, they expect the same from their government. When 

commitments are made, they expect you to keep them, and this 

has been a problem in Saskatchewan. Prior to yesterday’s 

Throne Speech, the responses could have pretty well been the 

same year after year because the Throne Speech was always the 

same: re-announcement after re-announcement, empty 

promises. Finally the people of this province had had enough. 

Fearmongering didn’t work. People chose hope and positive 

change over fear. 

 

What people heard yesterday were new ideas from a new 

government. These were our plans for this province as stated in 

our election platform. Saskatchewan is a rich province, rich in 

natural resources and human resources, but we’ve 

underachieved. We’ve underachieved because the previous 

government settled for mediocrity. We have so much potential 

for growth. We need to keep our future, our children, our youth 

in this province. The Throne Speech addressed this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was door knocking during the election 

campaign, many of the people I spoke to really liked our plan 

that included tuition rebates and also the program for young 

entrepreneurs. For too long our youth have been leaving this 

province because there were no incentives encouraging them to 

stay. This program will deal with the educate-and-export 

mentality of the previous government. We in the Saskatchewan 

Party believe that we should train and retain. 

 

Another issue that was and is very important is increased 

property tax relief. For the past several years the NDP promised 

to deal with this issue. They said that when the Boughen report 

was released this would be dealt with. The NDP cherry-picked 

from that report, choosing to raise the PST [provincial sales tax] 

by 1 per cent but there was no relief on the education portion of 

property tax. Then it was dependent on school amalgamations. 

Then it got so it was almost dependent on the weather, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly dependent on the approaching election. 

 

Finally people are getting what they voted for. The education 

portion of property taxes will be reduced by doubling rebates 

over the next four years. And, Mr. Speaker, this applies to farm 

land as well as urban dwellings. 

 

People in my area were also very happy with the announcement 

that used cars and light trucks are exempt from the PST. No one 

could figure out why PST was paid over and over again on the 

same vehicle. Many people cannot afford to drive a new 

vehicle, so this program really helps those who need it most, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities are pleased with our commitment 

to negotiate a new revenue-sharing agreement. Local 

governments have faced cuts and downloading during harder 

times. But now that the economy has improved, little has been 

done. Negotiations will include a percentage of our own-source 

revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is a very important industry in my 

constituency and indeed the province. The producers of this 

province have faced some extremely trying times in recent 

years. Thankfully, grain prices are on the upswing now, but 

ranchers are still struggling. This industry has been ignored by 

the NDP for 16 years. We had a minister who didn’t understand 

or care, or maybe both, about agriculture. It’s time 

Saskatchewan played a leadership role in negotiating programs 

such as CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] with 

the federal government, and I’m confident this will happen with 

the member for Melville-Saltcoats being the Minister of 

Agriculture. He is someone who truly understands the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my husband and I farm. We live on a farm and 

love the peacefulness and freedom that goes with that lifestyle. 

In our area there are some young people moving back to the 

farm. Just this past summer we had a young couple build a nice 

new home on an acreage just about a half a mile from our farm. 

And a real drawing card in attracting people to a community is 

the distance to the school. So it is important that schools are 

within a reasonable distance for students travelling by bus and 

also for the economic well-being of a community. When people 

are interested in relocating that is probably the number one 

question asked. 

 

Education is a priority for this government, as is fairness 

regarding operating grants. The Saskatchewan Party 

government realizes that children are the future and will 

increase K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] operating funding 

by 20 per cent over four years. We must remember that the 

school closures in rural Saskatchewan are a result of the NDP 

government’s total abandonment of rural Saskatchewan, driving 

people out of their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected in 1999 I think I received 

more inquiries regarding health care than any other single issue. 

Highways would probably be a close second. Surgical waiting 

lists are the longest in the nation; shortages of doctors and 

nurses and, in some areas, rural hospital closures on a 

temporary basis. The last point I mentioned did not happen in 

my constituency, Mr. Speaker, but that was only because in the 

early ’90s the NDP closed so many hospitals that most of them 

were closed then. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do need more doctors and nurses. We need 

more training seats and more residency positions. We need to 

ensure that enough of the health care budget is direct to front 

lines of patient care. And, Mr. Speaker, for the past four and a 

half months my husband and I have been in and out of the 

hospital more times than anyone can imagine. I must say that 

despite the fact that doctors and nurses are run off their feet, 

they’ve always been very caring, compassionate, professional, 

and dedicated. There’s just not enough of them and they’re 

tired. And this issue is finally being addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it was also in 1999 when then Premier 

Roy Romanow delivered a Throne Speech in which there was a 

promise of 200 new police officers. That was another 

commitment that was never kept. Mr. Speaker, the growth of 

this province is extremely important. But equally important is 

security. We must ensure that our communities are safe, and 

this will be achieved by working with communities on a 

long-term policing strategy that will include the provision of 

120 new police officers over four years. 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

Mr. Speaker, in a province such as Saskatchewan with all its 

wealth and the food produced in bountiful harvests, we must 

help those in need. We are committed to providing more funds 

for school lunch and anti-hunger programs. We all realize that 

when children are hungry, it affects their learning ability. So 

working hand in hand with CBOs [community-based 

organization] across the province, we will provide these 

services to those who need them. 

 

CBOs will also receive an additional $20 million over four 

years to provide employment skills training to those who need 

extra assistance. And, Mr. Speaker, I have visited the Estevan 

Diversified Services many times, and it is just a joy to walk in 

there and see the employees meaningfully employed and 

realizing their capabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I would like to say that this 

Throne Speech is one of vision, whether the creation of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, partnerships with First Nations 

people who we are indebted to for their help in building this 

province and also in dealing with the labour shortages. The First 

Nations and Métis people will have a key part in that. 

 

We also address environmental issues, protecting and 

conserving our resources. And we must remember that 

Saskatchewan under the NDP had the highest rate of growth in 

greenhouse gas emissions since 1990 — more than any other 

province or territory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these were all part of our election platform, 

Securing the Future. The people of this province voted for 

growth. They voted for security. And the government is 

committed to keeping its promises while being fiscally 

responsible. That is why we will introduce the Saskatchewan 

growth and financial security Act that will require the 

provincial budget to be balanced every year using surpluses to 

pay down the provincial debt and investing in the future. We 

must turn the current economic boom into lasting prosperity for 

this province that we love. We will keep our promises, Mr. 

Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan will judge us on 

November 7, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you for this opportunity, and I move, 

seconded by the member from Yorkton: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Estevan, seconded by the 

member from Yorkton, has presented a motion in regards to the 

Throne Speech. Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, congratulations on your 

election. I know you’ll serve this House fairly. Thank you to all 

for the warm welcome I’ve received since I’ve come to this 

building, and congratulations to all of the newly elected and 

re-elected members on both sides of the House, especially our 

newly elected Premier. I am pleased and honoured to have this 

opportunity to second the 2007 Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have always been interested in politics, but I 

must admit three years ago I would never have imagined taking 

my place here today. I had been approached prior to my 

nomination a couple of times. However being a family man and 

coming from small business and doing a lot of community 

service, I really wasn’t interested. 

 

It took some convincing by a dear uncle and aunt to consider 

the possibilities, and after a meeting with our current Deputy 

Premier, I began thinking about seeking nomination. After one 

meeting with our current Premier, I was certain I would seek 

nomination. With the support of my wife, Leone, who is seated 

up in the gallery today — the west gallery — and my daughters, 

Katelin and Rayanne, I was nominated almost two years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to acknowledge a man I’ve 

known for over 20 years, the former deputy premier, Mr. Clay 

Serby, for his 16 years of dedication to my home constituency 

of Yorkton. I urge all people, particularly my colleagues here in 

the House, to keep Clay in their thoughts and in their prayers on 

his road to recovery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — I’m honoured now to take his place and 

represent Yorkton. I’m excited for the future of my home 

constituency and being able to represent and work for the 

people there in a government looking to the future and not the 

past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, upon seeking the nomination, I spoke with Mr. 

Serby before my intentions became public. And we have a very 

good relationship, Clay and I do. We . . . [inaudible] . . . joked 

with each other. And at that time I told him it may be a good 

idea to let somebody younger and with different ideas take over 

the needs of the constituency of Yorkton. And he told me at that 

time he would consider it if I would run for the NDP. Obviously 

that wasn’t going to happen. 

 

One visit to the Assembly I had, Mr. Serby introduced my 

family and I. He said that knowing that I was a pilot, knowing I 

wasn’t afraid of heights, he would do his best to keep me up 

there in the Speaker’s gallery. However the people of Yorkton 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

and area had a different idea, and we outdid their best efforts in 

the recent election and I take my place here today. 

 

In the past two years, Mr. Speaker, I had plenty of opportunity 

to come to this Assembly, sit in on caucus meetings, observe 

the proceedings in these galleries. However I must admit that 

never prepared me for the first time back here after the election. 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, on that day I stopped halfway up 

those grand front steps and I went, holy cow, I work here. 

 

That same day, Mr. Speaker, the Premier asked me what my 

biggest victory was during the election. I’d have to say because 

my family was present. My mom worked tirelessly through the 

election delivering flyers, whatever needed to be done, as did 

my wife Leone. No one I believe worked harder than her and 

I’m forever grateful. My daughters Katelin and Rayanne as well 

were very supportive and encouraging even when they couldn’t 

be present. 

 

One of the big highlights of that day came when I came up to 

the podium at our victory celebration. Upon reaching the front 

of the room with my wife and girls, I was greeted with a huge 

hug by my father. I hadn’t seen him in months. All he had to 

say was congratulations, son, I’m proud of you, and I broke into 

tears. Seeing the pride in their eyes was the high point and I 

believe feeling the presence and pride of my son on that day as 

well made me feel very victorious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I’m talking about people, I’d really like to 

acknowledge a few. I would like to thank my mother and father 

for giving me the basis of work ethics and morals, and bringing 

me up to be the person my wife saw fit to marry. 

 

I’d like to thank my wife of 21 years, Leone, who has stuck by 

me, loved me, and supported me through thick and thin, good 

and bad. She has given me three wonderful children and has 

contributed the most to make me who I am today. And through 

her guidance and prayers I will continue to be the man I think I 

should be. 

 

Thank you to the rest of my family and my community of 

Yorkton, my home for almost all of my life. Thank you to 

Yorkton for supporting my family through all we’ve been 

through during the illness and subsequent death of our son and 

brother, Brayden, and for embracing what we continue to do to 

preserve his legacy. When he became ill we began to fight 

against cancer, starting a fundraising event that participants take 

part in and raise funds, and they shave their heads to support 

cancer research. Upon Brayden’s passing over seven years ago, 

the event was renamed in his honour, Mr. Speaker. And today, 

the Brayden Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer event, I’m proud 

to say, has raised over $400,000 for research, and over $15,000 

for local cancer initiatives right in Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this is but a small example of 

the support and caring attitude that people of my home 

constituency of Yorkton have for each other. Our event could 

never be successful without the total support of residents, 

businesses, and the people of Yorkton. I must say as well it 

portrays the philosophy Leone and I have adopted through our 

lives, take a bad situation and make good come from it. Bitter 

or better, Mr. Speaker — all we need to do is choose the vowel. 

 

And I’m grateful to all the people in Yorkton for showing their 

support and electing me. They’ve given me so much, and I will 

continue to give back. I’d like to thank the people that worked 

for us throughout the election and before the election: the 

Yorkton executive, the campaign team, hundreds of volunteers 

who contributed to the win in Yorkton, and our win throughout 

the province. The number of individuals, Mr. Speaker, was 

overwhelming. The ones that contributed were apparent during 

our post-campaign appreciation social we held only a number of 

weeks back. The room was overfilled; we didn’t have enough 

chairs. 

 

I’d like to thank everyone involved with the Saskatchewan 

Party, but particularly Brad Wall and Tami Wall, Ken and Gail 

Krawetz, for their strong guidance, their support, and to show 

how actually a family and politics can work together. 

 

Thank you to all the staff in this great and historical building for 

the welcoming and helpful atmosphere that you do have here 

and for the knowledgeable guidance you have offered and that I 

will continue to seek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many have asked me why I would want to run for 

politics at this time in my life. My family is almost grown. I’ve 

built a successful business on what my parents started some 44 

years ago. We were to the point we were taking it fairly easy in 

life. A friend of mine so graciously pointed out to me that as a 

politician I should realize that half the time half the people hate 

you, and the rest of the time everyone hates you. 

 

But I did see a need for positive change. And at this time of my 

life, I feel I have something to contribute although, Mr. 

Speaker, it has also been pointed out to me as well that I may 

have a tougher road to travel than most. 

 

As you may well know, recently politicians were voted as the 

least-respected occupation, but still above lawyers. Sorry, to the 

Minister of Justice. But politicians were voted as being below 

respectability of arms dealers, Mr. Speaker. Furthermore, the 

least desirable occupation was voted to be a sanitation engineer 

— I use quotes. And so now, in consideration of my past 

business background and my new career, I may have some 

stereotypes to overcome, but I am up to the challenge. I’m sure 

glad that I’m not an arms dealer. 

 

But joking aside, I’m very proud of my government’s plans for 

growth, security and accountability. It seems to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of my constituency of Yorkton are 

willing to give me that opportunity to represent them. In our 

recent victory, we had 60 per cent of the popular vote, 

something for which I am very grateful and humbled; Mr. 

Speaker, something I believe is more of a testament to the 

leadership and substance of the party than myself. 

 

Back to the main reason I decided to run for politics, Mr. 

Speaker. Recently I read an article right before election or 

during the election where the writer said politics is really about 

people. And during the campaign, I was reminded on that very 

point one afternoon of door knocking. I met an older couple at 

the door who was quite excited to see me, which seemed odd 

during election time. Mr. Speaker, as the conversation 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

progressed, I realized they had someone visiting them that they 

were quite anxious for me to meet, and it seemed like they 

wanted my wife to meet them as well. That’s when I knew it 

must have something to do with our cancer fighting efforts, our 

walk with our son, Brayden, and our community service. Our 

cancer fighting efforts are known throughout our community 

and as well throughout the province. 

 

The person that we met that day was . . . It was really touching. 

And she really touched my heart, and she’s no stranger to this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. The little girl I met that day was baby 

Paige, a small person whose cause our party took up in this very 

Legislative Building, a reminder for all of us as to why we’re 

here: to do right by people, to look after our constituents, to 

work selflessly for them. All I needed to do, Mr. Speaker, was 

look into that little girl’s baby blue eyes to realize that — to 

ponder what she had gone through, what she had to endure. It 

really made that sink in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talking about door knocking experiences brings 

me back to the election and the mood of our province now. We 

had to battle against attacks of misinformation and fear, but 

hope prevailed and as I said, the people of Yorkton spoke with 

60 per cent of the popular vote in our support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a positive attitude and feeling of optimism 

out there. It’s our time. It’s Saskatchewan’s time for the 

Saskatchewan Party government, and now the Saskatchewan 

Roughrider Grey Cup win. And our government will work hard, 

and I will work hard to follow through with the promises in the 

present and look ahead to continue to deliver on the promises 

and secure the future of our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Yorkton is a great place to live. It’s a great place 

to work, conduct business and raise a family. We are 

surrounded by valleys, rivers, lakes, and parks. And I believe 

some of our Throne Speech plans for parks will benefit our 

area. We have a wide-ranging sports, arts, and cultural 

environment. Our residents have one of the most diverse 

ancestral backgrounds in the province, I believe, ranging from 

Ukrainian, German, First Nations, Irish, English, Scottish, you 

name it. I think we just about represent everybody in our corner 

of the province. 

 

Like many other places in Saskatchewan, we face many 

challenges. The last 16 years, Mr. Speaker, won’t be repaired in 

16 days. But being the third largest trading area in the province 

behind only Regina and Saskatoon, I believe Yorkton can and 

will be better. We have challenges in health care in the areas of 

personnel, facilities, and services. But I feel the Throne Speech 

addresses some of those areas, and we will be able to reach our 

potential in Yorkton and become the true regional health facility 

that we can be. 

 

Our economy is doing well; I must agree, but again we have 

room to grow, Mr. Speaker, to give our young people more 

opportunities to stay, learn, work, and build families and 

businesses in our province. There’s expanded opportunities in 

education and tax relief addressed in the Throne Speech. The 

Throne Speech addresses this as well by building a more 

diverse and less volatile economy — a true, not a virtual 

economy that will help Yorkton and Saskatchewan develop into 

a retail, industrial, and agribusiness leader in our province, 

country and the world. 

 

Yorkton is very reflective of this already with private 

companies such as Ram, Leon’s, and Morris Industries 

providing manufacturing to the agricultural industrial sectors. 

And I believe the Throne Speech as well addresses some of the 

agricultural concerns will help our farmers move into that 

agribusiness, being an agribusiness leader in the country and in 

the world. 

 

I believe we can turn the boom into long-term growth and 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker, with more security. I also believe the 

Throne Speech has the potential to begin to fill the billion dollar 

potholes in our roads and infrastructure, and make 

Saskatchewan a more attractive, safer place to travel, live, and 

do business — a better place in all communities by sharing 

revenue with municipal governments to help alleviate some of 

their concerns and also alleviate the policing shortages and 

make our communities safer. 

 

I’m going to wrap up here, Mr. Speaker. But I would also like 

to thank again the Premier for the honour of being named the 

Legislative Secretary to Social Services responsible for 

community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, 

culturally-based organizations, and food banks. 

 

I look forward to working with the Minister of Social Services 

in carrying out her mandate to create a social safety net with the 

help of those organizations. I recognize that these organizations 

need more funding, longer-term funding to carry out their 

important work and contributions they make so selflessly and 

efficiently to the people in our province. 

 

I take the responsibility of this appointment very seriously, and 

I look forward to aiding these groups in reaching more of their 

potential in the delivery of their services. Working with many 

of these groups is something I’ve strived for in my private life, 

and I’m honoured to work towards and show the Saskatchewan 

Party government’s strong social conscience. Our government 

is intent on keeping promises and growing the province to 

create more opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and to secure the future 

for Saskatchewan people and show compassion and help those 

in need. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to second the 

motion from the member for Estevan regarding His Honour’s 

2007 Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, just before I recognize the next 

speaker, I’d just like to remind members, and especially for the 

sake of new members, remember that we’re not to use first 

names but recognize people by their constituency or their 

position. And just a reminder so I’m not interfering in the 

debate. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

join other members in congratulating those who have been the 

newly elected to our legislature, to congratulate the member 

from Yorkton on his first speech in this legislature, and to 

congratulate all members on our re-election as we take up the 

responsibilities of this new twenty-sixth legislature in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to extend my own thanks to the constituents of 

Riversdale in Saskatoon for affording me the opportunity to sit 

in this legislature, to thank the many, many who worked very 

hard in the most recent campaign to provide for myself this, this 

privilege. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, I am privileged to represent 

what I think is arguably one of the most diverse constituencies 

in the province of Saskatchewan — diverse in our demographic, 

diverse in our economic base, diverse in the many challenges 

that face the constituency of Riversdale — and to say how 

much I have treasured the opportunity to work with the people 

of Riversdale over these last number of years now and to look 

at the accomplishments that we have achieved within the 

constituency of Riversdale by working together and by working 

with government whether it be in education, the new high 

schools on the west side of Saskatoon, Tommy Douglas and 

Bethlehem, the new programming that we’re anticipating and 

building towards in Mount Royal in terms of training, the new 

W.P. Bate school, all of the work that we’ve done in the 

community schools, Mr. Speaker. This work has occurred 

because communities have worked together. 

 

I think of the work that we’ve been able to do in terms of 

housing in the constituency of Riversdale and in the west side 

of Saskatoon, particularly proud of the efforts we’ve undertaken 

with CUMFI [Central Urban Métis Federation Inc.], with the 

urban Métis housing, with Station 20, and all of the community 

. . . [inaudible] . . . groups that have come together at Station 20, 

the housing programs that are available there now. I’m very 

proud of the work that we’ve been able to do with the Juniper 

Manor in seniors’ housing, with Abbeyfield, with Arbor Green. 

 

I think of the work that we’ve been able to do by working 

together in Riversdale to improving the health status. We 

recognize the health status challenges we had as a result of 

poverty and addictions. I’m very proud of the work we’ve done 

with the College of Medicine and students from that college in 

the SWITCH [student wellness initiative toward community 

health] program through the White Buffalo Youth Lodge, 

through the West Winds health clinic on the west side of 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I’m very proud of the work that we’ve been able to do as a 

community together in redeveloping River Landing in the new 

farmer’s market, in the new small business vitality that is part 

of Riversdale. And I very, very much appreciate this 

opportunity to work with the people of Riversdale again in 

building to the future of our constituency and our city and our 

province. 

 

If I may say, Mr. Speaker, high on my agenda as the member of 

the legislature from Riversdale will be to seek continuing work 

towards a new St. Mary’s School within our constituency and 

the adjacent and attached housing developments that can flow 

from that. I look forward to working with the people of 

Riversdale on one of the highest needs in the constituency of 

Riversdale and, if I may say, on the west side of Saskatoon. 

And that’s all of the needs around housing, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m going to have a word or two to say about that in a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to enter into this Throne Speech 

debate. I thank His Honour for his reading of the Throne 

Speech of the Premier, and I want to observe just briefly this 

afternoon on some areas in the Throne Speech which are 

obvious by their omission, Mr. Speaker — things that are not in 

this speech, things that the people of Saskatchewan might well 

have expected to see in the first Throne Speech of a newly 

mandated, newly elected government that is not new to this 

legislature, but a party that has been part of this legislature, that 

has been part of issues, now elected to government. The people 

of Saskatchewan might well have anticipated within this Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, things which are not there, things which 

should be there, mind you, but are not there. 

 

I turn in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, to the section on 

agriculture, an issue that is not unknown to the members 

opposite. They raise the issue of agriculture in their Throne 

Speech and their major commitment — get this, Mr. Speaker — 

their major commitment in agriculture is to, and I quote right 

from the Throne Speech: 

 

My government is committed to fully funding the 

province’s share of the Canadian Agricultural Income 

Stabilization Program (CAIS) . . . 

 

They make this as a brand new announcement in their Throne 

Speech, from the brand new government, with a brand new 

mandate. This is the new project. This is the new proposal to 

save agriculture in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, where have 

these people been? We have been fully funding CAIS for years, 

Mr. Speaker. We have been fully funding CAIS for years. 

 

It’s time to move beyond CAIS. It’s time to look for those 

better programs that better support base for producers in our 

province. So the major initiative from this new government, in a 

brand new Throne Speech, this is the noble vision for 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to fully fund CAIS. 

Well been there, done that and it’s time to get on with it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one might have expected — and I’m sure 

the livestock producers of Saskatchewan waiting for the Throne 

Speech might have well expected — that within the course of 

this Throne Speech we would see some very clear indication of 

what this government intends to do to support the livestock 

producers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you’ll be aware, 

members are aware that our livestock producers are in some 

jeopardy these days as a result of the high Canadian dollar, as a 

result of pressures in their industry as a result of high grain 

prices. 

 

Our livestock producers, some of them, are describing a 

situation today as worse than the situation when they were 

contending with the closure of the border with BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy]. Some of them are saying it’s 

worse today than it was then. Well, Mr. Speaker, where is this 

government? Where is this government? Where is the comment 

in the Throne Speech about a plan of action, Mr. Speaker? 

 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

Now we have some big references here that the government was 

actually going to listen to producer groups. Well isn’t that a 

news headline. They’re going to listen to producer groups and, 

in some cooperation with the federal government, they’re going 

to find a way to work through this, which they call a difficult 

transition period. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan, the producers of Saskatchewan, the livestock 

producers of Saskatchewan deserve something better than this 

in a Throne Speech from a government with a brand new 

mandate. 

 

They should expect, we expect some plan. And I’m going to ask 

this government, we’ll be asking this government over the 

course of this session and in the weeks and the months to come, 

if necessary, what is their plan for the livestock industry. And 

when will we see that plan? When will we see timelines? When 

will we see some real support, not just rhetorical comments in 

the Throne Speech but some real support for the producers of 

Saskatchewan? We would have expected that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what else is missing from this Throne Speech? Well we 

would have expected in this Throne Speech a significant plan 

for the forest industry. Now we’ve already learned that this 

government for ideological reasons alone tore up the MOU that 

was established between Domtar, the people of Saskatchewan, 

the people of communities of Prince Albert, Big River, the First 

Nations of the North. This government for ideological reasons, 

without any consultation we’ve learned, has taken that MOU 

and torn it up — well fair enough, if that’s their ideology. 

 

Their ideology is they will not participate with private industry. 

They will not participate with communities. They will not 

participate with people in economic development. That’s their 

philosophy — fair enough. But if you’re going to tear up an 

MOU, if you’re going to tear up two years of work, then, Mr. 

Speaker, you would assume that they would come with a 

Throne Speech with a very clear plan on how they intend to 

open the mill. 

 

Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t many months ago, it 

wasn’t that long ago that that party now in government was 

sitting here in the opposition. And they said to the then 

government failure to produce a timeline for the opening of the 

mill would represent a failure of government. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, now the question comes right back to them. What is 

their timeline for the opening for the P.A. mill? Now if I was 

just to take the Throne Speech, if that’s all there is, well the 

timeline is going to be a very lengthy timeline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the industry is at risk. Families are at risk. 

They’ve been hanging on. They’ve been hanging on, and now 

they say we need to start all over again. Well what is the 

timeline, Mr. Speaker? What is the plan for the forestry? I 

would have expected to see that in the Throne Speech. 

 

I tell you what else, Mr. Speaker, we should have seen in this 

Throne Speech is something much more substantive than what 

we see as a plan for the future of our environment. Now 

interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

adopted, has adopted . . . According to the Throne Speech, 

they’ve adopted Saskatchewan’s, quote, “. . . existing 

greenhouse gas emission target of reducing levels by 32 percent 

to 2020.” 

Well now that’s a step forward, Mr. Speaker. They’ve now at 

least adopted a target — the target set by our government mind 

you — but the short-term target. They’ve not adopted, I noted, 

the longer term targets, but they’ve adopted at least the 

short-term target. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, how are they going to achieve that target? 

Again where is the plan? Where is the climate change plan? 

Where is the plan? Well all we’ve learned from this government 

since they took office is they have gutted the funding that was 

set aside to do this goal, to achieve this goal. They’ve gutted the 

funding. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s their choice. They’ve done 

that, but now they claim they’re going to meet that target. 

 

Well the question is being asked by this caucus, by this 

opposition — the question being asked in the province — is just 

how are they going to do it? Because they’ve taken all the 

financial resources and yet they suggest, they suggest that 

they’ll be operating hybrid cars and high emission vehicles. 

Well that’s fine. But I just want to tell the Premier and the 

government that that’s not going to do it. That alone is not 

going to do it. That’s not going to reach a 32 per cent emission 

reduction target by 2020. It’s going to take much more dramatic 

action that that and, if I may say, much more dramatic financing 

than that. 

 

Well they’ve gutted the financing. They’ve gutted that. So the 

question is, what’s the plan? Mr. Speaker, what’s the plan? 

We’re not going to meet these targets without a plan. And 

what’s the timeline? Well the timeline is set. It’s 2020. How are 

we going to move from today to 2020 and a 32 per cent 

emission? Mr. Speaker, we might have expected that in the 

Throne Speech. 

 

And if I may say, I fully expected, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure 

the people of Saskatchewan fully expected to see in this Throne 

Speech the position and the plan of this government regarding 

the most significant single issue between Saskatchewan and the 

national government — that being the issue of equalization and 

a fair deal for the people of Saskatchewan under equalization 

for the resources that belong to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here is an entire Throne Speech, an entire 

Throne Speech from a new government that does not mention 

this most significant issue between the province of 

Saskatchewan and the national government. Not a word in this 

Throne Speech about equalization or a fair deal for the 

resources of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now what does this lead you to believe, Mr. Speaker? Well this 

leads me to believe that somehow they’ve already cooked up a 

deal with their political friends in Ottawa. And we’ll see, Mr. 

Speaker, because when that deal is revealed we’re going to 

want to be sure that the people of Saskatchewan are getting full 

value for their resources valued at $800 million a year — $800 

million a year. If they’ve cooked up a deal with their political 

friends, fair enough. Let’s see it, Mr. Speaker. They chose not 

to mention a word about this issue in the Throne Speech. 

 

So there are some very significant, some very significant areas 

of concern in our province that are not mentioned in the Throne 

Speech. And the one that struck me perhaps most vividly, Mr. 

Speaker, not a word in this Throne Speech, not a word about 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

housing, not a word. And I’m not sure who’s even in charge 

over there, the Minister of Social Services perhaps. But I can’t 

believe a minister in charge of housing wouldn’t insist that 

within the Throne Speech the issue of housing was included. 

And there is not a word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re in a situation today where we have rents skyrocketing on 

Saskatchewan families and young people and students and 

seniors. We’re in a situation today, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan where people are being ejected from their rental 

accommodation as they see those buildings being turned into 

condominiums with the condo conversions. 

 

We have a situation in Saskatchewan today where young people 

are finding it harder and harder to own and buy their first home. 

We’re finding a situation where seniors are finding it hard to 

find accommodation. And if I may say, in the inner city we’re 

seeing already signs of significant homelessness. In my own 

constituency of Riversdale the Salvation Army have 

significantly expanded their shelter capacity, and even with the 

expansion they’re not able to meet some of the need. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you travel to the First Nations of 

Saskatchewan, speak to First Nations, speak to the chiefs and 

councillors, the women of First Nations. Many of them will tell 

you the number one issue on their First Nation is the question of 

housing. Mr. Speaker, not a word, not a word in this Throne 

Speech about one of the most significant issues facing 

Saskatchewan families today. 

 

And if I may say, all those renters who are observing the 

process of this legislature, all of those who are renting 

accommodations today in the province of Saskatchewan, 

they’re saying, what about us? Why have we been forgotten by 

this new government? All of the seniors seeking new housing 

opportunities, they’re saying, why have we been forgotten by 

this new government so early, so early in their term? 

 

So there’s nothing substantive in this Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, for the livestock producers of Saskatchewan. There is 

no substantive plan for the forestry. No substantive plan for 

climate change and the environment. There’s no reference to a 

fair equalization deal from Ottawa. And there is nothing in this 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that speaks to one of the 

significant issues of our time, that being the issue of housing for 

Saskatchewan people. And this, Mr. Speaker, from a 

government with a brand new mandate, a brand new mandate 

and already they have forgotten all of these significant issues in 

their very first Throne Speech. 

 

But what is in, what is in their Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker? 

Well now this is of significant interest. The Throne Speech 

speaks to the platform commitments of the Saskatchewan Party, 

and that’s fair. And that’s fair. But how is it, Mr. Speaker, that 

some of those commitments made by the Saskatchewan Party in 

a very recent election are now being watered down in the 

Throne Speech? Now you’ll remember, Mr. Speaker, and 

members will remember how they tried another tack, and the 

tack was to lower expectations of the people of Saskatchewan 

that they will keep their promises. 

 

[15:15] 

 

About 10 minutes after the new Premier was sworn in, what did 

he do? Came out and said to the press, oh woe is us; the 

province is broke. The cupboard is bare. The situation, he said, 

was stark, stark. Well everyone in Saskatchewan, beyond those 

who sit in the government benches now, knows that is simply 

not the case. Everyone in Saskatchewan knows that no 

government entering the halls of government in the history of 

this province has ever inherited the kind of fiscal resources that 

this government has. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are $2 billion in the bank — $2 billion in the 

bank, Mr. Speaker. Two billion dollars in the bank and they 

don’t have a plan to help the livestock producers? Two billion 

dollars in the bank and they don’t have a plan to achieve their 

targets? Two billion dollars in the bank and they have nothing 

to do for housing, the needs of housing in this province? No, 

they came out and they tried to say, the Premier tried to say, no, 

the cupboard’s bare and it’s stark. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know what that’s about. It’s trying to 

get people to believe there’s going to be an excuse for not 

keeping their promises. That was the first trick. Well it didn’t 

work. The journalists saw through it. The economists saw 

through it. The people of Saskatchewan saw through it. 

 

So now what we have is a Throne Speech, a Throne Speech that 

tries to do the same thing on some of the most significant 

commitments made in the campaign. We have a Throne Speech 

. . . Well let me go back, Mr. Speaker. We have a platform of 

the Sask Party which said very clearly . . . You can refer it to 

yourself in the platform; it’s all there. Get it quick before they 

take it off the website. It will say in that platform document, it 

will say that this government will provide for the people of 

Saskatchewan, will hire 800 new nurses. That’s what it said. 

We will hire 800 new nurses. That’s what they said in their 

platform. That’s what they campaigned on. That’s what the 

people of Saskatchewan voted for. 

 

Now what exactly does the Throne Speech say? Oh no, it 

doesn’t any longer say we will hire 800 nurses. No, no, no, no, 

no, no. Now I’m going to quote right from the Throne Speech. 

It says now well, Mr. Speaker: “The goal will be to hire 800 . . . 

Nurses.” Oh the goal will be. Well now isn’t that interesting, 

Mr. Speaker. During the campaign it was a promise. It was a 

firm commitment for 800 nurses. It wasn’t a goal. It wasn’t a 

shot in the dark. It wasn’t, as the part-time Minister of Labour 

says, their best shot. No, no, no, no, it was a commitment. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, wonder of wonders, a month after 

they’re elected, that commitment is now a goal. Well I wonder 

what it’ll be by next Throne Speech. A dream? And what will it 

be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Semantics, semantics says the 

member. Well I tell you, semantics matters when it comes to 

making promises. They made a promise for 800 new nurses, 

and we are going to be, as this official opposition, asking of that 

government precisely the timeline when those nurses will be in 

place. We’re going to be asking precisely how they intend to 

accomplish this promise because, Mr. Speaker, to break that 

promise — probably the most significant promise they’ve made 

in the entire election campaign — to break that promise will be 

a significant, a significant breach of trust with the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

But you know, it’s not only this promise about nurses. It’s not 

only this promise about nurses. You can read the campaign 

literature yourself. You can read the platform document. They 

say very clearly in their platform document . . . What do they 

say about doctors? They say we’re going to have 40 new 

training positions and 60 new residencies for doctors — 100 

new doctors. They define it 100 — 40 and 60. It’s right there in 

the platform. You can read it yourself. Well what do I read in 

the Throne Speech yesterday? Well again let me quote, Mr. 

Speaker. Well now that commitment is now “. . . to creating 

more training seats and more residency positions for our 

doctors.” Well somehow 40 and 60, somehow the 100 is gone. 

Already gone in one month and now we have a promise just for 

more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, again let me remind you and the people of 

Saskatchewan what this is all about. They’re trying to build an 

escape hatch. They’re trying to build an escape hatch when they 

know that they’re not going to keep these very significant 

promises to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know in the run up to the election, government opposite, 

their members were saying, we are going to revise The 

Education Act. We’re going to revise The Education Act to 

ensure that communities facing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think there’s a little . . . Order. The 

member from Humboldt will come to order. I think there’s a 

little too much debate going on in the Assembly. We’re trying 

to hear the Opposition House Leader, and I would ask members 

to allow the member to speak. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pointing out in 

that in opposition, when it came to the issue of school closures, 

they made a firm commitment to people in Saskatchewan — 

again you can read it in their platform — that they will revise 

The Education Act. They’re going to revise The Education Act 

to provide these protections against school closures. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if I can find it here in the Throne Speech, what do I see 

in the language of the Throne Speech? 

 

Well now you know what we’re going to do? We’re going to 

examine revising The Education Act. Now before the election, 

you know, they say one thing before an election: we’re going to 

revise the Act. Now after the election we get the Throne Speech 

when the rubber hits the road, and now what do they say? Well 

we’re going to revise the Act. You see what’s going on here, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re trying to open these escape hatches. 

They’re trying already to escape the promises they made only 

weeks ago. 

 

And remember today’s question period, Mr. Speaker? We had a 

promise from the member from Prince Albert, the new minister 

from Prince Albert. You know, vote for him and the mill will be 

open. That was a promise; he put it in the paper. He put it right 

in the paper. Well not even days after the election, his Premier 

breaks the deal, breaks the deal. 

 

Now when that member was making this promise to the people 

of Prince Albert, he either was doing it knowing they were 

going to break the deal, or he made the promise in good faith 

and he was being fooled by his leader and his Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see in this Throne Speech, fundamentally 

two things. We see a Throne Speech that does not deal with 

significant plans and timelines to deal with issues like our 

livestock producers, forestry, the environment, housing, 

equalization. We have a Throne Speech that tries to water down 

the promises they made. 

 

And then finally let me say this, Mr. Speaker: it’s a Throne 

Speech that doesn’t even carry the courage of their own 

convictions. You know, they didn’t consult with anyone when 

they decided they were going to produce essential services 

legislation in this House — at least I’ve not found anyone in the 

province. Even their own ministers weren’t consulted with. 

That’s apparent. 

 

I haven’t found anyone in the province they consulted with 

before they decided — before the Premier decided, I guess — to 

institute essential services legislation. Well fair enough. Again, 

fair enough. If that’s your philosophy, if that’s your program, 

why wasn’t it in the platform? The question is well asked. If 

you intend to do essential services legislation, why wasn’t that 

in the platform? Well not a word about that in the platform and 

interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, not a word about it in the 

Throne Speech. 

 

Now if it’s your conviction, if it is your political conviction that 

the people of Saskatchewan ought to have essential services 

legislation, fair enough. But at least have the courage of your 

convictions and put it in your platform and put it in your Throne 

Speech — not just this roundabout rhetoric that says we’re 

somehow going to be competitive in terms of labour protections 

with other Canadian jurisdictions. And by the way, Mr. 

Speaker, when these debates get going, I’m going to be asking 

the question: why do we need to be just competitive? Why can’t 

we be leading Canada as we always have? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech hides from the convictions 

of the party opposite, now in government. It does not address 

significant issues that face Saskatchewan communities and 

Saskatchewan people. And it begins to water down and already 

break the promises, the commitments that they made to 

Saskatchewan people only but days and weeks ago. And so 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Regina Douglas Park, the following: 

 

That the motion be changed to read as follows: 

 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 

this Assembly because it has a hidden agenda that picks 

winners and losers, because it puts the interests of the 

federal government ahead of Saskatchewan citizens, and 

because it is already making excuses to abandon election 

commitments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the members to come to order. The 

Leader of the Opposition, seconded by the member from 

Regina Douglas Park, has moved an amendment. The 

amendment reads: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 

 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 

the Assembly because it has a hidden agenda that picks 

winners and losers, because it puts the interests of the 

federal government ahead of Saskatchewan citizens, and 

because it is already making excuses to abandon election 

commitments. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, may I at the outset congratulate you, sir, on your 

election as Speaker. When you first indicated and it was 

communicated to us that you were seeking the office, my 

thoughts were, here is someone that will need no training; here 

is someone whose experience will serve the members of the 

Legislative Assembly extremely well in the years to come. So I 

mean that sincerely. Congratulations, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I’d say that in the brief time that 

we’ve had the opportunity to be here under your tutelage you 

have in fact confirmed for me that it was not a difficult 

transition to make. 

 

Speaking of transition, Mr. Speaker, there are many members of 

this House who are making the transition — new members to 

now elected status, members of the Assembly who are changing 

their roles in this Assembly. I might say that it’s at times been a 

difficult adjustment, but I have made that transition. 

 

I’d like to quote the former Member of the Legislative 

Assembly, one Davey Steuart, who, commenting on the 

transition from being on the front benches in cabinet to being a 

private member, who observed that “I have successfully learned 

to open my own car door.” So, Mr. Speaker, I can say that I’ve 

made that transition and I think that we all in the coming days 

and weeks will learn to make that transition. 

 

I want to congratulate the government on its election. I want to 

congratulate those members of the governing party that were 

appointed to cabinet — somewhat surprised at some of the . . . 

well not surprised at the appointments, but I guess at some of 

the appointments that weren’t made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to of course congratulate all members 

on their election and especially the new members who will be 

joining us. And I look forward to their contributions in the years 

to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me also take this opportunity to thank the 

constituents of Regina Douglas Park for their continued support 

and their election of me as their representative in this 

Legislative Assembly. I very much enjoyed the opportunity to 

knock on doors, to visit with my constituents. When I was not 

in cabinet I had more opportunity to do that and therefore I very 

much relished the opportunity that was afforded by the election 

campaign to meet with them, to learn from them about their 

issues. And we will all know, on both sides of the House, that 

when you talk to people in your constituencies on the doorsteps, 

there will be many issues raised that are not necessarily raised 

in the election platforms of any of the parties, that people have 

other concerns, other issues that we need to follow up on now 

that we’re here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the previous speaker . . . And I didn’t consult 

with him about the direction that he was going but I find myself 

going the same direction. What I find interesting about the 

Throne Speech is what was not in the Throne Speech. 

 

[15:30] 

 

You know, to a very great extent the Throne Speech was 

predictable. But there are a number of issues that confront 

Saskatchewan people. There are a number of issues that should 

concern us all that in fact were not mentioned in the Throne 

Speech, and I thought that they would have received much more 

explanation so that people’s minds could be set at ease, that 

people of Saskatchewan have a better idea where it is the 

government is going on a number of significant fronts. 

 

There was no repetition of remarks by the Premier where he 

characterized the province’s financial situation as quote, 

“stark.” Shortly after being sworn in, the Premier announced to 

one and all that in his view the province’s financial situation 

was stark. A week after those remarks it was revealed in the 

mid-year financial report that the new Saskatchewan Party 

government had inherited from the NDP government quote, “an 

embarrassment of riches.” “An embarrassment of riches,” to 

quote a Leader-Post editorial. 

 

And it was a similar reaction, a similar reaction throughout 

Saskatchewan. All of the pundits, the editorialists, all of the 

commentators where they really questioned what it really is the 

Premier was getting at when he characterized our financial 

situation as stark, at the same time releasing financial 

information that suggests that the government is sitting on a 

billion-dollar-plus surplus. There is something strictly at odds 

here. 

 

So the Premier’s comment was distinctly at odds with reality 

and I think distinctly at odds with comments prior to the 

election where many members on their side said words to the 

effect, and I quote them, the NDP government quote, “sitting on 

a mountain of money.” Another one, “flush with cash.” Another 

one, quote, “mountain of extra cash,” and then again, “mountain 

of money.” 

 

Again I guess that was the line of the day for the members from 

their caucus. That was the line to be used in characterizing the 

financial situation. It is very clear what they’re getting at is that 

there is very, very good fiscal circumstances in Saskatchewan. 

And now we see a Premier’s comments that are distinctly at 

odds with the comments prior to the election and certainly at 

odds with the reality after the election. 

 

We would have thought that the Throne Speech would afford 

the Premier an excellent opportunity to explain to 

Saskatchewan people what his thinking was when he said that 

our financial situation’s at odds. Well I find the comments 

distinctly odd, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also no mention in the Throne Speech of 

the issue concerning the pulp mill in Prince Albert, no mention 

that the provincial government had ripped up a memorandum of 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

understanding with Domtar, owners of the P.A. pulp mill. 

 

And the government can say what it likes about, you know, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and what we plan to do and what our 

goals are, or what our hopes are in terms of economic 

development. You would have thought that they might deign to 

talk about forestry in substantive terms as opposed to these 

generalizations that are contained in the Throne Speech, that 

they might talk in specific terms about an issue that faces not 

just the people up in Prince Albert but all of the people that are 

involved in forestry in Saskatchewan, which is significant 

number of people. Thousands of people are employed in that 

industry, the P.A. pulp mill being, if you like, the tip of the 

iceberg that supports a massive forest industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

You would have thought that that government in its Throne 

Speech might have addressed that situation to give some 

comfort as to where it is that we are headed. But there was no 

mention in the Throne Speech of the P.A. pulp mill and no 

mention of the fact that their candidates were promising the 

people of P.A. and area that they would open the pulp mill. 

 

Again, as was pointed out in question period, a quote in the 

Leader-Post that I saw where it indicated that, and I’m quoting 

here, “a vote for Darryl Hickie is a vote to open the mill,” Mr. 

Speaker. And of course that person is now the member for 

Prince Albert Northcote, I believe the riding is. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, anyone who looked at those comments, recognizing 

that there was some framework for discussion to keep that mill 

open, would have interpreted that as being support for that 

specific initiative. Not one person in P.A. saw it as being 

anything other than that. 

 

So here is a Throne Speech that would have provided an 

opportunity to reconcile where you have comments prior to the 

election, comments after the election, but there is no 

reconciliation, if you like, of those comments, no clear 

indication of where we go with that significant aspect of 

Saskatchewan’s provincial economy. 

 

And I could go on, Mr. Speaker, about the Sask Party 

undertaking prior to the election to go on a fact-finding mission 

in the forest fringe to find out what needed to be done in terms 

of the forest industry. I could go on about their comments over 

the years or the years leading up to the memorandum of 

understanding about there needed to be a deal, that something 

needed to be done. But no, Mr. Speaker, I won’t do that. 

 

But again I was hopeful that the Throne Speech might have 

dealt with that very significant issue to people in the forest 

fringe and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

There was also, Mr. Speaker, no mention in the Throne Speech 

of essential services legislation. We all remember prior to the 

election the member for Indian Head and who is now the 

current — I think it’s Indian Head, Indian Head-Milestone — 

who is now the Minister of Health saying, and I quote, when he 

was questioned just immediately prior to the election about 

essential services legislation, direct question: would you 

legislate essential services? The member for Indian Head: no, it 

“needs to be negotiated . . .” And further on, “I don’t think we 

need to get to legislation, I don’t think we need to go there at 

all.” 

Well how else is one to interpret the intentions of a Sask Party 

government other than they have no intention to proceed with 

essential services legislation? What else could the people of 

Saskatchewan, and especially people in the health sector, 

interpret from those remarks except this is a Sask Party 

government that, contrary to musings that they might have had, 

had no intention to proceed with essential services legislation? 

Well of course after the election we have the Premier saying 

that his Health minister made a mistake when he ruled out 

essential services legislation because certainly this was a Sask 

Party government that was in fact going to proceed with 

essential services legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s just not the current Minister of 

Health that he was contradicting. Here’s a Premier who on 

September 22 said, and I’m quoting him in an article, quote, 

“There’s some common sense,” and this is the Premier, the now 

Premier speaking: 

 

“There’s some common sense at play here that simply says 

before collective bargaining begins, before the expiry of a 

contract, both sides (should) sit down and agree to 

providing essential services.” 

 

Wall told Leader-Post reporter Angela Hall, even going so far 

as to say: 

 

. . . legislation wouldn’t necessarily be required to set out 

essential services. 

 

What are the people of Saskatchewan to interpret from that 

except that this was a Sask Party government that was not going 

to proceed with essential services legislation and now saying 

that it will proceed with essential services legislation? There’s a 

very clear contradiction of what was said before the election as 

to what is now being said. 

 

One might have thought that the Throne Speech, in discussing 

significant issues that face Saskatchewan people, might have at 

least paid some attention to this very important issue, Mr. 

Speaker. But no, this is not something that we’ve seen in this 

Throne Speech and well, one can make of it what one wants, 

Mr. Speaker, but what was it that Murray Mandryk said in the 

Leader-Post? Basic honesty, minimum expectation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the unfortunate facts of life in modern 

society is that there will always be demographic trends. And 

those demographic trends in Saskatchewan are more powerful 

here than in many other jurisdictions as we’d see a continuing 

shift of people from the farm and into towns and into our cities. 

That’s a very powerful and seemingly irreversible trend that 

we’re seeing in our society. 

 

And one of the consequences of that is that it will always put 

pressure on services. Whether it’s services provided by 

individuals to people in those communities or services provided 

by public agencies to people in those communities, there will 

always be pressure on those institutions and those services to be 

kept operating. 

 

And very, very important in that of course is the question of 

schools. We saw prior to the election a great deal of debate in 

Saskatchewan because of plans by school boards to proceed to 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

close a number of schools in Saskatchewan, in their view, 

because of the changing demographics, the changing 

populations in their districts that they are intimately aware of 

and therefore put forward plans to close a number of schools. 

 

What we had then at that time was a Sask Party opposition, I 

guess you could say, milking that issue for everything that it 

was worth, milking it for everything that it could, playing on 

people’s fears about school closures and going so far as to say 

they had a reliable plan to keep schools open. Here’s the quote, 

here is the quote on May 14 of this year from their critic at that 

time, the member for Melfort saying quote, “. . . the official 

opposition at least has a plan that people of this province can 

rely on.” 

 

Well now we see after the elections, here’s the new Minister of 

Education saying quote: 

 

“The school closures have gone on forever and there will 

be schools that will close because of declining enrolments, 

(or) whatever.” 

 

Whatever? Mr. Speaker, is that the best that we can do? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, they said they had a reliable plan to keep schools 

open and now that plan is, whatever. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had expected more. The Throne Speech 

would’ve been a good opportunity to outline the government’s 

vision, the vision and their plan in terms of dealing with these 

powerful demographic trends and how it is that we might keep 

schools open, Mr. Speaker. But I think we can say on that score 

too that the Throne Speech is a monumental failure. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I must say this is an issue I’ve been 

dealing with for some years in my previous life as minister. 

And this is a huge omission because it is the singular most 

important issue, in my view, that faces the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that is the question of getting fair 

recognition of non-renewable resource revenues when it comes 

to important federal programs such as equalization, where we 

are being treated differently than other jurisdictions in this 

country. We are being treated in a way that can be characterized 

as nothing less than shabby by previous governments and by the 

current government in Ottawa. 

 

One would have thought that there would have been some 

mention of what the government’s plan was with respect to 

equalization. There is no mention in the Throne Speech of 

equalization, of what that $800 million a year represents. About 

one-tenth of our current revenues — what that would mean to 

the men, women, and children of Saskatchewan; what that 

would mean to the future of Saskatchewan. What is the 

government’s plan? This Throne Speech was strangely silent on 

what is surely one of the most significant public policy issues to 

face Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close here in a few minutes 

because I’ve gone on long enough. I want to just make a couple 

of observations. One of the observations I would make is when 

you look at the retreat from stated positions — stated positions 

on essential services, stated positions on school closures, stated 

positions on the fiscal circumstances in Saskatchewan, stated 

positions in terms of the P.A. mill — when you look at the 

retreat from stated positions to what we have now, Mr. Speaker, 

well I wouldn’t go so far as, but it certainly does bring to mind 

famous retreats in history, not the least of which was 

Napoleon’s retreat from Moscow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another observation I would make, not just based 

on the Premier’s contradiction and correcting the Minister of 

Health, but also, prior to the election, of his contradicting and 

setting clear what it is another member had to say — and that 

member now being a member of cabinet — what credence can 

we give to anything that cabinet ministers now say in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Can we rely on the word of cabinet ministers unless we know 

it’s had the Good Housekeeping seal of approval from the 

Premier’s office? We’ve seen in the last number of months two, 

I think, very substantial contradictions by members on that side, 

by their leader, now the Premier. It raises the question about 

what credence we can put in the words of cabinet ministers 

based on what we’ve seen these last few days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the overwhelming thought of 

Saskatchewan people would be, 16 years, we’ve made this huge 

change. What are we seeing? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

Saskatchewan people are massively underwhelmed what they 

see in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might say to the members opposite, have fun in caucus sorting 

this all out. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure 

to second the amendment. And I will be voting against the main 

motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to stand here in 

support of the Throne Speech. And I am humbled and it’s my 

honour to represent the people of Saskatoon Northwest and to 

represent the people of Saskatchewan as they have decided to 

take the Sask Party and make them the government of the day. 

 

It was about five years ago that I was invited to come to this 

province. I sat in a hotel room and I had been invited to come 

here by a number of leading citizens, Mr. Speaker, of 

Saskatchewan — the retired police chief of Saskatoon and a 

number of people that I knew from Crime Stoppers — to ask 

me if I would consider coming to this province to start a charity 

by the name of Teen Challenge. 

 

I sat there and I asked these people a number of questions. I 

have degrees in sociology and social work and I love stats and I 

did some research before I came to the meeting, travelling from 

Ontario. I had toured this province on a number of occasions 

with Crime Stoppers, speaking throughout the high school 

system of Saskatoon and Prince Albert and The Battlefords. 

And so I was aware of Saskatchewan. I was aware that Tommy 

Douglas was one of the premiers of the province and had started 

medicare, had started a social fabric for the rest of Canada to 

look on whose policies were to leave no one behind. 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

And I asked this group of men and women if they would answer 

some questions for me. I asked them if they were aware that 

Saskatchewan leads the nation in child poverty, that close to 

one in four children live in this province in poverty, that 

Saskatchewan leads the nation in child incarceration rates. In 

fact, they lead all of North America in incarcerating more 

children per capita than anywhere else. 

 

I asked them if they were aware that Saskatchewan leads the 

nation in substance abuse with the least amount of resources 

and that in fact Mr. Calvert when he was the minister of Health, 

his first action was to close one of the leading . . . I apologize, 

Mr. . . . The Leader of the Opposition, when he was the minister 

of Health, upon his first action was to close Whitespruce, one of 

the leading organizations in Canada treating addictions of 

young people that I was privileged to spend some time at in 

professional development and taking back to Ontario to the 

Toronto Board of Education some of the practices of it. 

 

Were they aware that Saskatchewan had the leading stats for 

youth recruitment into gangs, that they led the nation year after 

year in crime, that the prisons were splitting at the seams from a 

lack of attention to the infrastructure and the human care of it, 

that children were dying every year under the care of 

government from an antiquated model that said families first 

instead of children first? 

 

I informed them that I had read on the front page of The 

StarPhoenix of a 13-year-old girl that had died of an overdose 

in an apartment that was abandoned. And they couldn’t find her 

mother. And she traded her body to buy pills. 

 

I asked them if they were sure that they wanted me to come to 

this province because, quite frankly, I didn’t want to come here. 

I informed them that I believed this province had lost its way 

and whatever legacy of Tommy Douglas had been lost with a 

growing infrastructure of government. A province that led the 

nation in government bureaucracy almost double the national 

average; a province that had the highest union membership per 

capita and seemed more concerned about playing politics and 

getting itself re-elected than actually following the legacy of 

Tommy Douglas in dealing with the least of our brethren in our 

society — I informed them that I didn’t think they would like to 

have my mouth in this province leading a charity because as a 

social advocate I would have to speak out against such bad 

practices. 

 

I told them that I would consider it. I would talk to my wife and 

as a Christian that I would contemplate in prayer what I should 

do, which is usually the Christian answer for no because who’s 

going to argue if you say that God told you not to come. I have 

no idea what my wife was praying. But when she informed me 

that we ought to come, that in fact this province needed my 

voice and my action, she reminded me of my own beginnings 

— being born to a child, a Cree girl just barely into her teens, 

raped, giving birth to me in an abandoned building; as that 

product of rape, being brought up in the inner city of Toronto in 

abject poverty in one of the greatest ghettos rivalling the new 

ghettos of Canada in the central northwest of Regina or in the 

Leader of the Opposition’s own riding in Saskatoon. 

 

She reminded me of when I was taken away from my mother 

and placed in the most violent and brutal training school in the 

history of Canada at the age of 8 where I was to become a street 

kid at the age of 12, an alcoholic by the time I was 15, and a 

gang leader by the time I was 17, and a drug dealer; where I 

was to be incarcerated at 19 in the Canadian penitentiary 

system, a confirmed drug dealer and drug addict, embarking 

upon my early beginnings. 

 

She reminded me that maybe my voice and the failure of the 

current provincial government at the time, the NDP, was the 

reason that I ought to come here because, you see, those stats 

are not just stats — they are human beings. They are a cost to 

our society in human cost. They are a cost to our society in 

taxes. They are a cost that we can ill-afford in this province, the 

province of Tommy Douglas — an embarrassment to his legacy 

and quite frankly an embarrassment to the CCF, because I don’t 

know where the NDP has morphed to, but it is not to having a 

social conscience. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said that we should be first and 

that it was his goal to make us first. But we are first. We are 

first in the national embarrassment. We are first in leaving our 

most weakest and vulnerable behind. We are first in failing the 

citizens of this province. 

 

So when I look at the Throne Speech, when I look at a yes 

being yes and no being no and keeping your word of honouring 

what you’ve set out in a mandate to do, I look at our Throne 

Speech as a delivery of that — of hope, a hope of change, a 

hope of security, a hope of growth. Where you honour your 

promises given as leaders in a province. Not playing political 

rhetoric and political games at the expense of children and the 

weakest of our society, but honouring what you have told the 

people that support you to get you elected, who have voted you 

into office to represent them. 

 

I support this Throne Speech because it is the reason why I 

came to this province — to correct what is wrong with this 

province, to allow the equity and the prosperity of this province 

to go forward to all regardless if they are red or white or half of 

each, regardless of where they started in life. 

 

Everyone has the ability to have life if we prepare them with the 

proper foundations. We lead the nation in leaving children 

behind in child poverty — one in four. It’s a disgrace, the child 

incarceration rate — where we have failed our children by 

warehousing them so that they can be socialized into adult 

criminals, where 80 per cent of adult convicts started in juvenile 

custody, where we’re allowing our children to be recruited in 

the highest numbers in this country into gangs, to have a form 

of value and self-esteem by belonging to something instead of 

belonging to third world conditions which exist in our inner 

cities and exist throughout this province on reserves. 

 

I stand for a government that has come forward to say, we will 

have value. We will do what we have said we will do. We will 

not fail the citizens of this province. We will not play politics 

for the sake of politics. And we will bring forward the ideals of 

what Tommy Douglas once stood for in leading this nation of 

having social conscience and heart, of being honourable and 

delivering your word instead of playing little political games 

and acting like a bunch of children throwing insults at each 

other, but rather leading with respect and integrity. That’s what 

I believe our Throne Speech stands for. 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

That is why I have added my voice and my actions to this 

government. And when my friend Ted Merriman said that he 

couldn’t run and asked me if I would, when I asked the Premier 

of our province would my background cause a problem, and he 

said your background will give you an expertise of what we 

want to do as a government for the least of, the most vulnerable 

of, for those who need a solid and strong government to live by 

their word and their actions, then I took that invitation and I 

allowed my name to stand in Saskatoon Northwest. Why I am 

so humbled that the people of that constituency, regardless of 

where I came from, could recognize who I am today and that 

my voice will be a voice of representation for them and for the 

people of this province, delivering on the promises that the Sask 

Party stands for. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well I want to thank all the members in 

the Legislative Assembly today for this honour to have this time 

to talk about the Throne Speech. To begin with, I want to 

congratulate all the newly elected members from both sides of 

the Chamber for running and seeking public office. It was a 

new experience for all of us. I also want to congratulate our new 

Premier on his victory and for his vision he’s provided in the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today I’m truly proud, Mr. Speaker, to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan and those who elected me on November 7. It has 

been just over a month since being elected, and I have been able 

to attend this Chamber twice already. The first was the day of 

procedural training when the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote and I exchanged a quick volley across the floor at 

one another. And the second time when I and other MLAs from 

the Saskatchewan Party were sworn in last Tuesday afternoon. 

After the latter, Mr. Speaker, I remembered that the name of 

Hickie had graced the pages of Hansard even before I put my 

maiden speech forward today. 

 

Approximately one and a half years ago, both of my daughters 

came to the Legislative Assembly for a tour while on a school 

band trip. They were able to sit in the gallery across from where 

I stand today, and they were introduced by my colleague and 

friend, Mr. Delbert Kirsch, from Batoche . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . sorry, my colleague from Batoche. I correct 

that sir. They were also able to sit and watch part of question 

period that day, and I asked them over the past weekend what 

they remembered and thought of the experience. Both of my 

girls stated that it was, quote, “cool” to be here and see the 

building and see inside the Chamber. 

 

I thought about the language my two daughters actually used to 

describe their experience that day, and I pondered how that my 

recent experience within this Chamber and the actual 

Legislative Assembly has left its mark on me, Mr. Speaker. Of 

course after some thought I constructed a phrase befitting a 

43-year-old, first-time MLA, Mr. Speaker, and it comes out like 

this: to be a part of this historic Chamber and to be here today is 

really cool, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m sure my daughters will hear 

this, and for some reason, I have to think that it just won’t 

sound as good as they were describing their experience. 

[16:00] 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my family for all 

their love, encouragement and support over the past two years 

that I campaigned to get here. I have the utmost respect and 

admiration for my wife because she was always there after the 

evenings of door knocking and meetings, asking how it went 

and encouraging me to go out and do more. I can never thank 

her enough for all those evenings she took on the family 

responsibilities — being a chauffeur, counsellor and friend — 

but also committing time to her own profession as a teacher 

during the school year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of us who are married to teachers or who 

may have been a teacher or are teachers, we have come to 

understand that their work is never really done because after the 

workday is finished they have to get ready for the next day. And 

this goes on until June. 

 

To my daughters, Alyssa and Mackenzie, I thank them for 

understanding that Dad was working towards a goal that would 

make their lives better and make this province a better place for 

their future opportunities. 

 

As I worked towards having the honour today of standing here, 

Mr. Speaker, and addressing this Assembly, I know the hard 

work took me away from my home on a lot of evenings, as it 

did for all of us who sought public office. The importance of 

making time in our hectic schedules to spend with our loved 

ones and our children is something that we should never lose 

sight of. And I for one will never forget how my daughters lent 

their dad to the process of democracy to see a Saskatchewan 

Party government today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I find myself reflecting on the past two years, I could not 

help but remember all of the campaign staff, volunteers and 

supporters who made the run so exciting and rewarding. So 

many people gave unselfishly of themselves to ensure that I got 

to advance in and around Prince Albert, made sure that the 

direction we were taking was always towards a goal — the goal 

of having the privilege today to sit to your right, Mr. Speaker, 

and make history as a member of the Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, all of those who took in the 

process, took a part in the process, volunteered and voted to see 

a Saskatchewan Party win have become a part of our province’s 

history. To all of those people who wanted and needed to see 

change, I am truly mindful of the responsibility bestowed upon 

me. I am thankful to each and every supporter who made this 

possibility a reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about my constituency 

of Prince Albert Carlton. My constituency has the potential to 

become the economic hub of our north, with our vast resources 

that some have argued were underutilized over the past 16 

years. The women and men of Prince Albert and our province 

should and will benefit from a new investment climate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

For years I have heard questions from my community in regards 

to why don’t we have an oil sands development in this 

province? Why is it that the nuclear industry hasn’t established 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

themselves more in our province, Mr. Speaker? If you have 

been paying attention for the past number of years, industry 

leaders from these sectors have been looking at expanding their 

investment into our economy, but the climate for that to occur 

wasn’t available, Mr. Speaker, and now that will be changing. 

 

The people of Prince Albert Carlton, along with the citizens of 

Prince Albert and area, will benefit from the change in 

government. Our children have opportunities now to return to 

Saskatchewan, and others will now have the opportunity to stay, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The evening of November 7 brought with it the true spirit of 

Prince Albert Carlton, I believe. Hope beats fear. The campaign 

of hope beats fear, Mr. Speaker, was province-wide, but in my 

constituency I truly believe it meant something more. The 

voters who put their X next to my name did so because they too 

wanted to see opportunities expanded and not wasted. The 

voters wanted to see a government in Saskatchewan that was 

responsible, a government that was accountable to the people, a 

government that would stop putting good money after bad into 

investment ventures, Mr. Speaker. That practice over the past 

16 years should have taught the previous administration that, as 

elected officials, we need to stop trying to pick winners and 

losers in our economy. We need to stop risking taxpayers’ 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The voters of Prince Albert Carlton and other constituencies 

across our great province wanted to see a government who 

provided an investment climate for prosperity while not being 

forced to participate in it with their own tax dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. There were almost one billion reasons they wanted to 

have their say, Mr. Speaker, and on that day of November 7, 

they had their say. 

 

The Throne Speech has set forth our government’s plan for the 

next year, Mr. Speaker, and it also contained the blueprint for 

the next four years and I’m sure for some time to come after 

that. Our Premier has made it clear that a plan for growth, 

security, and keeping our promises is how the Saskatchewan 

Party government will provide a future for our great province. 

 

The first part of our plan involves the growth initiative our 

candidates spoke of throughout the 28-day campaign, and our 

party spoke of leading up to the election call, Mr. Speaker. This 

initiative will see our government accountable to the people, 

Mr. Speaker, through not only the balancing of budgets but also 

the projection of the four years after each and every budget 

year. That, Mr. Speaker, should have been a cornerstone of 

government, but it took the will of the Saskatchewan Party 

voters to finally get the realization of sound policy that will give 

the citizens of Prince Albert and Saskatchewan the larger 

financial picture and not just a snapshot in time as has been the 

case in the past. 

 

Our growth initiative will bring with it a confidence in our 

economy that will see an investment climate without direct 

government inputs, with more effective measures that will 

allow for large and small businesses to start, and those already 

contributing to our economy to expand and stay, Mr. Speaker. 

Once again I believe that these measures alone will make my 

constituency more prosperous in the years to come. 

 

Security, Mr. Speaker, is all encompassing. It involves the 

protection of people in the broadest sense. Within this initiative, 

we will provide security to those who need it the most, the 

citizens — young and old alike — who need a strong social 

safety net that will be there for them in their time of need. 

 

Our health care system will see our plan to put additional 

resources into the front line with doctors and nurses. I am truly 

thankful to see that part of our platform become reality, Mr. 

Speaker, because the Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert and 

other hospitals across our province need these resources to 

advance the care of our citizens. 

 

My hospital alone services a vast geographical section of this 

province, and the demands upon its services have been 

increasing over the years. The health care professionals have 

been pushed to the max, while the NDP failed to take the steps 

to improve the health care system they alone let slip, slip into its 

current state, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will also be there for those who have been victimized by a 

part of society, Mr. Speaker. Some of these individuals know of 

no other way but to lash out at the system and at people. We 

will be there for both of these groups. For those who offend 

against property or persons, there are underlying factors that 

have lead to the commission of their offences and a vast 

majority of these incidences. Substance abuse and use has 

resulted in the perception that committing crime is the only way 

they can survive, Mr. Speaker, or at a minimum these concerns 

have been a factor in the crime being committed. It would 

appear that not enough emphasis was placed on treatment beds 

or programs by the previous administration either, in their 

tenure, to make an impact on the situation today. It’s time for a 

positive change in that direction as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, I can 

tell you that resources will be allocated under our plan to 

address a record we never should have attained. The unfortunate 

fact that our province has the highest violent crime rate in 

Canada for the past nine years is another reason I believe the 

citizens of Prince Albert Carlton put their X next to my name, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a police officer, I’ve had to have the unfortunate task of 

attending violent crime scenes and homicides. I’ve also had the 

unenvied task of having to inform parents that their child was a 

victim of a homicide, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard the cries of a 

father asking why. I’ve heard the screams of a mother who, 

after a moment of clarity, understood that we had just told her 

she’d lost her child and that child had been killed by someone. I 

was not able to answer their pleas at the time when they asked 

me who did it. All I was able to do was assure them that we, the 

police service, the men and women who are committed to law 

enforcement, would work day and night until we brought all the 

suspects to justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a situation in our province right now that has our 

police services and officers pitted against an increase in gangs. 

We should not try to hide the fact or forget the fact that these 

members of gangs are members of organized crime, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government recognizes that it is time to 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

develop a long-term policing strategy that clearly identifies the 

current and emerging needs of local police services. We have 

people on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, who can speak 

from experience on how the NDP were funding positions within 

our police services that left, for all intents and purposes, violent 

crime completely untouched. Mr. Speaker, all one has to do is 

check into the national crime statistics to see that the provincial 

violent crime rate led the nation for each of the past nine years. 

 

As we stated in the introduction of the Throne Speech: “. . . 

actions speak louder than words,” Mr. Speaker. And for too 

many years, the NDP kept using words by telling the general 

public about their funded crime fighting initiatives while our 

citizens were being assaulted and murdered. Sadly these words 

never led the former government to follow their own words 

with adequate actions. 

 

As a person who takes law enforcement seriously, I know that 

more can be done by those who protect and serve, that they 

need a government to stand beside them in order to get off of 

that nine-year run at the top of the most unenvied list in this 

country, Mr. Speaker, a list that the NDP should be very 

ashamed of. 

 

The final pillar I’ll call it, Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan 

Party government will keep its promises. We came out during 

the election with a platform that provided mandates that our 

government will fulfill. As of yesterday, the people of 

Saskatchewan can see that as a party we made statements, and 

now as a government we are putting those statements into 

action, not just words, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard over the 

past 16 years — a mandate, actions that are accountable to the 

people of our great province, Mr. Speaker. On November 7, Mr. 

Speaker, we listened. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

before I begin my remarks, may I congratulate you on your 

election today to the Deputy Speaker’s position. I appreciated 

the comments that you made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in accepting 

the wishes of the House, and I look forward to working with 

you in your various capacities here in the Chair and in 

committees. So congratulations to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

That having been said, I also want to congratulate the elected 

Speaker who was elected yesterday, who will bring a renewed 

sense of who we are to this Chamber, an individual who has 

indeed served a considerable number of years in this place and 

understands the value of those who occupy the chairs 

throughout the Chamber. 

 

I also want to take a moment to congratulate the government on 

their election on November 7. It was a hard-fought election 

campaign across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite came to this Chamber with more constituency 

representation than my party, Mr. Speaker, and I congratulate 

them on their success in that regard. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate my colleagues 

who are serving with me on this side of the Chamber. As our 

leader indicated on the night that we were sworn in here, there 

is not a bad seat in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. There is not a 

bad seat whether you serve on that side of the Chamber or 

whether you serve on this side or indeed whether you serve at 

the Table, Mr. Speaker, because indeed we are all doing the 

work of the people of Saskatchewan. They rely on us to ensure 

that monies are distributed fairly and equally across the 

province and that laws that are affecting all people in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are indeed fair and balanced and 

take into account the needs of all Saskatchewan representatives. 

So I congratulate my colleagues on the efforts that they put in 

during the election campaign and indeed the representation that 

they are now going to make as they go forward over the next 

four years. 

 

And specifically, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate and welcome my 

new colleagues, members from different parts of the province 

— Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert — who have been 

elected to serve for the first time in this Chamber, and I wish 

them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want one moment to thank my constituents 

and the volunteers who served in my campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the second time that my constituents have supported me 

and the representation that I will make on their behalf. I am 

grateful for the people of The Battlefords — the support that 

they have given me to serve. I am grateful for the support that 

my volunteers gave to ensure that I was able to run and manage 

an effective campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think you are aware that I previously served 

twice in the federal House of Commons. I thanked my 

constituents at that time. And, Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful 

that they are continuing to support me through now my second 

term in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

[16:15] 

 

We are here today, Mr. Speaker, as you are aware and all 

members are aware, to reply to and comment upon the vision of 

the new government as expressed in the Throne Speech 

delivered in this Chamber earlier this week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a Throne Speech that addresses a number of 

issues that the new government feels are important for the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, of course as other 

members from this side have indicated there are also some 

omissions, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have 

indicated are important to them but have not yet been addressed 

by the new government. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, to take the new government on 

its words during the delivery of the Throne Speech — “It’s time 

to get to work,” for example and “. . . actions speak louder than 

words” — well, Mr. Speaker, we are certainly looking for the 

actions that will stem from the words that were expressed in the 

Throne Speech. And we are in fact hoping for actions that go 

beyond the words that have been expressed here because there 

are some significant omissions. 

 

And I mentioned my gratefulness to my constituents, Mr. 

Speaker, for their support for me in this election campaign. And 



December 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

I’d like to address this Throne Speech first, Mr. Speaker, from 

the perspective of my constituents. 

 

There were a number of things that we addressed on the 

doorsteps during the election campaign, a number of issues that 

weren’t necessarily a part of either party’s provincial campaign, 

that weren’t necessarily a part of the general thinking . . . the 

media comments with regards to the election and the future, Mr. 

Speaker. But there were some things that my constituents were 

telling me on the doorstep that were important to them, and I 

am bringing those issues back to the Legislative Assembly here 

in Regina. Mr. Speaker, I will do so not only today but 

throughout the term of this government because, Mr. Speaker, 

these are issues that my constituents told me are important to 

them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of those issues that came up frequently 

during the campaign was an issue that the Leader of the 

Opposition referred to in some of his remarks just a few 

moments ago, Mr. Speaker, and that is housing — more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency — seniors’ 

housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen indeed the economy of this province 

grow at a great rate over the course of the last three years, an 

economy that is having an impact at the local level and on 

persons, Mr. Speaker, not only in a positive way — like more 

jobs are being created. There’s more wealth in the province. 

There are greater resources available, fiscal resources available 

to government to address some of our social challenges, Mr. 

Speaker. But the booming economy, the prosperity of this 

province has also created some stresses for ordinary people in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those stresses include increased value of property, increased 

costs to new homeowners, increased rents to renters. And what 

my constituents were telling me during the election campaign is 

if we’re all going to benefit from the prosperity of this province, 

then what is government going to do to ensure that there is 

affordable housing for seniors throughout Saskatchewan? 

Affordable housing, Mr. Speaker, in the sense that many seniors 

living independently are living in apartment buildings. And in 

North Battleford as in Saskatoon and in Regina, we’re seeing a 

number of apartment buildings being converted to 

condominiums, Mr. Speaker, because of course the more 

prosperous economy has created an opportunity for investors 

and others to move from rental accommodations in one place to 

purchasing property, purchasing condominiums. Well that 

opportunity has stressed seniors who are on limited and often 

fixed incomes. And their ability to remain in their own homes, 

the apartments that they’ve been renting, Mr. Speaker, have 

stressed them considerably. 

 

So what is the plan of the government opposite in addressing 

not only the prosperous sides of our growing economy, but 

some of the negative and some of the stresses caused by this 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When it comes to housing, I read the Throne Speech. My 

constituents read the Throne Speech. We have nothing to say, 

Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan who are stressed by 

housing. Primarily seniors in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, but 

if we just take a look at what this means to students in rental 

accommodations where the rents are increasing three and four 

times a year now because property values have increased or 

those properties in fact have been purchased at highly inflated 

values by outside-of-the-province investors, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re pushing the values up for students in our universities 

and colleges, for seniors in our communities on fixed incomes 

and, Mr. Speaker, for average families who are still trying to 

find . . . or young people starting a family, Mr. Speaker, who 

are looking for their first home. A home that in North Battleford 

three years ago was $70,000, that home is now $200,000, Mr. 

Speaker. Very difficult in a very short period of time for young 

people to be able to start their families and enjoy and benefit 

from our local economy. 

 

So housing, Mr. Speaker, seniors in particular but also students 

and young families, an issue that my constituents want raised in 

this Chamber. I will raise it again, Mr. Speaker, but the absence 

of housing from the Throne Speech indicates that this 

government, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t seem to get the issue of 

prosperity also needs to be managed by government. 

 

The other piece, Mr. Speaker, is of course that along with 

prosperity and a growing economy and the great number of jobs 

that have been created in this economy, Mr. Speaker, is the 

labour shortage. And of course the new government has talked a 

little bit about immigration. They’ve talked a little bit about 

First Nations, Mr. Speaker. But what they haven’t talked about 

and what they have not addressed in the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, is training spaces at our institutions of 

higher learning, Mr. Speaker, that will allow for Saskatchewan 

young people — whether they are First Nations or non-First 

Nations or immigrants coming into our province — to gain the 

skills necessary to ensure that we’ll be able to fill the jobs that 

have been created. 

 

Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, in the four years that I 

served on the other side of the House as a minister of the 

Crown, and each and every month when the job numbers came 

out and there more jobs created in the province of 

Saskatchewan than ever before, not a question, not a comment 

from the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, about job creation in 

the province. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that one of 

the first news releases issued by the new government was to 

acknowledge the latest reports about new job numbers in 

Saskatchewan, the highest employment rate ever achieved in 

the province of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, the highest 

number of people working in the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 

Speaker, in the history of our province. So interesting that when 

the job numbers were good and the members opposite were on 

this side of the House, not a comment about that, and now 

taking credit for and enjoying the benefits of the work that had 

been done previously. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the stress that all these new jobs and new 

investment is causing into our provincial economy, Mr. 

Speaker, the stress of that on ordinary people about having the 

skill levels to be able to go out and compete for these new jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, not acknowledged in this Throne Speech at all. 

North West Regional College and other regional colleges 

throughout Saskatchewan looking forward to being able to 

deliver new programs to meet the needs of the local labour 

force, Mr. Speaker . . . We have to ensure, we have to ensure 

that we’re going to have the training spaces necessary at the 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2007 

local levels to be able to meet the needs of our growing 

economy. 

 

That takes me also, Mr. Speaker, to an issue that was addressed 

in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and it has to do with health 

care. Of course I am well aware of the stresses on the health 

care system, the need for additional doctors and nurses in the 

system, and of course the need to ensure that we’re going to be 

able to deliver value to the Saskatchewan population through 

our health care system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about the new health care 

audit that’s being proposed by the members opposite in the 

Throne Speech. We know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

already has the lowest administration costs of every health 

system in the country, in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And so the 

government now is saying that from the base of the lowest cost 

administrative system in Canada we’re going to squeeze some 

money that’s going to allow for us to hire more nurses and more 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. We need a greater commitment than that, 

Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to serve the public through the 

health care system. We need a greater commitment than that. 

 

And I’m hoping that actions will speak louder than words 

because, Mr. Speaker, the words in the Throne Speech do not 

meet the expectations that were created during the election 

campaign where the public was told this new government, when 

elected, if elected, would hire 800 new nurses. There was no 

plan of course behind that commitment. And now we’re finding 

out that not only is there no plan, there’s not even anything 

more than it’s just a goal of this government to actually hire 

new nurses. We need more than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing is, I do have some concern, Mr. Speaker, with 

concerns about the new Enterprise Saskatchewan, a group of 

appointed individuals who are now going to manage the new 

economy. Mr. Speaker, I think the public should be most 

concerned about the language in the Throne Speech and what it 

might mean for us. The language says that the new government 

will “. . . return direction of the economy to the hands of people 

who create the jobs.” In other words, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is privatizing the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This place, Mr. Speaker, is where the direction for the economy 

should be decided, this place, Mr. Speaker, because we are 

placed here by the people of Saskatchewan to do the bidding of 

the people of Saskatchewan. And this government is in turn 

handing off the responsibility for that to the private sector, Mr. 

Speaker. And while it’s important that jobs are created and it’s 

important that government work with the private sector, we do 

not, as it says here, “. . . return direction of the economy to the 

hands of the people who create the jobs,” privatizing the 

economy of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is reaching the end, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to indicate that I have been very pleased to 

serve the people of The Battlefords for the last four years. I’m 

pleased to be able to represent them for the next four years. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I signal today that I will be supporting the 

amendment and not supporting the . . . I’m sorry. I will not be 

supporting the motion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I see 

that I’m being given some direction, Mr. Speaker, on my feet. 

It’s a good thing that I can do two things at once, speak and 

listen at the same time. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, 

assuming that I have heard things correctly, I would like to at 

this point move adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from North Battleford 

has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

House for the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I move that the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There has been a motion for the 

House to adjourn. The House will meet tomorrow at 1:30. Is it 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is carried. The House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:28.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 

  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 12 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Thank You to Civil Servants During Transition 

  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................ 13 

 Violence Against Women 

  Beatty ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

 Asia-Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative 

  Ross .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 13 

 Human Rights Day 

  Morin ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

 Saskatoon Citizens Save a Life 

  LeClerc ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 14 

 Role of Opposition 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

 Congratulations to Saskatchewan Roughriders 

  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 14 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 15 

  Furber .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 17 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 18 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 20 

  Brkich .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 20 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 20 

  McMillan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 

 House Adjournment 

  Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Eagles ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 21 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 23 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 25 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................... 30 

  LeClerc ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 32 

  Hickie ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 34 

  Taylor ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




