


















































Hansard: May 02, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 55A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 2, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1477 
 May 2, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned citizens in the Broadview and surrounding regions 
regarding the need for a dialysis unit in the area. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition where people are asking the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they are concerned that without an office 
submission of electrical and gas permits will be more difficult 
and cause delays in customer hookups. The prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that all of the signatures on this petition 
come from the community of Rosetown. I’m so pleased to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of the people from 
my constituency who are very concerned about the 
discontinuing of basic education classes at the Estevan campus 
of the Southeast Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 

continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this has been signed by people from Estevan and Bienfait. 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar concerned 
about their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Kinley and Perdue and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the South who are 
extremely concerned about the withdrawal of lab services at the 
Lafleche and District Health Centre and the hardships it would 
cause to residents, especially senior citizens. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are very concerned with the 
health care system that’s provided in that area and the 
potentially dangerous situation that is coming forth. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shellbrook 
and Holbein. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today as well to present a petition on behalf of citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the 
possible and potential closures of schools in their communities 
and the hardships that that would put on, especially, young 
children. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by good citizens from Nokomis and 
Lockwood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition for the people of Saskatchewan who 
are deeply concerned about the presence of sexual predators 
that present a threat to our communities. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth, 
Prud’homme, and Lethbridge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with the citizens concerned about the underfunding this 
government is providing to schools to help keep them open: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petitions are signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis and Silton and Lockwood. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise in the House today to 
present a petition regarding schools in rural Saskatchewan. The 
prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools stay open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
whereas a citizen of the province of Saskatchewan was killed in 
a motor vehicle accident September 2005 in Saskatoon while 
stopped at a red light, whereas the citizen was struck from 
behind by another motor vehicle and drug- and alcohol-level 
testing was not administered, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
will be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol 
testings. 

 
By the good people of Bruno and Humboldt. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Multiple 
Sclerosis Awareness Month, and I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all in the 
Assembly, two gentlemen sitting in your gallery. They are 
members of the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada, 
Saskatchewan division. And I’ll ask them to stand. You’ll 
recognize them because of the carnation on their lapel. 
 
There’s Jack Aldcorn, executive director, Saskatchewan 
division. And Brian Duck, a government relations Chair. And I 
would also like to thank TaraLee Pister Saskatchewan division, 
who can’t be with us this afternoon, but in fact she’s the one 
that put these carnations together, ensuring that all of us are 
able to sport these carnations in honouring the MS [multiple 
sclerosis] Awareness Month. I would like all in the Assembly to 
welcome these gentlemen to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to introduce a number of good friends and people in the 
west gallery. These are People First of Saskatchewan, People 
First of Canada, and certainly members of the Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have representatives from a number of places 
that attended a rally today to certainly express their views on 
the institutions throughout Canada in terms of working with 
many people that have a wide variety of disabilities. There’s 
representatives from BC [British Columbia], Alberta, Manitoba, 
Ontario, PEI [Prince Edward Island], Newfoundland, Nova 
Scotia. 
 
I also want to thank the organizers of the rally today: Faith 
Bodnar and Diane Otterbein. And, Mr. Speaker, we did attend 
the rally. We had a number of MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] from the government side that attended, 
the MLA for Saskatoon Sutherland, Moose Jaw Wakamow, and 
Saskatoon Fairview. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make an extra effort to welcome all our guests from across the 
country and to especially welcome the people that organized the 
rally this afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you 26 grade 5 students 
from the Delisle Elementary School. Also with these students 
are teachers Donna Dreher and Valerie Dyck, and also 
chaperones Ms. Wist and Ms. Richardson and Ms. Smith. I will 
be having a photo with them a little later and also having a visit 
with them where I will answer questions. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the students from Delisle 
Elementary School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join the members opposite as a representative of 
government to welcome the guests from the MS Society and 
thank them very much for coming. It’s nice to see Brian Duck 
here as well. He’s looking as good as always, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I, on behalf of the government, welcome them to the Chamber 
and thank them very much for the efforts that they put in on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people every day of every year. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly today, seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is one of the interns, one of the five 
interns that’s been working here at the Legislative Assembly. 
With us today is an intern that will be working with me for the 
next couple of months as my intern. I would be pleased and 
honoured to welcome to the Assembly today, Jarita Greyeyes. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There’s two 
people I actually want to additionally recognize, both seated in 
the west gallery. They happen to be a husband and wife team of 
one who is absolutely no stranger to this Assembly, and one 
who soon will be no stranger to this Assembly. 
 
We have in the west gallery Reg Knezacek, former MLA for 
Saltcoats. Reg, good to see you. Seated with Reg we have a 
former teacher and now candidate for Melville-Saltcoats, 
Marlys Knezacek, and we very much look forward to the day 
when Marlys will take her place in the benches on this side of 
the government. I ask all hon. members to join me in 
welcoming both — Marlys the candidate and Reg the former 
MLA Knezacek — to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure as well, 
Mr. Speaker, to welcome to the Assembly Kiley Frantik as one 
of our interns. I’m looking forward to working with Kiley. This 
is the first time I’ve actually had the privilege of working with 
an intern. I know the interns truly enjoyed their trip to England 
that they just arrived back from, and we certainly want to 
welcome them back to the province, to their Assembly. And as 
members, we appreciate their learning effort as they join us here 
in the Assembly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great privilege to introduce to the Assembly a family friend 
who’s on the floor of the Assembly, Emily Otterbein, who’s the 
daughter of one of the organizers, Diane Otterbein. Emily is a 
very bright grade 11 student who is a excellent athlete and is 
involved in too many numerous activities to mention here, but 
whatever she sets her mind to she’s able to achieve. And I’m 
predicting today that at some point in the future if she wants to 
be, she very well could be the first woman premier of 
Saskatchewan, but no pressure or anything. But would all hon. 
members please welcome Emily here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We now are having 
the pleasure of receiving interns as the trade occurs during their 
mid-term of service to us. And it’s just a great pleasure for me 
to be able to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly, Jonathan Selnes who will be joining me. I’ve just 
broken the news to him that he will be having a very busy June 
as we enter into the hearings at our committee on TILMA 
[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement]. And he’s 
expressing some delight at being that busy because he’d like to 
do his research work and paper on that. 
 
So I’m going to have a really hard-working intern for the next 
number of months. I’ve supported the internship program since 
its inception, and I’m just delighted to have Jonathan with me. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the late 
1970s May has been observed across Canada as Multiple 
Sclerosis Awareness Month, and by wearing these carnations 
we wish to raise awareness about multiple sclerosis on behalf of 
the people with MS. During the month of May efforts are made 
to raise awareness about this disease with the public through 
fundraisers and awareness programs using special projects like 
sponsorship walks and community events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, MS is a disease of the central nervous system and 
is the most common neurological disease affecting young 
people and young people in Canada. Unfortunately there is no 
known cure at this time. MS is most often diagnosed between 
the ages of 15 and 40 and unfortunately can be found in 
children as young as three years old. There are between 55,000 
and 75,000 Canadians with MS, with approximately 1,000 new 
diagnoses a year, and that’s a startling statistic. 
 
On a personal note I have taken a renewed interest in MS as a 
disease because my constituency assistant is one who suffers 
from the effects of MS. Due to many fundraisers, research and 
special adaptations are advancing. My CA [constituency 
assistant] now lives in a normal or a near normal work and 
family environment because of that work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to thank Jack and Brian 
and anyone involved with and those who support the 
Saskatchewan division of MS. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
bring to the attention of the legislature and offer our 
congratulations to the winners of the 14th annual Battlefords 
Business Excellence Awards presented May 1 in North 
Battleford. 
 
I’m proud to say the Heritage Award was provided to Paul and 
Diane Gervais of G & C Asphalt Services. As many in this 
Chamber know, the Gervais family has been active not only in 
The Battlefords but throughout the province. 
 
The Community Contribution Award went to Canadian Tire, 
A&J Marshall Holdings. The Export Achievement Award went 
to Vanguard, Winalta Industrial Division. The Marketing 
Award went to Karen Ulmer Chevrolet. Customer Service went 
to My Travel, Sinfonia; New Business Venture to Envirosafe 
Chemicals Canada; and the BBEX [Battlefords Business 
Excellence Awards] Business of the Year Award went to 
Dwight’s Trenching Limited Partnership, one of several 
companies now owned by the Battlefords Tribal Council. 
 
My congratulations to the organizers, The Battlefords Chamber 
of Commerce and the corporate sponsors including SaskTel, 
CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce], SaskPower, 
Royal Bank Financial Group, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], Innovation Credit Union, and SaskEnergy. 
 
And special mention, Mr. Speaker, must be made of local artist 
Pam Lowe, whose incredible original paintings were given to 
each award winner in recognition of their success in the 
community during the past year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan Volunteer Captains Big Bike 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
privileged to attend the launch of the SaskEnergy Heart and 
Stroke Big Bike Tour. I am very pleased that Ed Moreau from 
Estevan has been named honorary provincial captain for the Big 
Bike by the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Ed has been involved 
with the Big Bike for 12 years, and this gentleman has amazing 
energy, enthusiasm, and generosity. 
 
Ed’s Big Bike team, the Medical Maniacs, is comprised of staff 
from St. Joseph’s Hospital, and they have a lot of fun with this 
event. But it is fun with a serious purpose. Each year they 
dedicate their ride to a friend, colleague, or community member 
who has faced heart disease or stroke. The funds they raise help 
the Heart and Stroke Foundation continue research projects 
aimed at helping people survive this disease that currently 
affects 4 out of every 10 Saskatchewan people during their 
lifetime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ed and his team, including Mark Pettit and Darla 
Wilhelm, have raised more than $100,150 for the work of the 
foundation. Ed is quick to credit the generosity of the Estevan 
community for this amazing accomplishment, but it is Ed’s 



May 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

determination to set his goals higher each year and his 
willingness to do whatever it takes to reach those goals — 
including shaving his head or having his caricature plastered all 
over town, also his underlying dedication to reducing the 
devastating impact of heart disease and stroke — that have 
made this milestone possible. Ed and the foundation are also 
committed to helping people protect their health by encouraging 
an active and healthy lifestyle. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Ed Moreau for 
his selfless dedication to our community and our province. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Think Regina Campaign 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Today, Mr. Speaker, is part of this city’s 
Think Regina campaign, Team Regina landed in Calgary to 
promote the career, investment, and business opportunities that 
Regina has to offer. Mr. Speaker, Team Regina features over 40 
Regina businesses and agencies such as IPSCO, the Wheat 
Pool, SaskPower, and some have as many as 130 job openings 
on offer. Rawlco’s Sarah Mills and CTV’s Lindsey Hoemsen 
are on site, and it’s reported that people were lined up with 
resumés in hand before the doors even opened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the focus of this government continues to be 
making Saskatchewan the best and most affordable place to 
live, work, and build your future. We have been proactive in 
promoting our province far and wide, and we have always 
known that the future is wide open. The Think Regina 
campaign can only take us further in this direction. Today in 
Calgary the message is, if you’re looking for a career, think 
Regina. If you’re looking for a business, think Regina. And if 
you’re looking at investment, think Regina — with apologies to 
Saskatoon and other communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hats off to the mayor, business leaders, recruiters, and the 
Regina Future Leaders group for taking this initiative. We wish 
you every success and we will get out the welcome mat for the 
people who will be following you back to the best place in 
Canada to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Butler Byers Insurance Celebrates Centennial 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
year there are some Saskatoon businesses celebrating their 
centennials. Independent insurance broker Butler Byers 
Insurance Ltd. is one of those businesses. 
 
The company got its start when Newt Byers — one of the many 
Americans who immigrated to Saskatchewan in the first decade 
of the 20th century — he got together with real estate agent Jim 
Butler and his younger brother Ivan Byers to form Butler Byers 

real estate insurance in Saskatoon in 1907. The company 
recorded its first ever sale of hail insurance in 1913. A century 
later, the firm is one of the largest independent insurance 
brokers in Western Canada. It is still run by the Byers family, 
four generations later. According to Canadian Association of 
Family Enterprise, only 10 per cent of family businesses make 
it to the third generation and even fewer to the fourth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the firm offers products and services — 
including standard home, auto, business, and life — to large 
manufacturing firms, employees’ benefits, and hail insurance. A 
profile of the firm in the publication called Saskatoon 
Centurions notes, quote: 
 

The Butler Byers story is closely intertwined with 
Saskatoon’s history. The firm has not only grown with the 
city, the Byers family and the staff have invested their 
time and talents to make an impact on quality of life. 

 
I would like to congratulate all members of the Byers family 
and all the staff of Butler Byers Insurance on their 100th 
anniversary and for their endless contributions to the city of 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

2007 National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is currently 
hosting the 2007 National Aboriginal Hockey Championships. 
The event began on April 29 and continues until May 5, 
showcasing the best young Aboriginal men and women’s 
hockey players from across the country. 
 
I was proud to be part of the opening ceremonies on Sunday 
evening to help welcome these top athletes and their families. 
The games began Sunday night with a Saskatchewan men’s 
team winning their first game against Team Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are nine women’s teams and eight men’s 
teams with over 400 athletes ages 13 to 17. Accompanying the 
athletes is a small army of about 100 dedicated trainers, 
coaches, and of course their families. There are also more than 
100 local volunteers. All are working hard to ensure that the 
athletes are ready and able to represent their regions as best they 
can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no question there is exciting hockey this week in 
Prince Albert. So far Saskatchewan’s men’s team remains 
undefeated with three wins. Mr. Speaker, Team Saskatchewan 
is defending their gold medal. The women’s team has won 
twice along with one tie. They too are doing very well. 
 
I invite all members to go see the games in Prince Albert this 
weekend and support the young men and women as they 
compete for the title of 2007 Aboriginal hockey champions. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Results of Media Polls 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, all across Saskatchewan 
people’s attention is focused on the NDP fraud scandal that 
continues to balloon. The fact that it was, according to a 1994 
police report, the intention of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
caucus to conceal fraud is the topic of conversation on talk 
shows and newspaper columns and editorials, on blog sites, and 
even on coffee row. Several media outlets have also been 
conducting polls on the matter. 
 
Early this week CKOM’s poll asked listeners if the Premier 
should fire the minister at the centre of this scandal; 73 per cent 
said yes. CJME polled its listeners to find out if the minister 
should resign; 79 per cent said yes. Last night CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] released the results of its e-poll that 
asked if the Premier should accept the minister’s resignation; 69 
per cent said yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix polled readers on whether the 
minister should be relieved of his duties because of the way he 
handled the potential caucus fraud case which dates back to 
1992. As of the first thing this morning, 87 per cent said yes. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very interesting to poll 
the NDP caucus on this subject just to see how many of their 
MLAs agree that the minister should go. I think the results 
would be very surprising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Response of Caucus to Misappropriation of Funds 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
no longer a question of was there a cover-up? The question now 
is, who knew about the cover-up? Who knew about the NDP’s 
decision to conceal fraud? Pat Lorjé told the police that it was 
the intention of the NDP caucus to conceal fraud. 
 
Yesterday she told reporters she didn’t really mean not the 
whole caucus, just a few of them. Lorjé said and I quote, “There 
may have been individuals in caucus who wanted to forget 
about the whole thing, but I wasn’t part of that group.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, who was in the group? Who knew about the fraud 
the NDP caucus had decided to cover up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question that has been 
posed is not one that is the responsibility of a minister. I will 
however allow a response if there is a minister that wishes to 
take it. The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as Government House 

Leader, I will voluntarily take that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just review the facts. Mr. Speaker, in 1992, 
under an assumed name, Ann Lord was hired to work in the 
caucus office. And in August of that year, she left a letter 
indicating that she had misappropriately received funds. Mr. 
Speaker, that matter was then pursued. And as is indicated in 
the illegally obtained police document filed by the opposition in 
this House yesterday, it was confirmed that in fact the police 
were aware of the letter of confession that Ms. Lord had left. 
Mr. Speaker, that matter was concluded. 
 
It was again revisited at the direction of the caucus admin 
committee under the leadership of Pat Lorjé. Mr. Speaker, at 
that time all items were turned over to the police, including the 
document, all the accusations that had been received in writing, 
and once again it was determined that no charges would be laid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to blame the 
entire cover-up on Jim Fodey. The problem is that story just 
does not hold up. Other people knew that the confession letter 
and the audit never got to the police in 1992. There was a story 
about that in the Leader-Post. There was also a staff meeting at 
Madge Lake where this was discussed with the NDP House 
Leader. 
 
There was a caucus meeting in Prince Albert where Pat Lorjé 
provided complete disclosure. According to her statement to the 
police, Mr. Speaker, Pat Lorjé knew about the cover-up. That’s 
why she went back to the police. If she knew about the 
cover-up, who else knew about this cover-up that was sitting on 
the NDP benches at the time? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, again the information in the 
illegally obtained police document tabled by the opposition 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, confirms in the notes of September 16, 
1992, that the police were aware that there was a letter from 
Ann Lord that had been received and was a factor in what was 
being dealt with at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because later on there was a staff person within 
the caucus who felt that matters had not been properly handled, 
as well as a number of other complaints, Mr. Speaker, all of that 
complete statement of complaints made by that employee was 
taken and delivered to the police in a process of communication 
and organization that was led by Pat Lorjé under the direction 
of the administration committee of the caucus — under the 
direction of the administration committee of the caucus, Mr. 
Speaker — to ensure that all of that went to the police. The 
complete package. They got it. They reviewed it, and there were 
no charges coming out of that once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is elapsed. 



May 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Pat Lorjé clearly knew that 
the evidence had not been turned over to the police in 1992. It 
says so in the police report. It says, and I quote, “It is unknown 
by LORJÉ . . . ”: 
 

It is unknown by LORJÉ why FODEY may have told 
DOUGLAS the MINTZ/WALLACE investigative audit 
was with the police. 
 

So clearly from that, Pat Lorjé knew the audit had never been 
turned over to the police in 1992. Does the minister really 
expect us to believe she never discussed this with him? He was 
the caucus Chair at the time. Does he really believe that she 
never went to him and asked why the audit was not given to the 
police in ’92? Mr. Speaker, why is the minister sticking to his 
completely implausible story? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I fully admit that I have 
made a public statement previously, based on the best 
information available to me in my briefing, that was incorrect. 
And for that, Mr. Speaker, I have corrected that record in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and stated that publicly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information in the police report indicates, in 
the notes of September 16, 1992, that the police were aware of 
the Ann Lord letter. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the facts are the 
facts. And the facts of the matter are that this whole matter was 
brought to a head. It was completely reviewed in its entirety. 
And all of the accusations related to this — and a host of other 
things, Mr. Speaker, from an employee who felt that matters 
were not being properly handled within the caucus office — 
was turned to the police for their review. They did that, Mr. 
Speaker, and at the end of it, once again there were no charges 
laid, once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear from her statement 
to the police, Pat Lorjé knew the evidence had not been turned 
over to the police in 1992. So how did she know that? She has 
either heard it from the minister or she heard it from somebody 
else. If that is the case that she heard it from somebody else, she 
would have gone to the minister who was the caucus Chair at 
the time and asked him about it. Either way the minister knew 
that the evidence had not been, the complete evidence had not 
been turned over in 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how on earth would Pat Lorjé know that the 
evidence was never provided to the police, but this minister 
claims he didn’t know? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
many times it has to be repeated. In the police notes, in the 
illegally obtained police document tabled in this House by the 
Saskatchewan Party, that on September 16, 1992, it becomes 
clear that the police were aware of that letter. I can’t say any 
more than that, Mr. Speaker. There it is. It’s in the notes. It’s in 
the notes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think once again we have to ask ourselves, what 
is this all about? I’ve answered the question already twice, Mr. 
Speaker. And what this is all about is a difference in view about 
what’s important to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
we have an opposition in this session that has said that the two 
most important things to the people of Saskatchewan are two 
personnel matters: one of, I think, four years ago and one of 
fifteen years ago. Mr. Speaker, that has been the priority of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The New Democratic government, Mr. Speaker, is much more 
interested in getting on with the business of the people of 
Saskatchewan, building for the future of Saskatchewan. That’s 
what we’re doing, and that’s we will continue to do in the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what’s to the interests of the 
Saskatchewan public is honesty, a government that they can 
trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And you’re not providing it. They’re not 
providing it, Mr. Speaker. Let’s pretend for one moment that we 
could believe this minister’s fairy tale. Let’s just imagine that 
somehow the minister got all the way to 1994 still believing that 
all the evidence had been turned over to the police in 1992. 
 
But then on September 12, 1994, there was a very unusual 
meeting involving Pat Lorjé, Wil Olive, Judy Bradley, Grant 
Whitmore, Carla Douglas, and the minister. Carla Douglas had 
bundled up all the evidence on Ann Davey’s fraud and placed it 
in an orange folder. She initialled that folder and handed it over 
to Wil Olive and the minister who initialled it as well. Then Pat 
Lorjé and Wil Olive hand delivered it to the Regina city police, 
Murray Langgard. Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a meeting. 
 
But the minister yesterday said he doesn’t remember. How 
could he forget initialling evidence that was handed over to the 
police in 1994 that should have been handed over in ’92? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve listened to the opposition for the last couple of days with 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

much interest. And the member opposite talks about honesty. 
Now let us examine honesty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have a file in their possession that clearly 
contained the contents of that envelope that was initialled and 
turned over to the police. We do not have that in our possession. 
We did not have that in our possession. It was given to the 
Regina city police, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the municipal police Act, no one in the 
Regina Police Service or no police officer can provide that kind 
of information. It’s illegal, Mr. Speaker. And I ask the members 
opposite — because no doubt there will be a police 
investigation — where did you get that file? And why don’t you 
put it on the public record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would request the minister to 
remember to make all of her comments through the Chair. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, every piece of information 
that we were provided in a brown envelope was put on this 
Table, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s go back to the issue of 
this minister forgetting the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 
member for Indian Head-Milestone may start over. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let’s talk about the minister forgetting that 
very important meeting that took part with all those different 
players. Mr. Speaker, I’ll admit that sometimes I won’t 
remember what happened in a meeting in 1994. But what I can 
ensure is that I will remember every single meeting where I was 
asked to initial evidence — evidence that would be immediately 
after delivered to the chief of police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister still believes that the evidence had 
been delivered, still believes, expects us to believe that he 
doesn’t remember whether the evidence was delivered in 1992. 
Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely absurd. Will he not stand in his 
place today, one last chance, and tell the truth? Did he know 
about the evidence not being delivered to the police in 1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a piece of 
legislation here that clearly says: 
 

A member of a police service commits a major offence 
against discipline if he or she is guilty of: 
 
. . . improper disclosure of information, that is if he or she, 
without proper authority, communities to any person any 
information which he or she has acquired as a member of a 
police service, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
There are documents that were tabled in this legislature 
yesterday, posted on their website, that only the city police had, 

Mr. Speaker, because they were initialled and handed over by a 
lawyer to the Regina city police, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask again, I ask again — where did those members get 
those documents that only were in the hands of the Regina city 
police? They need to come clean, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Ann Davey admitted to defrauding about $6,000 in 
1992. But in 1994, the NDP’s new director of administration 
went through the books again, and she found about $20,000 
missing. 
 
Carla Douglas said Ann Davey altered even more cheques. In 
fact before she disappeared in 1992, she altered two cheques for 
about $3,000 each. Mr. Speaker, Carla Douglas said nearly 
$20,000 of taxpayers’ money went missing from the NDP 
caucus. To the minister: Mr. Speaker, is that number correct? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we all know, the members opposite tabled a file in this 
legislature yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, police reports are not 
shared with the public, Mr. Speaker, unless there is a court 
order to do so. The members opposite had two police reports in 
their possession. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is why didn’t they turn those police 
reports — because they’re illegally obtained documents — over 
to the police before question period yesterday? They apparently 
turned the entire file over to the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] commercial crimes division and the city 
police, but, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had those documents in their 
possession for some time. Those police reports were not to be in 
their possession. 
 
My question is, why weren’t they? And, Mr. Speaker, why is it 
that some of the police report is blacked out? Who blacked out 
the police report, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
should not be a difficult question at this point. I repeat; Carla 
Douglas said nearly $20,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members will come to 
order. Member for Melville-Saltcoats. Order. Order. Member 
for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, this should not be a difficult 
question at this point. Carla Douglas said nearly $20,000 of 
taxpayers’ money were stolen from the NDP caucus. Is that 



May 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

number correct? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Public Service Commission, the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
also understand that this entire file that they tabled in the 
legislature was posted on the Sask Party website. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, these men and women want to become the government 
of the day. 
 
There was personal information in this file. Mr. Speaker, all 
members of the legislature are subject to the freedom of 
information and personal privacy protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
There were people’s phone numbers. There were their 
addresses, Mr. Speaker, and other personal information. 
 
Now I ask this, why would the Sask Party . . . If they could 
black out some part of the police report, why wouldn’t they at 
least preserve citizens of this province’s private personal 
information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the last week the minister has neglected to mention any amount 
above $6,000 in answering his questions. My question is simple 
and to the point. Is the correct amount stole by Ann Davey from 
the NDP caucus to the tune of $20,000? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there were two audits that 
were tabled in this legislature, and that has been answered, Mr. 
Speaker. But what has not been answered is how is it that the 
opposition come in receipt of two police reports that, Mr. 
Speaker, are not to be given to anybody unless there’s a court 
order. That’s question number one. 
 
This is question number two: who blacked out part of the police 
report, Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, why was it that they 
didn’t have the common, decent courtesy for people that live in 
this province to at least protect their names and their addresses 
and their phone numbers, Mr. Speaker? These men and women 
want to be the next government, but they don’t even know how 
to protect people’s private and personal information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, with the NDP’s record of scandals in the last while, it 
won’t be long before that minister will be on this side and will 
be able to ask questions of the government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — But, Mr. Speaker, the present day, right 
now, I’m asking the question. I would really like an answer. But 
I believe even more important than that, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan deserve an answer. Was that number $6,000? Or 
was the actual number, according to Carla Douglas, $20,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, these folks over there like 
to read documents. Well there was a document called KPMG, 
and it was tabled in this legislature, and they confirmed the 
number, Mr. Speaker, of $6,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite believe they’re the 
government in waiting. Well, Mr. Speaker, governments in 
waiting have to deal with justice issues, and they have to deal 
with personal privacy protection information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they have a code of ethical conduct. They 
have clearly, they have clearly violated their code of ethical 
conduct. How could a group of politicians called the Sask Party 
put people’s names, addresses, and phone numbers on their 
website? There are citizens of this province that are named in 
all of this material, Mr. Speaker, and I find it disgusting. But the 
members opposite didn’t have the good sense to protect 
people’s private information, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t have 
the sense to go to the police once they came in contact with 
those illegally obtained documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House, we find dishonesty 
disgusting, really disgusting. And I believe . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I believe again that the 
taxpayers of this province are coming to that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I’d ask the members to 
come to order. The member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Carla Douglas was very specific about two cheques. She said 
that there was a cheque from Ann Lord for $327, but it was 
altered to read $3,327. She said there was another cheque from 
Ann Lord for 293, but it was altered to read 3,293. That 
happened just before Ann Lord’s disappearance. And that 
minister and that government never did anything about it. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask again: was it $6,000, was it $10,000, or was the 
real number $20,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the file was turned over to 
the police in 1994, including Ms. Douglas’s comments. And, 
Mr. Speaker, there was an audit conducted by KPMG which 
was tabled in this legislature. 
 
Now my question is this. They say they get a brown paper 
envelope. That’s what they say. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have 
illegally obtained documents. They tabled them in the House. 
They didn’t give them back to the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can these men and women possibly hope to 
be the Government of Saskatchewan when they take illegally 
obtained documents that have police reports that only can be 
given with a court order and table them in this House, Mr. 
Speaker? I think they need to explain that to the citizens of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess, 
Mr. Speaker, the real question is here: how does that 
government expect to stay in government, covering up frauds 
like this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, after about six or eight 
questions, it’s still very unclear how many dollars were actually 
taken. And again Carla Douglas says the amount was in excess 
of $20,000. 
 
But on Friday evening Chief Johnston said, at the end of the ’94 
investigation, police asked the NDP to conduct a forensic audit 
and get back to them with the results. Mr. Speaker, that never 
happened, and the audit they did was never given to police. Mr. 
Speaker, why was there no forensic audit done, and why was 
the audit that was done never turned over to police? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the audit was tabled in 
this House. But, Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite will 
not address, they refuse to address that they made use of 
illegally obtained documents, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 
say they got a brown paper envelope, but, Mr. Speaker, police 
reports are not shared with anybody unless there is a court 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really does speak, it really does speak to their 
integrity. They have documents that were illegally obtained. 
Mr. Speaker, they need to indicate to the public, how did they 
get them? How did they get those documents? And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have a lawyer in their caucus. They knew they 
were illegally obtained. Why did they use them, Mr. Speaker? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister wants to talk about illegally obtained 
documents. What about a illegally obtained taxpayers’ dollars 
stolen from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for . . . Order please, members. Order. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the real sign that a 
government’s been in power too long when they feel they have 
no responsibility to the taxpayers of this province. That’s what 
we see happening over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I ask any minister that would 
be willing to answer the question: was the number 6,000, 8,000, 
10,000, 20,000? Or for all we know, the way they’ve swept this 
under the rug, maybe it was a lot more. What was the real 
figure, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I could digress. I 
could digress back to . . . what year was it? But, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not going to because, Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
opposition must come clean. 
 
They posted private, personal information on their website, Mr. 
Speaker. They violated people’s personal privacy, Mr. Speaker 
— names, addresses, phone numbers. They don’t care if it 
serves their political purposes, Mr. Speaker. Well they need to 
think about the good citizens of our province, Mr. Speaker, and 
at least protect some of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, they have two police reports. Police reports aren’t 
given to anybody, Mr. Speaker, unless there’s a court order. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, they knew that those, those police reports 
were obtained illegally, and yet they didn’t go to the police and 
tell them that they had them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to table 
the 38th annual report for the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association, Saskatchewan Branch, dated 2006. 
 



May 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,300 to 1,302 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . to questions 1,300 to 1,302 inclusive have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to move to private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to move to private Bills. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Committee of 
the Whole to form. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible 
Institute Amendment) Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Order. The matter before this committee is Bill 
No. 301, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The Full 
Gospel Bible Institute. I would ask the sponsoring member 
from Elrose to make any remarks appropriate to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. It’s a privilege 
to be the sponsoring MLA for this Bill, which affects the Full 
Gospel Bible Institute, including a name change to Eston 
College. 
 
Madam Chair, the college I know from my personal experience, 
having been a graduate of the college and also sitting on the 
board of directors of the college, has been under pressure in the 
past to leave the province of Saskatchewan and move to a larger 
province with more population. Mr. Speaker, the school has 
resisted that pressure and I think the fact that they are now 
prepared to call their college Eston College, named after the 
community of Eston in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, is 
truly encouraging. 

Also, Madam Chair, there is some small changes to clarify the 
role of the school and particularly the governance of the school. 
Where there was a duplication of the words, directors and 
trustees, it has been corrected now to just read trustees. 
 
I want to thank the committee reviewing private Bills, and I 
want to thank all of my colleagues in the House for supporting 
this measure which is a clarification of the role of the school, 
the governance of the school, and its commitment to the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Madam Chair. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you to this member for his description of 
the Bill. We will now go to the Bill clause by clause. Beginning 
with the preamble. To the preamble, all those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[14:30] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Short title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 301, An Act to amend An Act to 
incorporate The Full Gospel Bible Institute. I would recognize 
the sponsoring member. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Madam Chair, I move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — Moved the committee report Bill No. 301 
without amendment. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I would like the minister of 
intergovernmental relations to ask the committee to rise and 
report the Bill without amendment, rise and report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Chair, I move the 
committee rise and report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — Report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And report progress and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the hon. minister. It has been moved by 
the minister of intergovernmental relations that this committee 
would rise, report the Bill without amendment, report progress, 
and ask for leave to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2007 

The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the committee to report Bill No. 301, The Eston College (Full 
Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible 
Institute Amendment) Act 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill 301, The Eston College (Full Gospel 
Bible Institute Amendment) Act be now read the third time. Is 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. At this time to 
facilitate the good work of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy and the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1478 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
 The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
 Estevan Volunteer Captains Big Bike 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
 Think Regina Campaign 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
 Butler Byers Insurance Celebrates Centennial 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
 2007 National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
 Results of Media Polls 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1482 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Response of Caucus to Misappropriation of Funds 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1482 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1484 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1486 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1487 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
PRIVATE BILLS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) Act 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1487 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible Institute Amendment) Act 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1488 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


