






















































Hansard: March 07, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 26A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 721 
 March 7, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to welcome all to the resumption of the 
third session of the twenty-fifth legislature, and I also wish to 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s good to be welcomed and 
good to be back here with you and looking forward to an 
eventful spring session. 
 
Let us begin, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move 
that Bill No. 42, the Martensville by-election Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Government House Leader that Bill No. 42, the 
Martensville by-election Act be now read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
the Bill shall be read a second time now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave for second reading at this time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, the 
Martensville by-election Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 42, the Martensville by-election Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question has been called. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, the 
Martensville by-election Act be now referred to the Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 42, the Martensville by-election Act be 
referred to the Committee of the Whole. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee of the Whole. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave that the Bill 
No. 42, the Martensville by-election Act be now then 
considered in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
that the Bill be now considered in the Committee of the Whole. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I therefore leave the 
Chair for the Assembly to go into the Committee of the Whole. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — The item before the committee is Bill No. 42, 
An Act respecting a By-election in the Constituency of 
Martensville. The first item before the committee, clause 1. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 42, The Martensville Constituency 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

By-election Act. Is it the pleasure of this committee to accept 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House leader has asked that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Agreed. Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the committee to report Bill No. 42 without amendment and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 42, the Martensville by-election Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I wish to advise the House that 
His Honour the Administrator will be here shortly for Royal 
Assent. 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 13:39 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bill.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed a Bill which, in the 
name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour unto which 
Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bill is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 42 - The Martensville Constituency By-election Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to the Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 13:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would, with leave, request a 
recess that the member may take her place. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
a recess so that we can proceed with the swearing-in 
ceremonies. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. This House stands 
recessed until immediately after the swearing-in ceremonies 
have been conducted. 
 
[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — The House will now come to order. I hereby 
inform the Assembly that pursuant to an Act of this Legislative 
Assembly respecting a by-election in the constituency of 
Martensville, which was assented to on March 7, 2007, Ms. 
Nancy Heppner is authorized to take her seat as member for the 
constituency of Martensville. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to you 
Ms. Nancy Heppner, member for the constituency of 
Martensville. She has taken the oath, signed the register, and 
now claims the right to take her seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Ms. Heppner, welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly. I hope that your time here will be one that serves to 
be a record of honour to yourself and to your constituents. Let 
the hon. member take her seat. Congratulations. 
 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new issue has 
arisen in Cypress Hills that I’d like to present by way of petition 
today. Residents of the community of Shaunavon and the areas 
surrounding are very concerned about the potential closure of 
the SaskPower office in the community of Shaunavon. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I present today two pages of petitions out of the 
more than 600 so far signed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’ll come as no 
surprise that I am again, have a number of petitions of citizens 
concerned about the safety on Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Carrot River, 
Colonsay, Humboldt, St. Brieux, Muenster, Annaheim, Watson, 
Lake Lenore, St. Benedict, Carmel, Lanigan, and Lake Lenore. 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present another petition from citizens concerned about health 
care services in Biggar and district. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people across Saskatchewan, who for the 
past seven years have been lobbying this government for a 
dedicated children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 

 
The petitioners today live in the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs and Saskatoon Sutherland. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order petitions received at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Environment: what was 
the sum paid to Tom Waller for wages in accordance with 
his contract to be CEO of the Forestry Secretariat, signed 
March 21, 2006? 

 
In addition: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Environment: what was 
the length of the contract between Saskatchewan 
Environment and OWZW Consulting Inc., signed March 
21, 2006? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Environment: what 
was the sum paid to Tom Waller for travel, meals, 
accommodation, and approved business expenses, with a 
breakdown for each in accordance with his contract with 
the department to be CEO of the Forestry Secretariat, 
signed March 21, 2006? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a series of questions to present today. And I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how many harassment-related complaints 
were filed in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have six similar questions for the years 
2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006, and 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: of the harassment complaints filed in the 
2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were verified? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I too have the same six questions for the 
fiscal years up to and including 2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how many government employees were 
charged with harassment for the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, similar questions for each of the fiscal 
years up to and including 2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how many government employee 
harassment cases resulted in convictions, disciplinary 
action, or firings in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, a similar question is asked for each of the six 
years up to and including 2006-2007. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how much money was paid out as a result of 
firings related to government employee harassment in the 
fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

And I have the similar question for each of the six years up to 
and including 2006-2007. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you some very special people seated in your 
gallery today. 
 
Patrick Bundrock, a very good friend of mine who has been a 
tower of strength in the last few months for me. Dave and Ethel 

Wiens from Waldheim, who have been great supporters. Dave 
is one of the best sign guys in the business. He made sure that 
you couldn’t drive down one block in Waldheim without seeing 
a whole bunch of Nancy Heppner signs, so that was great. 
 
Anne and John Friesen who are on my . . . Anne is on my 
executive and is also the aunt of the Leader of the Opposition; 
Laurie Kosior, a good friend of mine and fellow political 
junkie. 
 
Whitney and Rebecca Friesen. Whitney was my father’s 
constituency assistant, my campaign manager, and will now be 
my constituency assistant. And I would like to thank both of 
them for their patience and dedication and understanding the 
last few months. 
 
And last but certainly not least, my mom who is probably my 
biggest fan, biggest supporter. And thank you for being here. 
Please help me welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to join with the hon. member for Martensville in 
requesting leave of the Assembly and permission that you 
would allow us to introduce to you and through you to this 
Assembly the guests that Nancy has already introduced. 
 
I won’t go over their names again. I will just say this, Mr. 
Speaker, I will just say this: there’s a greeting that is used in 
low German, in Plattdeutsch. There’s a number of them, but one 
in particular that I like goes like this: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 
 
Which simply means, how’s it shining? And the response often 
is: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 
 
Which means, it’s shining from above. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s particularly appropriate today. Not just because 
most of the guests can actually speak that language far better 
than I can, but also because, Mr. Speaker, this day is truly 
shining from above for the Heppner family, for the new 
member from Martensville. 
 
It was obviously a very difficult time over the last number of 
months for the family and for their friends here in this 
Assembly, and throughout the constituency. And so I do want 
to welcome them in a very special way to this Assembly, to this 
very happy occasion, and a well-deserved time of celebration 
for the family and the daughter, and the new member, of our 
friend Ben. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you will permit I would also want to 
acknowledge my uncle and aunt who are here, my dad’s sister 
Anne and my Uncle John, both long-time residents of that 
constituency. Uncle John, just an excellent example of an 
entrepreneur, has created many jobs for not just his family, but 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

others in that constituency. He’s an inventor. And I’m certainly 
proud that they’re also able to be here today. Mr. Speaker, I join 
with the member and I ask all hon. members to again welcome 
our guests from Martensville constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
rest of the Assembly, is sitting in your gallery, Jarita Greyeyes. 
Jarita is my intern for this session through the legislative intern 
program. 
 
Jarita has a Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in psychology 
and a minor in politics from the University of Winnipeg. In 
2006 she received the Business Council of Manitoba Aboriginal 
Education Award in recognition of her involvement in 
community activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jarita has a lot of enthusiasm for this position and 
in my work with her, Mr. Speaker, Jarita is most certainly a 
great ambassador for the legislative intern program. So I ask all 
members to welcome Jarita to the Legislative Assembly. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour today to join with the member opposite in introducing 
three interns that are with the official opposition for their first 
few months here at the legislature. 
 
Working with me is Lucy Pereira and she’s in the . . . all three 
are in the Speaker’s gallery. Jonathan Selnes is working with 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, and Justine Gilbert 
is working with the member for Rosetown-Elrose. And I ask all 
members to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also with the 
Saskatchewan legislative internship program is Kiley Frantik. 
Perhaps she can stand so we can see where she is because I 
can’t even see her at this point. Thank you. 
 
She was born in Leoville where she graduated from high school 
and won the mathematics award. She’s a woman of many 
talents, Mr. Speaker. She received a Bachelor of Arts degree 
with honours in political studies from the University of 
Saskatchewan in 2005 and is currently completing her 
requirements for a Master of Arts degree. She appeared on the 
dean’s honour list through her undergraduate years and was 
subsequently awarded a graduate teaching fellowship at the 
University of Saskatchewan. She received an explorer bursary 
from the federal government in 2005 to study French in 

Trois-Rivières, Quebec. 
 
At the University of Saskatchewan, Kiley was an active 
member of the Political Studies and Public Administration 
Students’ Society. She has been a member of the society’s 
executive serving as secretary. She has also served as general 
news reporter for the university’s student newspaper, The Sheaf. 
Recently she has been a tutor to a special needs student at the 
University of Saskatchewan. She has been an active member of 
her community and enjoys playing sports in her leisure time and 
reading novels and keeping up with current events. 
 
She has already provided me with excellent assistance with her 
research capabilities as well as her own thoughts and opinions. 
I’m very fortunate to be able to be working with Kiley, and I’m 
grateful to Ken Pontikes and the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program for the dedicated work that they do in 
providing us with this program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we begin a new spring session, we all know that we’re here 
with the support and love of our families, and we begin that 
journey. And I’m very proud to introduce my son David who’s 
a thoughtful, bright young man and takes after his mother, of 
course. And so if he could just give a wave. And I’d ask all 
members here to welcome my son David to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I see seated in your gallery Gil 
Dobroskay, a realtor from Saskatoon, a commercial realtor. He 
is a member of the Dobroskay family, a prominent business 
family who has been active in community events and business 
events in Saskatoon for many, many years. And I suspect he’s 
here on other business today but would like to welcome him to 
his legislature. I would like to ask all members to join in 
welcoming him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Commitment 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we’re 
social democrats, and we’re committed to the conviction that 
economic progress must result in social progress and that social 
progress means real benefits for real Saskatchewan people. It’s 
a relatively simple proposition, Mr. Speaker, but it’s an 
important one to us. It reflects Saskatchewan values, and over 
the past 60 or so years it’s served Saskatchewan remarkably 
well. I am proud to be a part of that continuing tradition. 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

As for the members opposite, their only commitment is to 
getting their hands on the public purse, and their only loyalty is 
to their right-wing ideology. Look how they stand, shoulder to 
shoulder with Harper and the federal neo-conservatives against 
the interests of Saskatchewan people. 
 
If anyone was uncertain about where the loyalties of the Sask 
Party lie, all they have to do is look at the opposition’s shameful 
performance on equalization, the wheat board, literacy, child 
care, and the Kelowna accord involving First Nations. All areas 
targeted by their federal, right wing, ideological buddies. All 
issues that adversely affect Saskatchewan people. All issues 
where the Sask Party stood against the Saskatchewan people 
and took the federal government’s side. The Sask Party is afraid 
to bite the hand that pats them on the head. They are simply a 
branch office of the federal Conservatives . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Martensville By-election 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Monday night the people of Martensville constituency delivered 
a crushing blow to the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government when they elected the new member for 
Martensville with 77 per cent of the popular vote. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it looks like the member from Cannington has some 
catching up to do in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP received just ten and a half per cent. And 
in fact, in 22 of the 41 polls the NDP were in single digits, 
including three polls where they didn’t earn a single vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did the NDP get trounced in this 
by-election, they lost significant ground. Ten and a half per cent 
is the lowest percentage of popular vote received by the 
CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party] in any provincial constituency since 1944. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Martensville also delivered a simple 
yet strong message that Saskatchewan people are tired. They’re 
tired of this old, tired NDP government that doesn’t share their 
values and are ready for positive change in the form of the 
Saskatchewan Party. It looks like even some of the NDP’s own 
supporters are starting to see that the NDP doesn’t share their 
values any more, and they stayed home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to invite all members to join me 
in welcoming the new member from Martensville to the 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Revitalizing Neighbourhoods 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
thanks to a strong economy and increased revenue, this 
government can afford to make significant investments where 
we know the need is great. And because we know that caring 
communities, safe, affordable housing, and access to education 
and training all have a tremendous effect on the well-being of 
our youth, our families, and our communities, we’re 
implementing a $100-million plan to revitalize Saskatchewan 
neighbourhoods with the greatest need. 
 
The plan includes 60 million to provide the single largest 
expansion of HomeFirst for affordable housing for families in 
northern communities and inner cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further 40 million will support inner-city 
initiatives in Regina and Saskatoon, focusing on education and 
skills training and the development of healthy, vibrant 
neighbourhoods. Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to 
making life better for Saskatchewan people by promoting 
caring neighbourhoods and providing better access to education 
and skills training. 
 
Now what’s the Saskatchewan Party’s take on all this? It’s 
predictable, Mr. Speaker — usual Saskatchewan Party 
negativity. Do they have an alternative? No. How could they? 
The Saskatchewan Party doesn’t spend time on policy. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s only interested in what’s 
good for the Saskatchewan Party. They’re not interested in 
what’s good for Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Telemiracle 2007 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the past 31 years Telemiracle has grown into a provincial 
institution recognized at home and beyond for the wonderful 
and selfless work they do each and every year. Only through the 
continued efforts of more than 1,000 Kinsmen and Kinette 
volunteers, the TV production volunteers, the generous spirit of 
our people, and many more groups, can this amazing fundraiser 
happen each and every year. 
 
The total amount raised for Telemiracle 31 is a record-breaking 
$5,604,682 which was accomplished with a population of less 
than 1 million people. It is now commonplace for large amounts 
of money to come in to Telemiracle as bequests. What a great 
legacy to leave. This brings the total raised to date to more than 
$74 million. Not only does Telemiracle help raise needed funds 
for those Saskatchewanians in need, it also promotes our local 
talent, brings Saskatchewan people together, and demonstrates 
the compassion of this province. Who hasn’t been inspired by 
listening to the chant — ring those phones — and see each 
phone light light up with an eager and caring donor. 
Telemiracle is a fine example of the wondrous volunteer spirit 
that exists in this province. 
 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

I would like to thank the member from Rosetown-Elrose who 
last year introduced a private member’s Bill to declare the first 
week of March as Telemiracle week. And finally I would like to 
ask all members of this Assembly to join me in thanking all the 
dedicated volunteers and kind-hearted contributors who helped 
make Telemiracle 31 a record-breaking year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Environmental Initiatives 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
to point out just a few of the good things that we are doing to 
build a green and prosperous economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has been at the forefront of innovation when it 
comes to alternative energy. We are partnering to create the 
world’s first clean coal generating facility designed right here in 
Saskatchewan. We were the first province to mandate the use of 
ethanol and we are leaders in the nation in energy generated 
from wind power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also working to take the lead in carbon 
sequestration. We are developing a comprehensive plan for 
biofuels and we have just recently received a report from my 
colleague from Saskatoon Greystone that provides an excellent 
blueprint for further conservation and renewable energy 
initiatives. When it comes to the climate crisis, Mr. Speaker, 
this government will lead the way with real practical and 
visionary solutions. 
 
And what does the Saskatchewan Party have to say about all 
this? Well, Mr. Speaker, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Estevan has told us that, quote, “Scientists 
can’t assure us that there is a trend to global warming.” The 
MLA from Thunder Creek has told us, quote, that “The 
scientific community [can’t] even agree as to whether or not 
any global warming is occurring.” The MLA from Moosomin 
wonders if the, quote, “whole idea of the ozone layer and the 
environment is not one big hoax.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can deny and ignore the 
science behind climate change if they want. For our part on this 
side of the House, we are moving ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Congratulations to Clerks 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity this afternoon to rise and acknowledge 
some important changes at the Clerks at the Table. Mr. Speaker, 
on January 1 of this year Mr. Greg Putz was named to be the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly Greg brings to this office a tremendous amount of 
respect and experience. He joined this Legislative Assembly in 
1987. He was born and raised in Saskatchewan and received his 

graduate degree from the University of Regina, a master’s 
degree from the University of Western Ontario. For the last 12 
years he’s been responsible for the administration of House and 
committee services. And on a personal basis, he certainly was 
very instrumental in assisting many opposition members in their 
roles as Chair of Public Accounts Committee and some 
important precedents were set in those efforts over the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I think it’s important to recognize that 
Greg has been very instrumental in providing the technical and 
expertise that is required for us to make the legislative reforms 
and changes that this legislature is now experiencing. And I 
think it’s important to recognize Greg’s contribution to this 
institution and to thank him for the services rendered and wish 
him very much success in the future in his new role. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Ken Ring is at the Table as the Law 
Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel to the Legislative Assembly. 
Mr. Ring has been serving as Law Clerk in the past and 
certainly on behalf of the official opposition we’d like to 
recognize the great contributions and assistance that Mr. Ring 
has given to opposition members in the past number of years as 
he has assisted us in preparing legislation, private members’ 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all the members of the 
Assembly to wish the institution of the Law Clerks great 
success and best wishes for the future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Increase in Minimum Wage 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
clear contrast in this Assembly between the members of this 
side of the House and the Saskatchewan Party opposite. The 
Saskatchewan Party focus is on what’s good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. On this side of the Assembly we’re 
focused on making life better for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 1 Saskatchewan’s minimum wage went 
up for the third time since June 2005. This does not sit 
particularly well with the right wingers opposite. The member 
for Rosetown-Elrose once cautioned that a minimum wage 
increase of 40 cents could devastate the Saskatchewan 
economy. The member from Indian Head-Milestone is of the 
opinion that letting the market take care of itself would address 
a lot of the problems when it comes to a fair wage policy. And 
apparently the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs is 
completely oblivious to the role minimum wage plays in the 
lives of students and young people. He’s on record asking who 
an increase to minimum wage even benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly we are committed to 
making Saskatchewan the best place for young people to live, 
work, and build their futures. We’re committed to ensuring that 
everyone benefits from our strong and prosperous economy. 
What’s the Saskatchewan Party committed to? A training wage, 
a two tiered minimum wage — anything’s possible from the 
party who said they’d go to war on labour. 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this tired, 
old NDP government has lost, completely lost its sense of right 
and wrong. Last week this Premier and this NDP government 
awarded 275,000 taxpayer dollars to a man who was fired for 
harassment and convicted of assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this decision was and remains obviously wrong. It 
was wrong to the people of Martensville who handed the NDP 
its worst loss in 63 years. It’s wrong to the taxpayers of this 
province. It’s wrong to everyone in Saskatchewan, most 
assuredly wrong to the nine women who are subject to the 
harassment. Mr. Speaker, it’s wrong to everyone in 
Saskatchewan except for this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand in his place today and 
explain this outrageous decision? Why did the NDP 
government provide $275,000 in a payoff to a man who was 
fired for harassment and convicted of assault? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When the Government of Saskatchewan made the decision to 
terminate Mr. Carriere in 2003, we knew that that decision 
would likely result in some form of payment to Mr. Carriere. 
Did we tell the public that this was a likely case? Mr. Speaker, 
we did. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Arlene Julé, the member of the 
opposition that called on us to fire Mr. Carriere, indicated at the 
time that should the previous minister of the Public Service 
Commission be subject to any court case and should the 
opposition become the government that they would pay her 
legal fees. Mr. Speaker, I think we all knew. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government gave 
$275,000 to Murdoch Carriere. The nine women who accused 
him of the harassment received $15,000 each — $15,000 for the 
victims; $275,000 from that Premier and that government to the 
man who was later convicted of assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the victims get $15,000 and the harasser 
gets $275,000, Saskatchewan people are disgusted about the 
decision of this government. They are disgusted with the fact 
that this tired, old government has so badly become out of touch 
with their values. 

Mr. Speaker, what was the Premier and the government trying 
to hide? Why didn’t they want this to go to court? Why won’t 
they explain what happened behind this decision and would 
rather pay $275,000 in taxpayers’ money as hush money to 
keep something hidden, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I can certainly appreciate, 
as a member of this Legislative Assembly, the public sentiment 
that a set of dollars went to the complainants and another set of 
dollars went to Mr. Carriere. I can understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are two separate issues. One, Mr. Speaker, under The 
Public Service Act, it is the permanent head of the department 
that administers and hires and fires most public servants. The 
elected, our job is to set public policy direction. We — all of us 
— should be mindful that it’s not our job to get involved in the 
day-to-day hiring and firing of a professional public service, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — This particular employee was convicted of 
assault. This particular employee was accused of harassment of 
nine women — nine women under the employ of that NDP 
government and that Premier. 
 
What did the Premier say when he explained why they’d just 
rather pay this $275,000 and not disclose any facts to the people 
of the province? He said that was, quote, “responsible 
government.” That’s what he said, that it was responsible 
government, Mr. Speaker. A $270,000 payoff to a convicted 
criminal who happens to be friends with the Minister of DCRE 
[Department of Community Resources and Employment] and a 
relative of one of that Premier’s former ministers in that 
government, $275,000 for someone convicted of assault — is 
that the Premier’s idea of responsible government, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when we announced at 
the end of February that a $275,000 payment had been made to 
Mr. Carriere, it also was clear from The StarPhoenix article that 
a number of media who had also been named in a suit by Mr. 
Carriere that they had settled with Mr. Carriere. Mr. Speaker, 
the media has settled with Mr. Carriere. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point: that what this 
settlement does is that it . . . All members of the legislature, 
they’re not held liable for anything that we said in the past, 
including the opposition. But it does not hold us not liable for 
anything we may say in the future. And so I would say to all of 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

us — to the members of the opposition and my colleagues on 
the government bench — we need to be very careful because 
we could be held liable in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I hope members of this Assembly 
are held liable and accountable for the decisions they’ve made. 
In this case this NDP government sent a message, sent a 
message to these nine women. What was that message, Mr. 
Speaker? Was it one of respect? Was it one that honoured their 
claims of harassment? No. Each of them got $15,000 in a 
settlement, and the perpetrator got 275,000 taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The minister talks about whether the media settle in or out of 
court. Mr. Speaker, the media are not accountable to the 
taxpayers. The media, Mr. Speaker, don’t have a responsibility 
to the citizens and the women of this province and the women 
in the civil service. They don’t have responsibility to provide 
good, common sense government. Why won’t the Premier get 
up off of his chair and explain why he paid $275,000 to this 
former friend of the government, this individual who was 
convicted of assault, Mr. Speaker? Why won’t he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to explain to the 
Leader of the Opposition, who is interested in becoming the 
next Premier of the province, that there is a separation between 
the elected and those people who are permanent heads of 
departments. Permanent heads of departments do the hiring and 
the firing. Mr. Speaker, the permanent head of the department 
had disciplined Mr. Carriere. When the government found out 
about this — just like the members of the opposition did, on the 
front page of the newspaper — it was the determination that in 
the public interest we would have Mr. Carriere terminated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The women . . . What the member opposite is asking, we made 
a determination to have a settlement based upon legal advice, 
just like the media did, based upon legal advice. And I’ve 
indicated in a letter to the member from Canora precisely why 
we did what we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to be here today 
representing the people of Martensville. And I can tell you from 
door knocking in the constituency, I have a pretty good idea of 
what the people there think of this NDP government. And I’m 
pretty sure after the results of Monday’s election the Premier 
must have a pretty good idea of what the people there think as 

well. 
 
The NDP government’s mishandling of the Murdoch Carriere 
case is foremost in people’s mind and not just in my 
constituency. This government’s handing over of $275,000 to a 
man who was fired for harassment and convicted of assault is 
beyond reason. No one thinks this is the right thing to do except 
apparently the Premier and this NDP government. Can the 
Premier tell us why this government chose to revictimize these 
women by rewarding their harasser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first of 
all I want to thank the member for Martensville for her first 
question in the Legislative Assembly. And I want to 
congratulate her for her victory. I appreciate that we now have 
another strong and tall woman in the legislature. So I am going 
to be kind on your first question as I’ve . . . in answer to her 
first question. 
 
What I will say to the member is that we made a determination 
based on legal advice that we would settle with Mr. Carriere. 
Mr. Speaker, it was not about Mr. Carriere’s . . . the 
complainants. It was about the process in terms of how he was 
dismissed. As I’ve said earlier, the permanent head has the right 
and the duty to hire and fire. And in this case, in this case, Mr. 
Speaker, the government decided, instructed the permanent 
head to dismiss Mr. Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think this comes down to a 
question of what’s right and what’s wrong, and I don’t think the 
government quite understands that. I understand that Murdoch 
Carriere worked for the government for over 30 years before he 
was fired for harassment and convicted of assault. Now 
everyone knows that people who harass others in the workplace 
don’t just wake up one day and decide that that’s the thing that 
they’re going to be doing. It doesn’t fit the profile. 
 
I would like to ask the member for Riversdale, were there any 
other harassment complaints against Mr. Carriere, sexual or 
otherwise, that were brought forward prior to the nine women 
that we know of? What year were the very first harassment 
complaints made against Murdoch Carriere? And to whom was 
it made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as you will recall, in the 
spring of 2003 the government read on the front page of The 
StarPhoenix that there was a serious case of harassment. We 
also learned from the permanent head that he had implemented 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

a disciplinary procedure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition called for the 
dismissal of Murdoch Carriere. The minister of the day 
recommended to the Premier, and the Premier instructed that 
Murdoch Carriere would be dismissed. Mr. Speaker, we acted 
as soon as we learned that Mr. Carriere had not been, in our 
view, properly dealt with, and he was dismissed. And we’re 
now paying the price for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — In his ruling, the judge that presided over the 
Carriere case said that he, and I quote, “could not understand 
how Carriere’s conduct could have gone on for so long as it did 
without being detected by other supervisors.” 
 
The judge isn’t the only one who cannot understand how this 
could happen. The public cannot understand how the NDP 
government can claim to have a zero tolerance on one hand and 
then not take action against a harasser until an independent 
report is leaked to the official opposition and to the media. The 
public cannot understand how someone who is finally fired for 
harassment and convicted of assault can be rewarded with 
$275,000 of taxpayers’ money by this government. 
 
My question is, how many supervisors came forward with 
complaints against Murdoch Carriere prior to the nine brave 
women in the lawsuit that we know about? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, as soon as 
the minister responsible for the Public Service Commission 
learned of this situation, she immediately had our 
anti-harassment policy reviewed by the public service and that 
anti-harassment policy was made public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say this: that the anti-harassment policy states, 
“In the most serious cases where harassment has been 
substantiated, dismissal will be the employer’s response in the 
absence of significant factors that dictate otherwise . . .” And a 
clear zero tolerance policy has certainly been communicated to 
all employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Service anti-harassment policy is blunt. 
No reported incident of harassment will go unaddressed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government claims to 
have a zero tolerance policy against harassment. But not only 
are they tolerating harassment; they are now rewarding it. 
 
The Premier last week said that rewarding Murdoch Carriere 

$275,000 was the responsible thing to do. Responsible? This 
statement is an insult to every woman that Carriere harassed 
and every other woman in the workplace today. My question is, 
how can anyone consider rewarding Murdoch Carriere with 
$275,000 to be responsible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member opposite has now got a 
number of questions under her belt, and so now I am going to 
say this. 
 
The members opposite worked for one Bev Oda before she 
came to this Legislative Assembly. And Bev Oda is responsible 
for the Status of Women in this country. And what did Bev Oda 
do with this communications person in hand? She removed the 
whole notion of equality from the Status of Women office. That 
is an insult. What did she do to the women of this country? She 
slashed Status of Women funding in this country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite, the new member from 
Martensville, was her communications adviser, Mr. Speaker, 
while she was doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Costs Associated with the Murdoch Carriere Settlement 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
approximately 1:15 this afternoon I received a letter from the 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service. The letter 
indicates, as I suspected, that the $275,000 paid to Murdoch 
Carriere was not the entire story. However the minister is less 
than candid in her answers. 
 
On page 3 of her letter the minister states that “a dollar value 
can not be attributed to in-house legal services” resulting from 
this case. Mr. Speaker, when an individual files a request under 
the freedom of information and privacy Act, the cost of getting 
information is calculated at a standard rate. Surely to goodness 
the minister isn’t trying to suggest it is impossible for her to 
calculate the entire cost of the work provided by the Department 
of Justice lawyers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us how many hours were 
spent, how many officials were involved, and what is the entire 
cost of the Department of Justice in the Murdoch Carriere case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when the members of the 
opposition were raising this House in the Assembly in April 
2003, they were calling for Mr. Carriere’s head. They wanted 
him fired off the place. Now, Mr. Speaker, the government of 
the day responded and Mr. Carriere was fired, Mr. Speaker. 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

Mr. Speaker, the people that can fire Mr. Carriere are the 
permanent heads. Mr. Speaker, the issue here is that the person 
that we’re talking about, Mr. Carriere, was dismissed by the 
government. And the government knew at the time, the 
opposition knew at the time, we made it available to the public, 
that it was likely that we would have to pay. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have paid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the letter that I received from 
the Minister of Public Service, on page no. 2 there’s a statement 
that I would like to have explanation for, and it says this: 
 

To protect the public service from political interference, 
The Public Service Act gives the permanent heads of 
government departments the exclusive power to hire and 
fire most public servants. 

 
The minister has quoted that statement a number of times today 
in this Legislative Assembly. Yet, Mr. Speaker, in that very 
paragraph the next sentence says, “Nevertheless, we acted in 
overturning the Deputy Minister’s decision.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how that political 
interference is different than the political interference that she 
talked about just a few short minutes ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, that is the point. Mr. 
Speaker, that is the point. The exclusive right to hire and fire 
the people in the professional public service is given to the 
permanent head. In this case, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission recommended to 
the Premier that Mr. Carriere be fired. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
carried out that instruction to his public servant. He instructed 
his public servant to do that. That’s highly unusual, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know that the members opposite think that we’re all political 
masters, and we can hire and fire. But we can’t, Mr. Speaker. It 
is the public service. The permanent head that does the firing 
and hiring, and we should stay out of it. But in this case we 
thought the public interest overrode the provisions of The 
Public Service Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in her letter the minister states 
that Terry Scott, the former deputy minister of the Environment, 
was paid a total of $184,290.35. Can the minister inform the 

people of Saskatchewan how that amount was arrived at? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Scott was a long-time 
public servant. And Mr. Scott, according to civil law, was 
entitled to this amount of money for leaving the public service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on page 3 of her letter, the 
minister said, “The government has not paid matching 
contributions to Mr. Carriere’s pension.” However she goes on 
to say that the people of Saskatchewan will incur an extra 
expense to pay for the increased value of the pension. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how much of an extra expense will the people of 
Saskatchewan incur because of how this case was bungled? 
And why is it that Mr. Carriere is getting anything at all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, all members of the 
Legislative Assembly agreed at the time that it was time for Mr. 
Carriere to take his leave. They called for his firing. And the 
government obviously, at the end of the day, based on the 
information that we had, made a decision to fire him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere is in the old pension plan. And I 
know the member opposite loves to look at information, and 
he’s quite familiar with the defined benefit plan and the defined 
contribution plan. Mr. Carriere was a 32-year employee. He 
was in the old pension plan. He makes contributions. The 
government does not make contributions until the pension is 
paid out. That, Mr. Speaker, is the answer to his question, and I 
thought he would have known that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a very short question to the 
minister and I’ll quote from her letter, page 1: 
 

[Additionally] Mr. Carriere was allowed to make 
contributions . . . to his pension plan with the government 
that entitle him to receive a full pension based on 35 years 
of eligible service. 

 
Could the minister explain why she has used this phrase, 35 
years of eligible service? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member . . . Mr. 
Carriere had 32 years of service. As part of the settlement with 
Mr. Carriere, he was allowed to make, it was agreed that he 
would make three years of contributions to his pension plan, 
and this would give him 35 years of service, Mr. Speaker. And 
if you look at the settlement, it appears as though it’s close to 
35, or it’s close to three years of salary because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he have on you guys? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — He had absolutely nothing on us other 
than the law. He had nothing on us other than the law, Mr. 
Speaker. And I find that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
invite the minister to . . . Order. I invite the minister to . . . 
Order please. The minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
member of the opposition obviously doesn’t care about the law. 
And it’s clear from what they say, day in and day out, they 
don’t care about the law. But, Mr. Speaker, there are laws in 
this province. We are guided by legislation. We are legislators, 
for goodness’ sake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we were advised by our legal people, just as 
the media were, to settle. And, Mr. Speaker, we settled. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to the members opposite be careful 
because, because, Mr. Speaker, we could be quite liable for 
anything we might say out in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here 
we have a man fired for harassment who received $275,000, 
well in excess of the compensation the victims received. Now 
we understand from the minister’s letter that the number keeps 
going higher and higher. We now know that a pension will be 
based on 35 years instead of 32 years. What is the accumulative 
cost of that? Yet in her letter, the minister says the settlement 
was appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening to the minister for years. I’ve 
heard her passionate defence of the rights of working men and 
women. How can she stand here and tell this Assembly and the 
people of Saskatchewan that this settlement was appropriate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the members will 
know, there are several of the complainants that have already 
been through criminal proceedings. They’ve already been 
through criminal proceedings. I said at the end of my letter, 
given the fact — and this is based upon legal advice — given 
the fact that this could be protracted, we might have to pay 
more; given the fact that the women, the original women who 

complained would have to go through this all over again, the 
legal people made the decision to settle. And the member asks 
us if we checked with the women, and my understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, my understanding from the Justice officials is that the 
complainants were checked with before this was given to Mr. 
Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Revitalization of Saskatchewan Neighbourhoods 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to stand in the legislature today and report that in a 
few minutes the government will table supplementary 
estimates, primarily to provide an opportunity for the members 
of this Assembly to discuss and debate the Premier’s recently 
announced initiative to revitalize Saskatchewan 
neighbourhoods. 
 
There has never been a better time to live in Saskatchewan than 
today. We are seeing record employment, strong production 
levels in our resource sector, growth in our manufacturing jobs, 
growth in our communities, and growth in the disposable 
income available to Saskatchewan families. Our economy is 
strong and the increased revenue today that we are seeing 
means that we can afford to make significant investments in our 
communities to make life better for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier recently announced, our NDP 
government will make available $100 million to revitalize 
Saskatchewan neighbourhoods. This will include $60 million 
for affordable housing and $40 million in capital investments 
for the development of training facilities and community 
service centres. This funding will be targeted for affordable 
housing in our northern communities and the inner cities in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and North Battleford. 
 
It’ll be allocated roughly as follows: $49.5 million will be 
provided for approximately 500 new affordable rental and home 
ownership units to help the low- and moderate-income families 
and youth at risk gain a stable footing in their communities; $10 
million will be provided for ongoing rent subsidies for 300 very 
low-income families and youth at risk. And half a million 
dollars will be provided in support for a training component, 
increasing participation among inner-city and northern youth in 
housing construction and repair projects. 
 
The $40 million capital investment for training and community 
services includes $8 million for the Station 20 West project in 
Saskatoon. This is an extremely innovative project brought 
together by community people and I think deserves the support 
of all members in this Assembly. A Saskatoon partnership for 
the development of community programs is largely based 
around the Station 20 West project. We believe that it will help 
to promote well-being for inner-city residents. 
 
The funding for training represents a new approach within the 
K-12 [kindergarten to grade 12] and post-secondary systems 
with a focus on engaging Saskatoon and Regina inner-city 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

youth in school and fast-tracking them on the jobs that are 
becoming available in this booming economy. 
 
In addition to these, the two major initiatives, the 
supplementary estimates include support for the recently 
announced Wi-Fi [wireless fidelity] initiative, the purchase of 
two new air ambulance airplanes to ensure Saskatchewan 
families throughout this province continue to have safe, rapid 
access to specialized medical care. 
 
There is additionally money provided to cover the cost of the 
recent SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union] strike and money provided for increased 
winter maintenance on our highways. 
 
The plan that is being presented in the supplementary estimates 
in a few minutes is a plan to help revitalize and restore stability 
to our inner-city neighbourhoods. And these and the other 
major initiatives that we are presenting today are just some of 
the ways that this NDP government is helping to make life 
better for all Saskatchewan families, and in so doing building a 
better future for young people right here at home. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It shouldn’t 
come as any surprise to Saskatchewan people that this tired, old 
NDP government with an election on the horizon has released 
supplementary estimates showing a spending increase of more 
than a half a billion dollars in this year alone. 
 
Once again, we have a tired NDP government that is trying to 
buy Saskatchewan people with their own money. We’ve heard 
from the Finance minister about the new spending in the final 
fiscal quarter of this year but what we haven’t heard is why this 
spending wasn’t announced in the budget that he brought in last 
March. All we heard was a PST [provincial sales tax] cut that 
was drawn up on the back of a napkin. 
 
We had a Speech from the Throne that was brought in and it 
didn’t even mention the PST cut. No consultation, none 
whatsoever, and then they go, is it 1 per cent; is it 2 per cent? 
Nobody seemed to know at the time it was 1 per cent, then there 
was the threat of an NDP caucus revolt and all of a sudden it 
was 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, could it be that this government 
has no long-term plan for the economy of the province or for 
the people of Saskatchewan other than getting themselves 
re-elected? Or, Mr. Speaker, could it be that the farther the NDP 
drops in the polls, the more the spending goes up? 
 
If the Finance minister thinks back to the last provincial 
election, he’ll remember that it was his Premier, his 
government, his NDP party that campaigned against tax cuts to 
make Saskatchewan businesses more competitive. And he did 
that because this government, this NDP government puts 
politics ahead of policy and the good of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan residents remember the fearmongering that took 
place in the last provincial election, the NDP ads that said, how 

are you going to fund the health care system and education 
system in Saskatchewan if you make Saskatchewan taxes 
competitive for small and medium-sized businesses? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s look at what happened. 
 
It was the Saskatchewan Party that said, if we make our 
business climate more competitive and grow the economy, 
revenues will actually increase, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s look at 
the documents from this very Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Corporate income tax is up over the budget by $163 million, 
$128 million in the last quarter alone. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party was right all along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, soon we will hear from this NDP government and 
this NDP Finance minister about the drain on the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, to try to buy an election. Will it be half a 
billion dollars? Will it be a full billion dollars, Mr. Speaker? 
Time will only tell. More politics from a tired, old NDP 
government that’s trying to buy people with their own money 
before an election. 
 
That’s the message that people of Saskatchewan have received. 
That’s the message that the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
have heard. That’s the message that the people of Martensville 
have heard in spades, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
certainly the message that people have heard from the Premier 
as late as yesterday about the state of our highways in the 
province when he admitted that his government had no 
long-term plan for infrastructure and that his government has 
been spending money on an ad hoc basis for 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are tired of NDP politics. 
They’re tired of being bought with their own money. And 
they’re tired of this desperate NDP government. They’re tired 
of a government that puts their dwindling political fortunes 
ahead of the people and good policy in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:00] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Table Officer 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I have 
three or four items I’d like to deal with. 
 
First of all, I would like to make official the announcement that 
Mr. Ken Ring, the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel, has 
taken on some additional duties. He has joined our procedural 
team as a Table officer. Today is his first day at the Table. Ken 
is no stranger to this Assembly, but I do want to introduce Ken 
Ring to all members in this new role. Please join me in 
welcoming Ken Ring to the Table. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Welcome to Clerk 
 
The Speaker: — I also would like to make an official welcome 
to Greg Putz, who is assuming today his first day as chief Clerk 
in this legislature. Mr. Putz enjoys the confidence of the House 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

— the members on both sides indicated so earlier today. I look 
forward to working with Mr. Putz and I would like to welcome 
him officially to his new position. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I wish to inform the Assembly that 
five of the six Pages for the spring session will be — and I’d 
ask them to rise as I mention them by name — Andrea Barraza, 
Glenna Coleman, Isla Dowling, Sope Ogunrinde, and Kyla 
Will. Please welcome back your Pages for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATIONS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I have two items to table. First of 
all a letter from the Lieutenant Governor who has indicated — 
it’s dated February 12 — and in his letter the Lieutenant 
Governor has indicated that the membership of the Board of 
Internal Economy will be made up of MLAs Harpauer, 
McMorris, Junor, Yates, McCall, Hagel, and Kowalsky. Signed 
by the Lieutenant Governor, Gordon L. Barnhart. 
 
And I wish to table also at this time a letter that I received from 
the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner along 
with some comments that he’s making with respect to Bill 20. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
it’s my pleasure to present supplementary estimates, 
accompanied by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 
follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the supplementary 
estimates for March of certain sums required for the 
service of the province for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2007, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. [Signed] Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. March 7, 2007. 

 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 23 — The 
Securities Transfer Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
in the House today and speak to Bill No. 23, An Act respecting 
the Transfer of Securities and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was considering reading the whole Bill into 
the record, but it’s 53 pages and so I just might hit some of the 
highlights if you don’t mind, Mr. Speaker. And I understand my 
fellow members are disappointed by that, but I will talk about 
some of the items in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that this is the second securities Bill 
to enter the legislature since last fall’s Throne Speech, and this 
Bill will bring Saskatchewan into line with other international 
conventions as well as provincial regulations in Canada. 
 
Now I understand that current law is inadequate to deal with 
sophisticated multi-jurisdictional transactions and needs to be 
reformed. And we’re assuming, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 23 is 
going to do this. We have talked to a number of people in the 
community and people in the securities business and we’re still 
waiting for some reply back from them if there’s any concerns 
concerning this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly must ensure that the legislature does 
not marginalize, to ensure that we do not become a 
marginalized financial backwater. And it should move quickly 
in this area and in many other areas to harmonize legislation in 
Saskatchewan with the current standard around Canada and 
other provinces as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that other provinces are also looking 
into implementing this type of legislation and to bring their 
laws up to date as far as securities and transactions. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will add a formal legal transaction 
process and hopefully it will control final risk and achieve 
finality of settlement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions arise out of 
the Bill. First of all, where was the NDP in this front for the last 
16 years? Securities and security transactions isn’t something 
new or novel in the financial markets or in the world. And so 
we certainly wonder, you know, the question comes up about 
why, why hasn’t the NDP moved on this Bill earlier in its 
mandate? And it’s some questions about what has taken place, 
what information do they have that has finally prompted the 
government to introduce this Bill and bring Saskatchewan 
security laws up to standards that are, well, fairly commonplace 
at the federal level and going to be in many of the provinces 
around Canada. 
 
In Saskatchewan we’ve been a leader in many areas and we 
should be a leader in business law reform and also initiating 
legislation that will enable business to create economic growth. 
Certainly because of the NDP economic policies in the past, 
Saskatchewan will always lag behind in economic growth, and 
it’s so crucial to the future of Saskatchewan to attract 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

investment dollars. 
 
Certainly we have . . . Going back to the ACRE [action 
committee on the rural economy] report and many studies done, 
and just speaking to businesses and industry and about what the 
future of the province needs, we know that we need huge sums 
of investment in this province. And certainly streamlining and 
bringing laws up to standard would be an obvious step that 
should have been done a long time ago in order to attract 
investment into this province. And once again this NDP has had 
a deathbed conversion as far as trying to attract business and 
investment into this province, something that basically was 
well-known, commonly known in all circles in business and in 
the minds of the people of Saskatchewan that we need more 
investment in this province. 
 
We need it in rural Saskatchewan. We need it in rural 
communities. We need it in agriculture. We need it in the 
ethanol industry. We need investment in mining the industry, 
the oil and gas industry. And the list goes on and on and on. 
And if we are to develop this province in the future we certainly 
need strong growth in the investment side of the equation. 
 
We need to attract money not only from investors in 
Saskatchewan. Of course Saskatchewan still has a high rate of 
savings on . . . per capita than most jurisdictions. We need to 
encourage that investment in the province. We also need to 
encourage investment from around Canada to invest in 
Saskatchewan, but we also need to look offshore and attract 
foreign investment into Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was a small step in that direction when the committee 
that I sat on as far as farm land ownership, that the 
recommendation from that committee was that we open up farm 
land ownership to foreigners. The government did not go that 
far and only opened it up to Canadians only and Canadian 
companies. And that was a step in the right direction. And 
certainly that has had a good effect on the sale and the transfer 
of property in Saskatchewan, mainly from Alberta, but from 
people all over. So one wonders what an effect it would have if 
we had opened . . . this government had opened up farm land 
ownership to non-Canadian residents, what amount of money 
and investment would have come into Saskatchewan and to 
revitalize the agriculture economy. 
 
But certainly it’s just not agriculture. We certainly need to 
revitalize the economy in small communities around 
Saskatchewan and we need to put huge investments in, as I’d 
mentioned, into other sectors like mining and developing gold 
mines and uranium and the oil and gas industry, diamond 
mines. This takes huge sums of investment. And anything that 
the Government of Saskatchewan can do to streamline those 
types of transactions to make it easier and more transparent and 
also safer, that’s what businesses need is a safe, predictable 
environment to invest their money in. And certainly having . . . 
updating Bill No. 23, I would hope that’s what this Bill is going 
to do to attract more foreign investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s somewhat . . . When you look at the global 
economy — and whether for good or for bad, Saskatchewan 
and Canada is part of the global economy — we compete with 
other jurisdictions for investment dollars. And you look at areas 
which are somewhat unrelated to this Bill but it’s also 

concerning the potential for fraud, online fraud, the stealing of 
identity and information from different MasterCards and credit 
cards that people use on a regular basis. 
 
Even those bizarre letters that are faxed from Nigeria offering 
great rewards if someone submits money to get other money 
that’s being held in Nigerian banks — all those things are a 
detriment to investment. It’s a detriment to the confidence of an 
economy. And anything the government can do to protect 
citizens of Saskatchewan from those types of fraudulent 
transactions and schemes, I think, would be greatly appreciated 
by everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned before, we have in the 
Saskatchewan Party consulted with some of the stakeholders. 
Not all of them have gotten back to us yet. We are looking 
forward to their input on this Bill. And so we will continue to 
look at this Bill and ask for input from citizens and from 
institutions that work in the securities business. So at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is that Bill 
No. 23, The Securities Transfer Act be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Question regarding . . . to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I apologize. I did not hear the member’s last 
statement. I retract that last statement and I go forth with a 
motion for adjournment. It has been moved by the member for 
Biggar that debate on Bill No. 23, The Securities Transfer Act 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 8 — The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
enter into the debate regarding The Paramedics Act. I’d like to 
start off, Mr. Speaker, by thanking the paramedics in this 
province for the hard work and commitment that they have. 
They, in fact, are the front lines of health protection and are 
often ones that deal with the most difficult circumstances as our 
citizens deal with health crisis and health trauma. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity as well, Mr. Speaker, to 
deal with a personal issue from my family that happened earlier 
this year. In January of this year my mother had a fall in her 
apartment and was able to use her call button to call an 
ambulance. The ambulance staff from MD Ambulance attended 
late in the evening and she initially told them that she was 
certain that she was all right but was complaining of a neck 
pain. 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

The ambulance staff were clearly more aware of her health 
condition than she was herself. In fact, she had a broken 
vertebra at the top of her neck. And they were able to recognize 
that and were able to place her on a bodyboard and transfer her 
to the hospital. She spent several weeks in the hospital and I’m 
pleased to report that she is not suffering any spinal damage and 
will likely have a full recovery. But it was their expertise and 
knowledge and ability that was able to not only recognize that 
there was a serious issue but were also able to take the 
necessary steps to ensure that she was adequately secured and 
transported. And on behalf of my mother and my siblings we 
would like to thank MD Ambulance and those particular 
paramedics for their hard work and expertise in dealing with 
what could have been a far serious matter. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Paramedics Act is a piece of legislation 
similar to many that we’ve seen in this House that creates 
another industry, another profession, that is going to become 
self-regulated. We have many of those and similar legislation in 
the province. And I’ll mention just a few of them. We have the 
engineers, we have architects, surveyors, dentists, teachers. We 
have doctors, the accounting profession. Earlier this year we 
saw changes to The Veterinarians Act. We’ve also dealt with 
realtors’ situation. An interesting turn of events with the realtors 
— one of the amendments they wanted was so that they could 
buy and sell their own real estate. The nursing profession. And 
of course the profession that I belong to, The Legal Profession 
Act, which is one of the oldest self-regulating professions in the 
province. 
 
Generally, Mr. Speaker, when an Act like this comes forward 
it’s a sign that the profession has, to use the words, come of age 
and is wanting to or is at a point where it’s capable of regulating 
its own members and controlling the destiny, becoming a lobby 
voice for its members as well as a self-regulating regime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that there’s various things that are going to 
come into play. With self-regulation comes some significant 
responsibilities. There is the discipline of their own members 
and, as with any of the professions that are self-regulating, the 
process has to be one that’s fair and has some significant 
amount of detail to it because it deals with the right of the 
members to earn a living and maintain their livelihood and have 
some very profound consequences in the event that their right to 
practice or the right to carry on is not adequately, fairly, or 
properly dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also — and probably more significantly for the 
economy as a whole — creates a monopoly within that 
particular profession or within that governing body. Other 
individuals cannot practise in that profession. They cannot 
become an EMT [emergency medical technician]. They cannot 
become a paramedic or a lawyer or whatever, except by 
licensing through that Act. 
 
So that monopoly that is created by statute effectively limits or 
precludes anyone else from carrying on as a paramedic or, in 
the case of the other legislation, as a dentist, as a doctor. And 
we take it for granted from some of the self-regulated 
professions that it’s the correct, right, and proper thing to do. 
But as legislators we have to be aware that we are limiting the 

right and the ability of other people to do it, and we want to 
ensure that we take that responsibility as legislators seriously. 
In this particular case it is our hope and wish that the group has 
truly come of age and are representative of the paramedics in 
the province, and that it’s a good step to make to transfer that 
power and authority to those . . . to the individuals within the 
profession. 
 
As this Bill moves forward to committee and goes on, we will 
of course want to have some significant consultation with others 
in the health care profession. We will want to know how it’s 
going to affect the ambulance companies, how it’s going to 
affect the hospitals, how will it affect private health care 
agencies that may want to hire paramedics. 
 
Part of this process will be realigning definitions. And it’s not 
dealt with in the Act, but I’ve been advised that the term EMT 
or emergency medical technician will no longer be there. But 
there will be different categories of paramedic — primary and 
then secondary and then advanced. So those caregivers will all 
have their licensing, their labelling, all as a result of the college 
that will be the governing body . . . will be in effect similar to 
and modelled after the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
So we will want to hear, as this thing goes into committee, we 
want to hear from people that are directly affected. We want to 
hear from the ambulance companies who are the employers of 
many of these people. We want to hear from the hospitals. We 
want to know how it will dovetail and fit with the air ambulance 
service that’s provided in this province. And we approach this 
with no preconceived notions as to how this is going to happen, 
but it’s a consultative process that members on both sides of the 
House undertake. 
 
The government members obviously will have or should have 
done some research before introducing the Bill and hopefully 
have done some consultation with members within that 
practising group. We have not yet had the benefit on this side of 
the House and are going to want to make sure that we do 
everything appropriately and fairly and with some degree of 
detail and exercise as much competence as we can. 
 
We’ll want to know how they determine and how appropriate it 
is the professional standards that they meet. Are the 
professional standards going to be high enough that the public 
is adequately and properly protected? We will want to further 
know whether the standards are so high that it becomes difficult 
to retain and keep people in the profession as they move into or 
out of the province. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite have not 
done a very good job of attracting and retaining health care 
professionals. So I want to put them on notice now, Mr. 
Speaker, that we will be looking at this Bill in the context of 
how well we can attract, retain, and recruit new paramedics as 
well as other health care . . . technologists, doctors, nurses, etc., 
as well. So we’ll be looking at this not just in the context of 
whether this is an appropriate regulatory regime for paramedics, 
but we will want to also know whether it’s going to be the 
appropriate course of action in the broader picture of how we 
best deliver health care. The Paramedics Act, Mr. Speaker, is 
just one piece of what should be a comprehensive plan to ensure 
that good health care is delivered to all of the citizens of this 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not the role of the legislature to determine 
what those standards are, but it is the role of the legislature to 
ensure that the standards that are selected are appropriate and 
fair. And if any new group . . . That we know full well whether 
we’re in a position that we’re maintaining a good balance and 
that it’s not too onerous that new people come in, and at the 
same time ensuring that we’ve got good competent health care 
being delivered throughout. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just chat for a few minutes about the 
issues and the challenges that face any self-governing body. I 
spoke in April on the respiratory technologists Act which has 
some similarities to this one. And I think I spoke at some length 
and initially was going to bring in Hansard from last April and 
re-read it. And I’m sure that the members opposite probably 
re-read my remarks that I made that day many times and are 
probably using them to try and develop other legislation as I’m 
sure, you know, had they and . . . They may want to use that as 
very appropriate reading as they develop these standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever a new regulatory body comes into being 
there’s always growing pains and we want to ensure that there’s 
good ground structure so that they’re able to go forward. They 
will have to elect a board and they’re going to have to ensure 
that they’ve got good governance standards in place and good 
governance is something that all boards and commissions now 
should be undertaking. 
 
Strategic planning becomes an important issue with boards. 
And a new board coming on, obviously going to have to deal 
with developing mission statements and go through the strategic 
planning exercise. So we want to ensure that they’re up to speed 
and ready to deal with them. 
 
They will probably have to develop a fairly detailed committee 
structure. They’ll have to likely have an audit committee, a 
finance committee. Most significantly, Mr. Speaker, will be a 
credentials committee, because they’re establishing new 
credentials for the paramedics as they come on stream. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I can advise that some of those things are very 
challenging. 
 
And the legal profession has got standards that are set by the 
College of Law. And in this case they’re dealing with a variety 
of different colleges as paramedics come in from various places 
to the province. So their credential system is going to have to be 
somewhat more detailed. 
 
They will of course have to establish bylaws and deal with the 
myriad of other things — insurance committees, professional 
standards, and a disciplinary committee. And, Mr. Speaker, a 
disciplinary committee is one of the most challenging things to 
establish because you want to ensure that it’s operated with the 
principles of natural justice, the right to counsel, the right to 
have public hearings while retaining the privacy not just of the 
patients that are affected, but of the individuals within that 
profession that are affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a significant piece of legislation for that 
particular profession and we would like to look forward to this 
as it proceeds to committee. But I’m sure that a number of my 

colleagues would also like to make comments and I’m sure 
probably at somewhat greater length than I have. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to move adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
8, The Paramedics Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 25 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today at the beginning of our first formal 
spring session with the Speech from the Throne being done in 
the previous fall. This is all happening under the new rules of 
the Assembly which in part are governed by the legislative and 
Executive Council Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t think I would be up quite so soon to 
speak as I expected my colleague who was speaking previously 
to carry on more elaborately in his speech. He claims to have 
significant verbiage available to him to carry on his speeches, 
but he somewhat disappointed me today with the lack of 
continuation of his speech. I’m sure that he’ll have the 
opportunity the next time that Bill comes up to actually fill in 
all of the information that he wanted to deal with. And in fact I 
look forward to that, Mr. Speaker, and I will be talking to him 
about that particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill No. 25, deals with the translation of 
the Executive Council Act into French. I think that’s very 
appropriate that that happens, Mr. Speaker, because this Act 
deals with the operation and the process that deals with the 
Legislative Assembly itself, Mr. Speaker, and how we operate 
internally within the Assembly, who has the authorities and the 
responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s not unusual in this House that members speak in 
different languages. In Saskatchewan we recognize only two 
official languages, English and French. Therefore those are 
provided with translations in the Acts. But it’s not unusual for 
members in this House to speak in other languages and dialects 
as well, Mr. Speaker. In fact, as even earlier today, we had my 
leader, the Leader of the Official Opposition, the member from 
Swift Current, talk in Plattish, a few words, a few sentences to 
welcome people from the Martensville area where they would 
understand that. 
 
It’s not unusual for the member for Athabasca to speak Cree in 
the House. It’s not unusual for the member for Canora-Pelly to 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

speak Ukrainian, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not unusual for other 
languages to be utilized in this Assembly. But it’s only . . . The 
laws are only written in both French and English, and this is a 
translation of one of those laws. 
 
I would like to discuss some of the items and issues that are 
brought forward in this particular Act, Mr. Speaker. And under 
section 2, interpretations, it outlines the meanings of the various 
words that are used in the Assembly to describe various people 
and to describe various processes. And to us they’re very 
familiar words. We have an understanding of what is meant, 
what the context in which these words are used, and how 
they’re applied in the House. And I think it’s important that 
these kind of explanations be included in a Bill such as this, and 
I’ll give you an example why. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I had the opportunity two weeks ago to participate in a CPA 
[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] commonwealth 
parliamentary exchange with Montana. And here when we use 
the word government, we’re talking of the governing party and 
the administration of government. When they talk about 
government in Montana or North Dakota, where I’ve visited the 
legislature a number of times, they think of the bureaucratic 
process as being government but that the members, elected 
members themselves, are not the government. They are elected 
to represent individual districts and are not responsible. 
 
Whereas in our Assembly and the Canadian parliamentary and 
the British parliamentary system, government means the 
governing party that has the responsibility to govern and 
henceforth is also responsibility for what happens. The things 
that are done by government or the failures of government, 
again the governing party is responsible. So sometimes the 
words that we use, while we use the same words, we actually 
don’t use the same meanings too. We don’t have the same 
understanding. They don’t create the same image and 
comprehension within each and every one of us. 
 
So some of those words that would be surprising or not 
necessarily well understood by somebody outside of the 
Assembly would be Leader of the Opposition. I mean if you 
talk to somebody in the US [United States] and you tell them 
the Premier, they understand premier, governor. Okay, I think I 
know how that works, even though they really don’t. But when 
you come to something like the Leader of the Official 
Opposition, they just have no comprehension. And so that needs 
to be explained to them. 
 
When you talk about House leaders, in their terms that means 
the actual leader of the party in that Chamber. For us, House 
Leader is an administrative position — understand the rules, 
work through the negotiations with the other side of the House 
to make sure the House operates in a smooth manner — but 
they’re not the leader of the party. But in the terms of US and 
other jurisdictions, they think of that as the leader of the party 
or in their terms, its majority and minority House leaders. And 
that becomes the leader of the party because they don’t have a 
leader of the party in the House. So again you get terms that 
don’t translate well. 
 
One of the descriptions in here, Mr. Speaker, is northern 

constituency. And my suspicion is that there’s a number of 
people across the province of Saskatchewan that would not 
understand the term in the context of legislative Executive 
Council Act. They would see geographically two northern 
constituencies without realizing that there are special terms and 
conditions on those two particular ridings. That they have a 
geographic boundary defined for them that allows them to have 
different rules in the sense of election of a member there than 
the rest of the province has in that they don’t have to meet the 
requirements of population that the other 56 ridings in 
Saskatchewan have. 
 
So when I looked at that I thought, well I wonder how many 
people are actually living in those areas as compared to the rest 
of the province. And the rest of the province has a breakdown 
of approximately 17,000 people, give or take 5 per cent, to 
describe where the boundary should be, and there’s an electoral 
commission that draws the boundaries to have about 
17,000-plus people in it. 
 
Well in the two northern ridings there is a 50 per cent allowance 
there, either above or below, that is possible. So I was 
wondering . . . I looked to see, you know, where are we on that 
scale. Approximately 17,000 for the 56 southern ridings. And in 
the North . . . These are the 2003 numbers so they could vary 
today four years later. But Athabasca has about 13,000 people 
living there, so they’re about 4,000 people less than a southern 
riding. But Cumberland is over 18,000, approaching 19,000, so 
they actually have more people living there than what there is in 
a southern riding, you know. 
 
So I’m not sure. I didn’t look up the rules on this, Mr. Speaker, 
but I’m wondering if the division boundary between Athabasca 
and Cumberland is fixed in legislation, or if there is the 
availability there for adjustments between those two 
constituencies, while maintaining the northern constituency 
definition, Mr. Speaker. So I think that’s something that might 
be interesting to look at for a future boundary commission with 
the possibility of adjusting that boundary. 
 
But you have to keep in mind when you’re making boundary 
adjustments that you look at trading areas, you look at other 
community patterns to make a determination on where those 
boundaries are concerned. I know those boundaries are drawn, I 
know in the past that’s happened in my constituency, that 
people who lived only a couple of miles outside of one town 
had to drive 20 miles to another town because no consideration 
was given to communities, no consideration was given to 
trading patterns, and the fact is no considerations were given to 
roads even running through an area to determine whether or not 
it was convenient to get to a polling station. 
 
In fact is people have had to drive out of their home 
constituency into another constituency and back into their home 
constituency to go and vote, simply because the lines didn’t 
take into account all of the matters that should be taken into 
account when constituency boundaries are drawn up. 
 
So you know, in the northern two ridings, the northern 
constituencies, perhaps there could be some adjustment made in 
there between Athabasca and Cumberland to equalize the 
populations in each. Because Cumberland is now exceeding not 
the requirements of the law, but rather exceeding what is even 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

in the southern constituencies, Mr. Speaker. And yet there are 
fewer people residing in the Athabasca riding. That’s one of the 
areas that this piece of legislation deals with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found this one also interesting because you get 
this one quite often when you start talking about elections. And 
people, the general public, isn’t necessarily clear on what the 
rules always are. So under part no. II, division 1, clause 6, it’s 
the duration in which a legislature can be convened, a 
parliament can be convened for. And the rule says, “No 
Legislative Assembly is to continue for longer than five years 
from the date fixed for the return of the writs at a general 
election of members.” So the maximum length of time that any 
legislature can be convened for is five years. 
 
And I know at times in the past people have pushed that limit 
out towards the end. I know in my own observations of the 
parliamentary process I can think of two times in particular 
where that has happened. I remember the Trudeau government, 
the Liberal government in Ottawa, going for almost five years 
at one point in time. And there was a great deal of concern 
throughout the general population. Was he going to go right up 
to the five-year period and force the courts to, or force the 
Lieutenant Governor — in that case the Governor General — to 
call the election? And people were getting pretty nervous about 
that. 
 
I know the same thing happened here in Saskatchewan under 
the Conservative government in the 1980s. They went 
approximately four and a half years, and people there were 
starting to get concerned. So I think it would be well served if 
the people of Saskatchewan had a better idea as to when the 
elections were going to be called, Mr. Speaker. If there was a 
fixed time limit on the elections . . . And I know the member 
from Moose Jaw North would likely agree with the idea of 
having fixed election dates because I know he sat here in the 
1980s and was concerned that the government of that day might 
not rush to an election. And in fact, monsieur le president, we 
have a concern even today that perhaps the current Premier may 
be reluctant to go ahead and call an election. And we would 
hate to see him push this limit of five years towards that point 
where the Lieutenant Governor might become involved and 
have to call the election. 
 
So I think in this particular Act is the Act that would need to be 
amended to change the length of duration of a Legislative 
Assembly. And I would think that in practice across Canada, 
across most of the parliamentary process countries, four years 
— give or take a little — has been the tradition. And I think it 
would be well worth our while to formalize that into a four-year 
period, and it could be done and still allow for what we in the 
British parliamentary system see as the ability to defeat the 
government and go to an election. The possibilities are there, 
the mechanisms are available to do that. It simply takes the 
political will. 
 
Now when you do that, what does it do? It takes power away 
from the Premier. There is no doubt about that. But I personally 
don’t see that as a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, to put the power of 
the election in the hands of the people. It certainly makes the 
mechanisms of the election process much more efficient. The 
Chief Electoral Officer would know the date of the election. 
The Chief Electoral Officer could book the halls, could hire the 

enumerators and the returning officers and the deputy returning 
officers and the poll clerks. Everybody would know when the 
election is. 
 
It’s not like you’re going to be campaigning for two years in 
advance of the election because you know what the date is. You 
can already do that when you don’t know what the date is so 
that’s not . . . I know that’s an argument that’s put forward by 
some but it’s not a valid argument, Mr. Speaker, because you 
can campaign from the day of election one to election two if 
that’s your desire and in fact is, Mr. Speaker, some people do 
that. And they go ahead and campaign but if you’re doing your 
job and representing your constituency well, listening to your 
constituents and responding to their needs, you don’t need to be 
out campaigning for that entire length of time if you’re doing 
your job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the parts of this Act that deal with the electoral process are 
some of the things that are in here and that, Mr. Speaker, we 
need to take a look at maybe making some adjustments at some 
time in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that changed in this particular 
Act over the last number of years occurred actually in this 
particular case during the election cycle before I came in, 
happened during the legislative session from 1986 to 1991 with 
the election of the first Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in 1986. After the 
election in 1986 was the first elected Speaker. Now there wasn’t 
actually an election but there was the opportunity for an 
election to be held at that point in time. 
 
The same thing in 1991. There was actually no election because 
only one person put their name forward to seek the position of 
Speaker, but the opportunity for an election was there. And the 
fact is it was in 1986 that we held our first physical election for 
Speaker. Two of the members put their names forward for 
election. And the members in this House, by secret ballot, chose 
to elect which one of those two members for Speaker. 
 
But it was during my time in the Assembly that the rules were 
changed to allow for the election of the Deputy Speaker. And 
that had not been in place before. And this Act was changed to 
allow for the election of the Deputy Speaker, which again is I 
think an important part of the democratic process that the 
members of this Chamber can select their officers. And I think 
that’s important, Mr. Speaker, and one of those things that 
needs to continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about some of the positive things 
that this Act deals with. But members are also human, and 
sometimes they have slips in judgment. They misstep. And this 
Act also deals with some of the legal requirements of a member 
and some of the procedures that can take place when a member 
is not living up to the honourable standard, Mr. Speaker. And it 
deals with things that constitute breaches of privilege and 
contempts of the Legislative Assembly. And it outlines a full 
page in the Act of the procedures and steps that can be gone 
through and what constitutes a breach or a contempt of the 
legislature. And I think it’s important that the members of this 
House have the ability to discipline themselves and to deal with 
the circumstances that happen in this House. 
 
[15:45] 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

Now we have the ability outside of the House, Mr. Speaker, to 
deal with those issues that may involve criminality, but not all 
actions in the House or by members are criminal. But they 
certainly could be a breach of privilege of this House, and the 
Legislative Assembly Act deals with those areas that would be 
breaches of privilege and contempt of the House. 
 
And I think the member from Moose Jaw North wants to join in 
this debate. That’s a good thing, Mr. Member. You should stand 
up after I am done the next time this Bill comes forward. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need to allow some of the other 
members such as the member from Moose Jaw North to take 
part in the debate, at a later date though, Mr. Speaker. At the 
present time, Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of being the 
member on my feet. 
 
Now one of the portions of this Act, Mr. Speaker, that changed, 
that the members opposite changed — that I disagree with, Mr. 
Speaker — was the changes to the by-elections Act, the rules 
within this Act. Previously whenever a seat was vacant for six 
months or the government was being forced to call an election 
within six months of a vacancy, that the by-election had to be 
held. And then the members opposite changed the rules, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now as I mentioned earlier, the maximum length of time that a 
Legislative Assembly can be convened is 60 months or five 
years. Well the members opposite decided they didn’t want to 
have a by-election if they didn’t want to call an election, in 
time. So they changed the rules, Mr. Speaker, to the first 40 
months of a Legislative Assembly was the time in which they 
would be forced to call a by-election within six months. 
 
The last 20 months of a potential Legislative Assembly being 
convened it was not important to them to have a by-election 
called. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s unfortunate. I think that 
the members of the public in each constituency should have the 
privilege of having their representative in the House when 
decisions are being made which affect them as well as the entire 
province. 
 
So I find that distressing that the members opposite would 
change the Executive Council Act in the past, to remove that 
six-month by-election rule for the last 20 months of a possible 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this Act does do, the minor changes that are 
in place here — other than the translation into French — is it 
deals with the Board of Internal Economy, which is the body 
that has the legislative authority and responsibility for the 
operations of the Legislative Assembly, the legislative staff, and 
the members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s that board that has the responsibility to review the budgets 
and to accept the budgets, Mr. Speaker, to vote on that 
acceptance or to reject as the case may be, or to amend as well. 
That body sets the salaries for the members and it sets the 
salaries for those who are not negotiated through the public 
service for this Legislative Assembly, and is responsible in part 
for the operation of the building. Saskatchewan Property 
Management is responsible for the actual operation of the 
building but the Legislative Assembly pays for a portion of that 
that deals specifically with legislative functions and duties 

rather than management of a government property, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the changes here deal with the Board of Internal Economy 
and outline the responsibilities and the role that the Board of 
Internal Economy plays. And so I think that’s important that 
that be clarified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other part of this Act, part V, deals with Executive Council. 
Now Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, is the purview of the 
Premier’s function as the Premier of the province. And in that 
area, particularly in his staff and his advertising portion of that 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we have seen that grow substantially over 
the last number of years. The advertising budget has increased 
dramatically as well as the staff numbers which have increased 
significantly as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know the Premier at one point in time said he had to hire all of 
these new staff members to answer the opposition’s questions. 
Well some of those questions seem to be pretty slow in coming 
for all those new staff members he hired on, Mr. Speaker, so I 
guess those of us on the opposition side question how many of 
those new staff are actually working on the questions versus 
doing something else — perhaps working on the advertising 
side of the Premier’s staff within Executive Council. That’s one 
of the growth areas that there has been in this province is in the 
Office of Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, and that’s an area I 
think that needs some closer scrutiny by the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that has happened in this legislature over the 
last few years, five, six years, has been a significant change in 
the rules under which we operate, and that came about because 
of a review that was taken place by members of this Assembly 
under a special committee. 
 
And we have gone to a much changed committee system, Mr. 
Speaker, that deals with two committees at the same time which 
previously we couldn’t sit in committee while the House was 
sitting. And so now we have two committees in operations 
which speed up the process although, Mr. Speaker, I have to say 
personally that while we sit in the Chamber and have our 
committee work for the policy committees, it’s not the best 
venue for dealing with committee work. I believe that the work 
that is done down in the committee room facilitates the 
committees better than the Chamber, the Committee of the 
Whole you might say, or the Chamber floor where we have to 
move tables in and out and put up microphones and deal with 
that issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that is an area we need to take a look 
at and that indeed goes in part through the Board of Internal 
Economy although I’m sure it gets discussed at Executive 
Council as well whenever that idea comes forward. I think it’s 
well worth the idea of bringing this forward, Mr. Speaker, for 
consideration. 
 
I know that my House Leader is anxious to get to his feet and 
deal with Bills that he may have some desire to express interest 
on, Mr. Speaker, so therefore I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on Bill No. 25, The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 26 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good 
thing the night light came on there. Now the members opposite 
can actually hear me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to reiterate all of those things that I said 
previously on the previous Bill because this is a new piece of 
legislation that is equally affected, Mr. Speaker, by what is 
happening in the previous piece of legislation and in this one as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was commenting on Executive Council that is 
part of the amendments and the consequential amendments, Mr. 
Speaker. And some of the things that have been happening in 
Executive Council that I think the public of Saskatchewan 
should be aware of is that there’s been a very sharp increase in 
the last little while of government travel and communication 
expenses over the last year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those 
costs have increased from $34 million a year to $38 million a 
year — $4 million, Mr. Speaker — and I guess we would have 
to ask with what results. 
 
Well if you look at results, I think you could look at the results 
from Martensville where our party received over 77 per cent of 
the vote, the governing party received less than 11 per cent of 
the vote. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, there were polls in that 
constituency in which the governing party received no votes — 
not even one. You know, that’s equal to the number of votes 
received in some of those polls that the Marijuana Party 
received, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, you take a look at it. The governing 
party received the same number of votes in some of those polls 
that the Marijuana Party received. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that should send a message to the governing party that they’re 
headed in the wrong direction. And I talked about the duration 
of a Legislative Assembly being convened and the time in 
which the Premier gets to call the election. I think maybe he 
should take that to heart and call the election sooner rather than 
later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ministerial travel through Executive Council has 
increased to $910,000 in the past year from 762,000 in 
2004-2005 and from 569,000 from the 2003-2004 year. So right 
after the election, they were spending a little over half a million 

dollars a year on ministerial travel and then just before the 
election — the year before the election — they’re spending 
almost a million. I guess that tells you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite are a little nervous about their jobs, that they 
have to spend twice the taxpayers’ dollars to get around to try 
and get out their message so that they can at least try to be 
better than the Marijuana Party in some of these polls, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communications in Executive Council went up to 
over $15 million, went up to over $15 million from 11 million 
in 2003. Well they’re spending a lot more money, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re getting some of the media training, but I think the 
report card came in on their ability to communicate in the 
Martensville by-election just as it had come in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy by-election where, in both of those constituencies, there 
was an overwhelming defeat of the government. And fact is, in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy they came in, I believe, third in that 
by-election, Mr. Speaker, third in the home constituency of 
Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would like to bring to the 
member’s attention that the item before the Assembly is second 
reading of Bill No. 26 which has five brief items on it which 
deal with changes of names, and I would ask the member if we 
would deal with the matter at hand. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the names and the provisions of this Act change a various 
number of things, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act from 2005 to 2006. But we need to understand as 
well what’s in those Acts to understand why they’re being 
changed. And they’re being changed, Mr. Speaker, to 
accommodate the changes that government is making to the 
executive council Act. And, Mr. Speaker, from my previous 
speech on the Bill that these amendments are consequential to, I 
in part explain what the executive council Act is, what the 
Legislative Assembly Act . . . and how that all ties in together, 
Mr. Speaker. And people, I believe, have a desire to understand 
how these work and how they tie together and how government 
has authorities or lacks authorities when it comes to spending, 
when it comes to the appointment of people into positions, Mr. 
Speaker, and these Acts deal in part with that. 
 
They also deal with other things such as . . . This Act, Mr. 
Speaker, deals with the assessment management Act. Executive 
Council deals with assessment management. Executive council 
Act deals with constituency boundaries Acts. It deals with The 
Election Act, The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, The 
Members’ Conflict of Interest Act — it’s almost like I’ve been 
everywhere — The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Benefits Act, Mr. Speaker. I mean there is a lot of amendments 
that go into this, Mr. Speaker, that deal with the legislative 
Executive Council Act, how the legislature works, how the 
Executive Council is working or not working, how the monies 
provided by the people of Saskatchewan is being spent in this 
Assembly by members, and how it is being spent by the 
Executive Council which is the Premier’s own ministry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I believe that the people of Saskatchewan have some 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

concerns as to how that particular area, the Executive Council 
Act, the Executive Council of this province under the 
administration of the member from Riversdale is actually 
spending the money of the province, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
that some of my colleagues want to enter the debate as well at a 
later date, so I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that the debate on Bill No. 26, second reading, be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 27 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — It’s the pleasure of the Chair to recognize the 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, is as I was following the orders of 
the day that Bill No. 27 as I understood wasn’t on the bill and at 
present time, unfortunately, I don’t have a lot of information 
before me in regards to Bill No. 27 and therefore I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 27, The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 19 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to address Bill No. 19, 
An Act to amend The Securities Act. And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
been reviewing the minister’s comments in regards to this Act, 
the minister makes reference to the fact that the Act is being 
brought forward to streamline our securities legislation with 
other provinces and territories under the passport memoranda. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a problem with that. In fact our 
party, the members of the official opposition, certainly agree 

that we need to do more to streamline the regulatory powers, 
not only within our province but between provinces, in order to 
enhance trade and enhance economic development here in the 
province of Saskatchewan and certainly, Mr. Speaker, right 
across this country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the legislation 
before us — this Act to amend The Securities Act — one is 
reminded of the fact that over the past number of years as we 
have observed how this government has functioned, this 
government has moved quite readily at putting more regulations 
in place and making it more difficult for people to actually 
move forward in expanding business and economic activity in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe over the past few years, as a result of a number of 
the recommendations that have come forward from Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition in the last few years, we have seen 
the government move to address some of the inequities that we 
have in our province that have hindered people from looking at 
this province as a place to invest. We’ve seen the government 
move on the issue of taxation. We’ve seen the government 
move on the issue of business taxes. 
 
However, Madam Deputy Speaker, we continue to see this 
government fail to deal with one of the real issues in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that’s the property tax issue 
which creates enormous inequity in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and not just between rural, but certainly between 
urban and rural communities, and is a hindrance to economic 
development in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would have to suggest that this piece of legislation that we 
have before us right now, as brought forward by the Minister of 
Justice, is what would be termed a step in the right direction as 
well. Over the past number of years I’ve had the privilege of 
talking about ways in which we can enhance regulations and 
bring our regulations in line with the regulations of other 
provinces so that we are not impeding trade between the 
provinces. And The Securities Act, Bill No. 19 that we have 
before us right now, certainly moves in that right direction. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think however as we look at the Bill 
and as I listen to the minister and move through a number of the 
arguments the minister has brought forward in regards for the 
reasons for the Bill, it’s also apparent that, from what we’ve 
seen in the past, that we need to take the opportunity to further 
scrutinize the legislation that we have before us to ensure that 
the legislation is actually moving in the direction that the 
minister is leading us, or is indicating that it is intending to 
move. 
 
We want to ensure that any amendments make corrections to 
the inconsistencies that existed and were passed in the 2005 
securities Act. We also need to ensure that the rest of the Bill is 
consistent so that there is no need to constantly amend the 
legislation. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I mention that, I’m also 
aware of the fact that the Council of Ministers of Securities 
Regulation in their discussions have been moving to address the 
issue of the securities agreements right across Canada. 
Unfortunately as I see in one of the news releases, while all of 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

the provinces and territories have signed on, the province of 
Ontario hasn’t. 
 
And one has to question, and ask the question, why would the 
province of Ontario not participate when all the other provinces 
feel it’s quite imperative that they move forward and that they 
bring forward regulations regarding The Securities Amendment 
Act that would enhance the ability of provinces to trade back 
and forth, of investments, to work and be treated similarly and 
equally in each province, enhancing the ability of that province 
to move forward as a province as it would look at enhancing the 
opportunities for investment? 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, certainly our province is a 
province where we would like to see investment opportunities. 
We would like to see the people look at Saskatchewan as not 
only a place to invest, but also a place where, if they’re 
involved in any securities agreement, that they have a sound 
understanding of what is involved and that when they make 
investments that their investments certainly are protected. 
 
And as I also indicated, in a note from the British Columbia 
minister of . . . Attorney General in the province of British 
Columbia indicated that in the 2004 agreement, memorandum 
of understanding, he called it a historic co-operation of all 
provinces and territories. And there again he also noted that 
Ontario unfortunately didn’t agree to participate. And I’m not 
sure if Ontario has even moved any further, or if the province of 
Ontario is continuing to remain on the outside while other 
provinces move forward in regards to this piece of legislation 
enhancing securities agreements across the province . . . across 
the provinces and across the country. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as we look at the legislation, as I 
indicated earlier, we trust that when the legislation moves 
forward that the intent of the legislation is very closely followed 
in regards to the regulations or the regulatory procedures that 
would follow the Bill. As we’ve seen in the past there have 
been many occasions where the intent of a piece of legislation 
has not been totally followed through in regulations, which it 
then creates a problem for — whether it’s a business, whether 
it’s an individual, whether it’s a securities company in working 
in the province of Saskatchewan. So we’re trusting that this 
Bill, as it moves forward, will move a step further to developing 
a national securities regulator. 
 
We hope that it . . . that the provinces who are currently 
working together at enhancing their securities agreements will 
also continue to enter into discussions with the province of 
Ontario so that when at the end of the day, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we have a securities agreement and the securities 
legislation, not only here in Saskatchewan or Alberta or BC 
[British Columbia] or the other provinces and territories . . . but 
we have a legislation that would work co-operatively right 
across this great nation of Canada. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is intended to streamline 
securities regulations across the country. It will allow 
transactions to be performed easier and seamlessly. And at the 
end of the day, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the proof of 
how well this Bill is working across Canada will be in the 
economic activity and economic growth that we . . . most 
provinces would like to see, and certainly we would like to see 

enhanced in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is one question however. If the NDP are introducing 
legislation to streamline regulations across Canada and 
securities, then why don’t they do the same for the Alberta-BC 
trade deal? And, Madam Deputy Speaker, over the past almost 
a year we have noticed, noted that the BC and Alberta 
governments have entered into a trade deal. I believe they 
extended an invitation to the province of Saskatchewan. And 
when we look at the trading patterns in Canada, we look at the 
trading patterns that even of a lot of businesses and 
manufacturing and processing in the province of Saskatchewan, 
we note that there is enhanced trading opportunities for 
companies dealing with Alberta and BC. And I believe, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, as we look forward to creating more economic 
activity in the province of Saskatchewan, we need to look at 
building other relationships. 
 
Even as this piece of legislation is doing in regards to securities, 
we need to look at building relationships that enhance trade 
opportunities rather than impeding the ability of trade — 
whether it’s trucking or whether it’s livestock or whatever 
sector of our province is facing challenges — because we don’t 
have equal agreements between provinces. We need to look at 
how we work together with other provinces to cut down the 
regulations that impede the economic growth in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when we look at the efforts that are 
being made with this piece of legislation, we would really hope 
that the intent to streamline the processes is followed. That at 
the end of the day it creates a greater opportunity for people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. It creates opportunity for people 
who would look at investing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Because, Madam Deputy Speaker, investment in this province 
means jobs, and real jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think at the end of the day it certainly can’t . . . it 
certainly will . . . no harm will be created in finding ways in 
which we can work together with other jurisdictions in this 
great nation as we look to build our province. And in view of 
the fact that I believe a number of my colleagues would like to 
make some comments in regards to this piece of legislation, Bill 
No. 19, An Act to amend the Securities Act, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 11 — The 
International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment 
Act/Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des 
matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles be now read a 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, I appreciate having the opportunity to speak on this 
Bill today because I think it has an importance to all people in 
Saskatchewan and to many of the businesses, especially our 
small aircraft lines and even the big ones, whether it’s WestJet 
or Air Canada or whoever the company is that flies into our 
larger centres such as Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
The Bill, from what I understand, and the changes that are being 
applied here, Madam Speaker, will allow Saskatchewan people 
to be creditors when international companies with 
Saskatchewan operations go into bankruptcy protection. It also 
makes amendments to bring Saskatchewan into line with 
international and federal laws. There is a need to maintain 
international flights to our cities in Saskatchewan to help 
promote anything from business to tourism all across this 
province, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Bill also creates an international registry for liens and 
registrations. It streamlines regulations for companies that fly 
all over the world and all over different boundaries. We no 
longer would need to register a lien in every province or 
jurisdiction in which the company operates, which I think 
would remove a lot of the red tape when these things happen. 
We’ve had an example, Madam Deputy Speaker, that when an 
airline went bankrupt several years ago and there were all sorts 
of different people and organizations that were seizing assets at 
different airports across the country . . . and I believe that this 
would remove a lot of that. This Bill would also allow for an 
orderly distribution of assets to their creditors. 
 
There are some implications, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this 
is an international treaty and the power to amend this Bill would 
be non-existent, and that the Bill gives up some provincial 
control over these matters and gives them to the federal 
government. But in this case I don’t think that should create a 
problem, Madam Deputy Speaker. If this Bill does not pass, it 
would be possible that some lenders might not finance airlines 
and they can’t be a priority creditor in all places. And they 
might also help maintain international and cross-jurisdictional 
flights. 
 
Madam Speaker, when the minister presented the Bill or 
introduced the Bill, he spoke about . . . that it should be noted 
that aircraft protocol applies to used aircraft as well as smaller 
aircraft. And I think that’s a positive part of what this Bill 
brings to the table. Madam Deputy Speaker, we know from all 
. . . I think many MLAs in here how important even our smaller 
airports are for our communities such as smaller centres — 
smaller cities like Yorkton, Swift Current, and many places like 
that where, by having an airport that is accessible to business 
people from all over the world and especially other countries 
within Canada, they’re more likely to invest in our province 
when they can get there by air and make it more feasible for 
them to do business in those smaller communities. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, being that this is such an extensive 
Bill — I believe there’s in excess of 90 pages in the Bill — we 

are still checking with people that may have some concerns 
with things in the Bill. And at this time we would like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Adjourned. Carried. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 18 — The Court 
Security Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today in the House and speak to Bill No. 18, 
An Act respecting Court Security. 
 
It’s interesting, as my seatmate, the member from Cannington, 
mentioned earlier when he was speaking, with the Speech from 
the Throne being done in the fall and the budget not for a 
couple of weeks. Normally when we first go into session your 
first piece of business is either replying to the Speech from the 
Throne or dealing with the budget. But we’re kind of thrust 
right into the inner workings of the legislature as far as 
legislation and adjourned debates even. Bills that have been . . . 
gone through first reading and are now in adjourned debates. 
 
And that’s where this Bill is. It talks about security in 
courtrooms and security matching what we see in airports now 
which, you know, if you look over the last number of years 
since 9/11, that security has certainly been beefed up. Mainly 
because of what had happened in 9/11 and the issues around 
terrorism, they’re looking to move a lot of the security protocol 
into the courtrooms for some of the issues that people that are 
working in courtrooms are facing. 
 
And it is really kind of sad to think that we need to go to that 
extent and that far, but I think it’s probably appropriate. I think 
you see some of the issues that the courts are dealing with now 
that are maybe far more severe than what they were dealing 
with before. And when I mean severe, I’m certainly talking 
about issues around gang activities and some of the spinoffs 
from the gang activities when a person is in court and they’ve 
been involved in gang activities, whether some of the opposing 
gang comes into court and wants to settle the score, I guess. 
 
And so this Bill, I believe, moves toward that where there are 
security checks for everybody that would be going into 
courtrooms, metal detectors the same as what you would see 
walking through a metal detector in an airport as well as . . . 
When I was reading through the Bill it was talking about the 
sheriff and other security people having the ability to use the 
paddle to wipe you down to make sure that you don’t have any 
weapons on you. And it’s really quite, you know, a piece of 
legislation that gives certainly an awful lot of power to the court 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

security people. But I think when you read some of the different 
issues that have been going on with gang crime, it’s probably 
not that far off. 
 
And I was just reading in a local paper, a paper from my 
constituency in Fort Qu’Appelle, that talks about a murder that 
had taken place in the community just a week or two ago and 
it’s got here that two Fort Qu’Appelle men appeared in Fort 
Qu’Appelle Provincial Court facing first-degree murder 
charges. And it talks a little bit about the situation, the murder, 
and the two fellows that are charged with murder. 
 
But I was reading through the paper and I thought it really 
applied to this Bill. It talks about the pair who have been 
accused of murder. And as they were standing and giving their 
plea somebody approached them from the courtroom, rushed 
forward from the courtroom and started hollering at them — 
why did you do it? — or, you didn’t have to do it. And they had 
to be restrained by the police officer and removed from the 
courtroom. 
 
But you can take that one step further. I mean, all the person 
was doing at this point was yelling at the accused in the docket 
where, you know, they’d come forward after the accused stood 
up and, you know, had access to that person. You take it one 
step further, and you think if that person had a weapon on them, 
if they had a gun or a knife on them and they went charging 
towards the accused, what could have happened? 
 
And certainly, I mean, the accused is innocent at this point. He 
is simply accused. You’d hate to have something happen to 
them for sure. But also the people that are working in the 
system, whether it’s the clerks or whoever in the courtroom, 
and some of the dangers that they would be put under or 
exposed to if people were entering courtrooms with concealed 
weapons. 
 
So the Bill certainly talks about that, and I can certainly 
understand the reasoning for this piece of legislation, for 
incidents that just happened in Fort Qu’Appelle last week. I can 
certainly understand that, but there are a lot of questions that 
come into play and one of the questions — and not that it would 
be the deterrent not to move toward this — but some of the 
costs. What are the costs that are going to be incurred? And 
what is the level of security in all the courtrooms that we would 
have to see throughout the province? Are we going to have 
walk-through metal detectors before the entrance of every 
courtroom that we have in our province? Are we going to have 
the sheriffs and the people that are in charge of security, you 
know, obviously trained, but what is the cost of that? What is 
the cost of extra staffing? There are a number of issues that we 
would be very interested in finding the answers out. 
 
As far as whether it needs to be done, I believe that it needs to 
be done and I believe the security of not only the people that are 
appearing in front of court but also the people that are working 
in the courtrooms need that protection. But there are some costs 
also incurred. And there are other some of the logistics. 
 
As I was reading through the Bill, it talked about what could be 
done and what searches could be taken place. And I think it 
sounds very, very similar — not that I’ve had a whole pile of 
experience being searched, which is a good thing — but I have 

certainly had to walk through the metal detector and I’ve had 
the paddle and being swept across and, of course, had to empty 
my pockets. But it goes on to certainly much more extensive 
searches, much more extensive searches in the courtrooms. And 
I seem to be making fun of the fact that I had to go through a 
search and had the metal detecting paddle passed across to 
make sure that I wasn’t carrying any concealed weapons, which 
of course I wasn’t, but when you go through this Bill it even 
goes a little bit further into, into further searches that can be 
done and some of the issues around that. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, I think the Bill is going 
in the right direction. There are a number of questions that we 
have to find answers to and a number of people that we need to 
talk to yet as to whether this Bill goes far enough. Does the Bill 
go far enough to guarantee security in our courtrooms? Because 
that is the intent. And as we’ve seen many times from this 
government, we pass a piece of legislation only to find out that 
it maybe didn’t cover off all the areas that it needed to cover 
off. So quite often it was inadequate consultation done with the 
people that it was going to be affected. 
 
So that is certainly the duty that we have and we’ll be taking 
this Bill and consulting further and wider to make sure that it 
covers off the issue of secure courtrooms. So at this time, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 10 — The 
Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and speak to Bill 10, The 
Limitations Amendment Act. Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill 
is about limitations and about time, and I think those are 
important considerations that we would discuss this afternoon. 
This Bill addresses changes that have been deemed required to 
tidy up the limitations period for various kinds of claims and 
procedures so that they are considered to be fair and reasonable 
and that they are consistent with that of other provinces. 
 
This Bill is addressing a basic fundamental concept, that is of 
time. What is a reasonable and appropriate period of time for 
various activities to take place? This Bill addresses time frames 
for civil legal actions. The Act provides for a two-year 
limitation starting from when a claimant first knew or ought to 
have known that the injury had occurred, that the injury appears 
to be attributable to the dependant’s act or omission, and that a 
legal proceeding would be an appropriate means to seek 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2007 

remedy. 
 
The Bill also addresses the ultimate, what’s considered to be the 
ultimate limitation period which in effect says that all actions 
after 15 years . . . It bars all actions after a 15-year period to a 
claim. It also addresses what represents acknowledgement of a 
debt, that is when does the limiting time begin. This 
acknowledgement is deemed to be, firstly, in writing and, 
secondly, made to the claimant. There’s also a 10-year 
limitation period which is being maintained with regards to 
claims based on court judgments or orders for the payment of 
monies. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it appears the provisions provided 
for in Bill 10 should help clarify the limitations with respect to 
these different legal situations. The question of, when does the 
time run out as far as proceeding with legal actions, could be 
compared with, when does the mandate of the government run 
out as far as governing of our province. Limitations, reasonable 
and appropriate, accomplished by fixed election dates would 
provide the same certainty for the electorate that this legislation 
we’re looking at today provides for our constituents in their 
legal matters. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, to gain more assurance that this specific 
legislation will accomplish its intended purposes we will be 
seeking the input of stakeholders, and to this end I would move 
to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 21 — The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la 
Loi sur la preuve be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure and an honour to rise in the Assembly and speak to 
Bill 21, The Evidence Amendment Act. This amendment will 
allow people and organizations to essentially apologize without 
admitting guilt or liability on an issue. 
 
And I’m a little bit confused. I’ve been using this for a number 
of years with my own wife where I’ve on a number of 
occasions have had to apologize, but I’m not admitting guilt. So 
I had already thought this was in place, but so be it. I suppose I 
was wrong. But I’m glad everybody in the province will now 
have this at their disposal. 
 
There are many times in many cases when legal counsel will 

advise a client to not apologize for fear that that would imply 
guilt. And I think in many ways it shows the state of our society 
where you can’t show remorse or guilt without facing certain 
. . . or in some cases some liability on an issue. So I think this is 
a good measure going forward to provide people the 
opportunity to show some goodwill towards people that they 
feel compassion, heartfelt compassion for. 
 
I note with some interest the comments made by the Justice 
minister when he introduced this that he talked about some 
research from the United States that suggested that some 
malpractice lawsuits, medical malpractice lawsuits would not 
have gone forward had the doctor apologized to the plaintiff. 
And then further to that, that mediators say that in many cases 
the victims would not have suffered some of the emotional 
suffering had an apology been brought forward. 
 
And I think that’s certainly the case. Not only, you know, when 
a person apologizes to somebody that they’ve possibly grieved 
that, you know, it, Madam Deputy Speaker, not only is good for 
the person that is being apologized to, but also for that person 
that is showing some compassion and some remorse for what 
has occurred. 
 
It’s a bit ironic, Madam Deputy Speaker — and I don’t have too 
much more to say on this before I’ll take my seat — but it’s a 
little bit ironic that it’s this particular government that is 
introducing legislation that will allow people to apologize 
without admitting any guilt. And I know that members on this 
side will have more to say about that. 
 
Whether it’s cases of this government, in the potato fiasco, the 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] fiasco where they did have to apologize, but also in 
other cases where . . . And the one that I can really think of 
from my first session, the fall session was the whole issue 
surrounding the Oyate Safe House where — and I may be 
corrected on this — I recall the minister in charge of that file 
saying that he invites scrutiny. But I don’t recall at one time 
where that minister or this government expressed remorse or 
apologized to the people of this province for this fiasco. So it’s 
a bit ironic that it’s this government that’s introducing the 
amendment to The Evidence Act. And I could stand to be 
corrected on that, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, as evidenced by the recent 
by-election in Martensville, this government can apologize all 
they want to the people of this province. But the evidence — no 
pun intended — the evidence is in. This government needs to 
go. And we need a new government in the great province of 
Saskatchewan. And with that, I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy has moved to adjourn the debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Regina Dewdney. 
 



March 7, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Regina Dewdney that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:33.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency By-election Act 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................721 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency By-election Act 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................721 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency By-election Act .................................................................................................721 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Martensville Constituency By-election Act 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................722 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................722 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................722 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................722 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................723 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................723 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................723 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................723 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................725 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................725 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Commitment 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................725 
 Martensville By-election 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 Revitalizing Neighbourhoods 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 Telemiracle 2007 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................726 
 Environmental Initiatives 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Congratulations to Clerks 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................727 
 Increase in Minimum Wage 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................727 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................728 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................728 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................729 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................729 
 Costs Associated with the Murdoch Carriere Settlement 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................730 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................730 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Revitalization of Saskatchewan Neighbourhoods 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................732 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................733 



 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Table Officer 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Welcome to Clerk 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................734 
TABLING OF COMMUNICATIONS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................734 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................734 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................734 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................734 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................735 
 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................737 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................741 
 Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................742 
 Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................742 
 Bill No. 11 — The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft Equipment Act 
 Loi sur les garanties internationales portant sur des matériels d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................744 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................744 
 Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................745 
 Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................746 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




