






















































Hansard: May 15, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 62A  TUESDAY, MAY 15, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1603 
 May 15, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, I would like to 
table the 2006 annual report from the Children’s Advocate 
office entitled Children and Youth First . . . The Right Focus. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again today to present a number of petitions on behalf 
of residents from the Broadview and surrounding areas 
regarding the need for a dialysis unit in the area. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by folks 
from the communities of Broadview; Swift Current; 
Whitewood; Cowessess; Regina; Grenfell; Saskatoon; and 
Kipling, I believe; Lethbridge, Alberta actually; and Preeceville, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition signed by people who want the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office in Rosetown. Mr. 
Speaker, they are concerned that the Rosetown SaskPower 
office currently supplies personal service for SaskEnergy, 
SaskTel customers, making it a one-stop office for payments of 
all three Crown utilities. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown and Kindersley, and I am pleased to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while on route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have grave concerns about the future of the Estevan 
campus of the Southeast Regional College. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project and pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify the disruptions to water supplies, 
produce an environment assessment study encompassing a 
large area outside the scope of the project, disclose the 
project’s long-term effects on these areas, and consider 
alternative sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Vanscoy, Grandora, Saskatoon, 
and North Battleford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present yet another petition on behalf of the 600 children under 
six years of age in the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency 
regarding a much needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

and Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek and Willowgrove. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators come from the northeast part of 
Saskatoon, Wickenden Crescent, Bentham Crescent, and Peters 
Cove. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from the citizens of the South that are very, 
very concerned about the lab services and the undue hardships 
it would cause residents, particularly seniors, if lab services 
were withdrawn from the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Lafleche 
and Gravelbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition — actually a lot 
of petitions — signed by citizens of my constituency that are 
concerned with the health care system and the potentially 
dangerous situation that’s looming in that area regarding the 
recruitment and retention of physicians. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Canwood, 
Leask, Shell Lake, Spruce Home, Spiritwood, Holbein, and 
Parkside. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 

with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at a 
minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available as well as lab, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services available to users from the 
Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today and present petitions calling on the 
government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are signed by people from 
Weyburn, Coronach, Moose Jaw, Willow Bunch, Fife Lake, 
and Assiniboia. And I so present on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 45, The 
Agricultural Societies Repeal Act, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 45 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Ag and Food has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Bill 45. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 45 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 52, The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2007 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 52 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 52. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/ 
Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 52 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have been 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No 53, the 
miscellaneous environmental statutes amendment Act, 2007 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 53 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole for 
Bill 53. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes 
(Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 53 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 46, The Crown 
Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 46 be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and Resources has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole for Bill 46. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 46 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 46 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed to report Bill No. 48, The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 48 be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and Resources has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole of Bill 48. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 48 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 48 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 66, the 
occupational health and safety amendment Act, 2007 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 66 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Labour has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill 66. 
 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 66 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Labour. 
 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 66 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
instructed to table the eighth report of the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by 
the member from Biggar: 
 

That the eighth report of the standing committee be now 
concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Biggar: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 31, 
The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 31 be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 31 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendment be read a first time? The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Health. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The minister has 
moved that Bill 31 be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its 10th report. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to welcome Jill Collins, president of Breast 
Cancer Action Saskatchewan, along with Tia Lutz, the 
executive director of Breast Cancer Action Saskatchewan. 
 
Breast cancer has touched the lives, Mr. Speaker, of many of us, 
and I’m pleased that Tia and Jill can join us today as the 
Legislative Building turns pink in support of breast cancer. 
Breast Cancer Action Saskatchewan works to empower and 
educate people affected by breast cancer. It is a non-profit 
organization dedicated to empowering and educating people 
affected by breast cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members today to join me in welcoming 
Jill and Tia here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
join with the minister and welcome Jill and Tia here today to 
their Legislative Assembly and thank them for all the great 
work that they do in this area. It has had an impact. There’s 
much more work to be done. And I’m certain that that work will 
be completed. 
 

But on this day I would like to welcome them to their Assembly 
and thank them for the work that they’ve done on behalf of the 
opposition. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce three guests in your gallery — 
Betty Anne Stevenson, director of communications for the 
Children’s Advocate’s office; Glenda Cooney, deputy advocate; 
and of course, Mr. Marvin Bernstein, the Children’s Advocate. 
 
I would just like to take a moment to thank him for this 
wonderful report that he has submitted today, outlining a vision 
that puts children first in this province. I know that a lot of the 
work he does is frustrating and sometimes difficult to do. But 
on a personal note, I want to congratulate him for what he does 
on behalf of the children of this province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca, the minister of Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join my colleague and all members of the Assembly to 
also welcome the office staff of the Children’s Advocate as well 
the Children’s Advocate himself, Mr. Bernstein. And obviously 
the report that he’s presented, we’ve looked at it. And we’ll 
continue working hard together for the best interests of the 
Saskatchewan children, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m really happy today that we’re joined by a group of 55 grade 
5 and 6 students from St. Matthew School in Whitmore Park 
here in Regina. The group is seated in the west gallery. And 
they’re accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Kot and Mrs. 
Weafer today. As well they’ve got chaperones — Mrs. 
Banadaga and Mrs. Kuster — who are here. 
 
We’ll be having an opportunity to get a photo taken. And I 
understand they’re going to do a bit of a tour around the 
building. And then we’ll have an opportunity to answer some 
questions about legislative process and what we actually do 
here later on in the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] visit. 
 
So I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
students from St. Matthew School here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the members of the legislature, sitting in your gallery, I 
would like to introduce my sister, Diane Murfitt — just give a 
little wave there — up for a little bit of visiting and shopping 
and possibly a little bit of rest from my two nephews, Cole and 
Clay. I hope you will enjoy the proceedings. I think today you’ll 
find them quite interesting. You picked a good day to come up 
and view it, with the Premier’s estimates coming up. I hope you 
enjoy your stay here at your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
three summer students that are seated in your gallery. Mr. 
Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery are Louise Bigeagle — 
Louise, give us a little wave there — is from the Ocean Man 
First Nation. She’s attending currently the First Nations 
University. Her studies currently focus on Aboriginal justice. 
She’s working with the deputy minister’s office, attending a 
variety of meetings and doing research as has been requested. 
 
Also is Jessica Greyeyes. Jessica is from the Muskeg Lake First 
Nation and is currently working in the lands and resource 
branch. She’s also working on a degree in business 
administration. Her interests, I’m told, include sewing, 
gardening, and computers. And lastly is Katryna Smith. Katryna 
is currently working with the policy and operations branch, 
specifically on the anti-racism file, which is of interest to her. 
 
These three summer students are all, as I said, working in the 
Department of First Nations and Métis Relations and wanted to 
come today to see a little bit of what the proceedings in the 
Assembly look like. So I’d ask all of my colleagues to please 
join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you, nine students, grades 6 to 9 from 
Swanson Christian School. They’re seated in the east gallery. 
Accompanying them are eight chaperones and also teachers, 
Miss Marie Dueck and Miss Susanne Ginther. And we will also 
have a photo later and a visit. On behalf of the opposition leader 
we say: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 
 
Please join me in welcoming these students from Swanson 
Christian School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my distinct pleasure to introduce to you and to all members 

of the Legislative Assembly a group of students and teachers 
that have travelled to Regina to attend the legislature but also to 
provide a presentation at the University of Regina in a college 
of Education class. Mr. Speaker, these students are here as part 
of their leadership, human rights, and diversity field trip. These 
students are from both Aden Bowman and Evan Hardy 
Collegiate. 
 
From the Aden Bowman Gay-Straight Alliance are 25 students 
accompanied by three of their teachers, Cathy Lacey, Bob 
Birtles, and Al Lowen. And from Evan Hardy Collegiate we 
have three students from the Evan Hardy Gay-Straight Alliance 
and they’re accompanied by their chaperone, Ms. Verone 
Charington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with these students and 
their teachers this afternoon. I understand they have a number 
of tough questions as to where the province stands on a number 
of human rights issues. I look forward to meeting with the 
students later, and I’m sure we will have a vigorous and most 
fruitful discussion. So I would ask all members of the 
legislature to welcome these future Saskatchewan leaders to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join with the other member who’s welcomed the 
Children’s Advocate here today. In the 18 months that I’ve been 
a minister, I’ve been able to meet with him and have 
conversations and also share a meal as well. 
 
But I did want to share one humorous story. When Mr. 
Bernstein moved here, his spouse remained back at his original 
. . . where they were living previously, so he was actually living 
here by himself for a while. And last summer our church took 
the youth group, 20 teenagers, to the Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan, and his wife had just joined him that day or a 
day previously. So we ran into him at the Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan. So he was a very happy man that day, and I was 
very happy because I was surrounded by a bunch of teenagers. 
So I just wanted to share that story and welcome him for the 
good work that he does for the children of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the House eight men and women who are in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker — eight men and women who in the 
days to come will be spending a great deal more time in this 
building and in this Chamber. They are each newly nominated 
candidates for the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So if I may, let me first introduce, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Gord Bedient who is an electrician and a 
small-business owner and who will be the next member of the 
legislature for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And then, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Cam Broten 
from Saskatoon. He works health policy with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, the next member of the legislature for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, from the community of 
Biggar . . . or farming near Langham, operates the family farm, 
former elementary school teacher and principal, Mr. Ken Crush, 
the next member for Biggar. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Brenda Curtis, 
minister of the United Church of Canada in Humboldt and the 
next member for Humboldt. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Larry Hall, mayor of 
Buena Vista, former teacher, next member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chad Nilson, a young 
man who is currently completing his Ph.D. He currently teaches 
at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and conducts 
research through the University of Saskatchewan, the next 
member for Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Corinne Pauliuk who 
owns her own licensed personal care home and works as a 
human rights investigator, workplace mediator. Ms. Corinne 
Pauliuk, the next member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, today finally, 
Ms. Jane Wollenberg who is a teacher by trade, who is currently 
doing some tutoring, and she will be the next MLA from 
Saskatoon Southeast. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, Minister 
Higgins, and I had the honour of attending the ninth annual 

SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence Friday in 
Saskatoon. It was an evening of excitement and pride with more 
than 300 family and friends gathered to honour the 54 First 
Nations and Métis youth nominated for 10 different categories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners of this year’s SaskTel Aboriginal 
Youth Awards of Excellence are for fine arts and performing 
arts, Chantel Redman of the Standing Buffalo First Nation; 
technology and science, Jordan Bear, Muskoday First Nation; 
leadership, Jessica BigEagle, Regina; in sport, Shasta Bear of 
Chacachas First Nation; community service, Stacey Houghton, 
Moose Jaw; recreation, Vern Martell, Waterhen First Nation; in 
education, Brennan Beatty, Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, 
Deschambault Lake; culture, Nicole Waskewitch, Onion Lake 
First Nation; the Spirit Award, Howard (Hal) Cameron, 
Beardy’s Okemasis First Nation; and for outstanding 
achievement, Jordan Mahalicz in Beauval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, special thanks is extended to the organizing 
committee chaired by Colleen Cameron for putting on a 
fantastic event to recognize the many achievements of First 
Nations and Métis youth of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Pink Day at the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is pink day at the Legislative Assembly, a day on which 
we wear ribbons and other pink garments to show our support 
for thousands and thousands of women who are diagnosed with 
breast cancer every year in this province and indeed this nation. 
 
With one in nine women diagnosed with breast cancer, there is 
a strong likelihood that every one of us knows someone who 
has been affected by this disease. In fact many of us have 
women in our families, our groups of friends, and colleagues 
who have fought or are currently fighting breast cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few decades, great strides have been 
made in terms of early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. 
Women who are diagnosed today have an excellent chance of 
beating the disease. We know that early detection is the key. A 
recent Canadian study shows that one of the main reasons more 
women are beating breast cancer today is because of early 
mammographies. I ask all members and everyone watching 
today to encourage all women you know to have regular, 
comprehensive screenings especially if they are over 40 years 
old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do we wear these ribbons in honour of all 
women who have been diagnosed with breast cancer; we wear 
them to recognize their families, friends, and colleagues who 
provide these women with love and support. And we wear them 
to show our appreciation for all the volunteers, doctors, nurses, 
and other health professionals and researchers who are 
committed to the cause of finding a cure for breast cancer. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Accomplished Pinehouse Athlete 
Prepares for Summer Games 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The Special Olympics athletes’ oath says, “Let me win. But if I 
cannot win, let me be brave in the attempt.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today to tell you about a 
remarkable young man from my constituency, Aaron Misponas 
from Pinehouse, Saskatchewan. Aaron is a new Special 
Olympics Saskatchewan athlete. And already, Mr. Speaker, this 
young man has achieved three gold medals at the Kinsmen 
Indoor Track Meet in Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although he is new to the Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan, Aaron has been running long distance for a 
number of years. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Aaron is fortunate 
enough to have the support of his many friends, his family, and 
the Pinehouse community to cheer him on. Aaron is well known 
in his community because he is frequently seen running. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s training twice a day and running twice a day. 
 
Aaron will soon be attending the Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan Summer Sports Camp and will compete in a 
track meet between Team Saskatchewan and Team Manitoba. 
All of this preparation is for the Western Canadian Summer 
Games in Strathcona, Alberta in August of this year. At the 
Western Canadian Summer Games, Aaron will be competing in 
the 100 metre, the 200 metre, the running, long jump, and 
possibly the relay. Aaron also enjoys competing in the 400 
metre, the 800 metre, the 1,500 metre, and the high jump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in offering sincere congratulations and very best wishes to 
Aaron Misponas of Pinehouse for his many accomplishments 
— past, present, and the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Medal of Valour 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity to recognize a constituent of 
mine, Derek Prohar from Avonlea, who received the Medal of 
Valour this past February in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Derek Prohar was assigned as a liaison officer 
with the United States armed forces during the battle of 
Sperwan Ghar in Afghanistan. Captain Prohar acted as a rear 
machine gunner operating on the battalion commander’s 
vehicle. Captain Prohar was wounded during an ambush but 
continued to return fire, assisting the commander with the 
control of the attack, which resulted in the seizing of key 
terrain. Because of his courageous actions, he earned himself 
and the Canadian Armed Forces much respect among the allied 

soldiers of the United States Special Forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, Medal of Valour decorations are 
national honours awarded to recognize acts of valour, 
self-sacrifice, or devotion to duty in the presence of the enemy. 
The decorations were put in place in 1993, but this is one of the 
few times that it has been awarded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of the Assembly 
to join me in congratulating Derek Prohar on his courageous 
acts and outstanding performance for this country, Canada. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Multicultural Celebration 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I attended the 
Multicultural Celebration hosted by the Confederation Park 
Community School in my constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. 
It was kind of a mini-Folk Fest, Mr. Speaker, aimed at 
showcasing the wide variety of cultures represented in school 
and community. 
 
It seemed like the entire school and community were involved 
in the celebration, and they really did it up right, Mr. Speaker. 
There were classroom pavilions, heritage fair projects, and 
ongoing multicultural entertainment featuring Pushpanjall from 
the India School of Dance, Confederation Park students and the 
Dance Morena Latin Dance Academy, Métis jigging by 
Courtney Anaquod, Buffalo Boy Productions, Donny Spiedel, 
the First Nations Dance and Drumming Group, the Lastwika 
Ukrainian Youth Choir, and the Vesniaka Academy of 
Ukrainian Dance. Other countries and cultures represented 
included Sudan, Bosnia, China, Germany, the Philippines, 
Vietnam, and Laos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it really was an impressive and extraordinary 
event with fantastic food and great entertainment and provided 
an excellent showcase of the city and the community’s diverse 
makeup. 
 
I want to convey a huge thank you to Principal Dr. Jayne 
Hudson and the parents, staff, and students of Confederation 
Park Community School. In particular I want to acknowledge 
Ann Longmuir, president of the school association, and the 
community coordinator, Cec Chambul. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Provincial High School Curling Champions 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today and recognize this year’s 
provincial high school girls’ championship curling team. The 
Weyburn Comprehensive Eagles girls’ rink — made up of skip 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

Melissa Hoffman, third Brittni Maurer, second Calli Tracey, 
and lead Jessica Pyett — won gold earlier this year. 
 
And they didn’t get there the easy way, Mr. Speaker. After 
dropping to the C bracket with a two and two record, the girls 
ran the table, defeating Strasbourg, Tisdale, Whitewood, and 
Gull Lake. And in the championship game, the girls got out to 
an early lead and didn’t look back on their way to an 8 to 2 
victory over Kelliher. This year’s championship, Mr. Speaker, 
marks the third gold medal in curling for the Weyburn Comp 
since 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a very busy year for these girls as they 
have spent a lot of time together on the ice, as shown not only 
in their gold at provincials but also with being recently awarded 
the Team Award of the Year by the South East Saskatchewan 
Association for Culture, Recreation & Sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I offer my congratulations to Melissa, Brittni, 
Calli, Jessica, and to their coach Mel Hoffman and assistant 
coach Danette Tracey on a very successful season. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Policies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why 
doesn’t the Saskatchewan Party want to talk about policy this 
session? Because they know that the people of Saskatchewan do 
not agree with the policies of the Saskatchewan Party. For 
example Crown corporations — they continue to hide their 
privatization agenda. This is why the member from Humboldt 
has to make claims that the Sask Party has never called for 
privatization of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. 
She said, quote: 
 

I would like a copy of Hansard where anyone in the 
legislature has said that STC should be sold, dismantled, 
got rid of. Because I’ve been elected since 1999. I’ve 
extensively gone through past Hansard in preparation for 
today. 
 

She didn’t look very happy when my colleague, the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation, provided a list of the many, 
many times that the Sask Party MLAs have called for the 
privatization of STC, both in and of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can’t talk about policy, and they 
can’t talk about ethics — not when they continue to hide their 
true policies. But don’t worry, Mr. Speaker, an election is 
coming. And to quote Mark Twain: “When a man is buying a 
basket of strawberries it can profit him to know that the bottom 
half of it is rotten.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 

Children’s Advocate Recommendations 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Children’s Advocate said an action plan based on the children 
and youth first principles he has outlined is needed immediately 
to address the needs of children in the government’s care. The 
advocate said that situations like Oyate and Four Directions are 
a wake-up call and the government needs to act and take action 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to developing an 
action plan based on all the recommendations of the Children’s 
Advocate, especially the children and youth first strategy, and if 
so, when can we expect this action plan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
When this government set up the Office of the Children’s 
Advocate in 1994, I believe is the right year, we intended to 
afford the office as much respect and certainly as much 
collaboration and communication as possible. 
 
What’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to know is 
that we take that role seriously for the advocate to come 
forward and give us some recommendations, to give us some 
advice. We will certainly value that advice and will do our 
darndest to work towards achieving the recommendations and 
the aspirations that he has. What’s important is this government 
respects the office and the role of the Children’s Advocate. 
We’ll continue working with him and his staff to try and 
achieve what is in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 
children. That is paramount to our thinking, to his thinking, and 
many people’s thinking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to be more 
concerned about process and jurisdiction than other issues when 
the main concern needs to be the safety of the children in his 
care. The minister is responsible for well over 4,100 children in 
this province, and Saskatchewan has the second highest 
mortality rate for children in the country. 
 
The Children’s Advocate says in order to protect children, a 
shift is needed in government policy, in practice, in legislation, 
and in attitude. Mr. Speaker, will the minister take the advice of 
the Children’s Advocate and commit to truly putting the safety 
of children first before all other considerations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Then maybe he 
will answer when he’ll implement this, which was in the first 
question. 
 
The reason the Children’s Advocate has outlined several 
principles, including that all children are entitled to equal 
standards of care, protection, and services, is because that’s not 
the case right now. Children are being left at risk. Children are 
being returned too soon to abusive situations. Too many parents 
are given too many chances and the safety of children is not the 
first priority when decisions are being made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit that his department will 
stop making decisions based on restrictive, family-centred 
policies and programs and instead change the entire focus to a 
child-centred program? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve indicated, that we plan on working very closely with the 
Children’s Advocate. And as I mentioned, since we established 
the office it’s important that we also respect the office, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to point out that much of the work has 
continued. And although we sometimes disagree with the 
advocate on the timelines, we can tell people that we do intend 
to move forward on some of the recommendations as quickly as 
we can, and to work our way through many of the points that 
he’s raised. 
 
I would point out that it is our first priority to ensure that the 
safety of children is paramount in our thinking. And we 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, that it’s always not possible to keep the 
families together. But always, as I mentioned at the outcome, 
Mr. Speaker, we will work with his office. We will not try and 
politicize the process. We will try and make sure there is good 
plans, there’s progress, and there’s good processes in place to 
ensure that there’s respect afforded to as many groups as we can 
to try and achieve the best interests and the safety of all our 
children in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks of 
timelines . . . If it hadn’t been for the Children’s Advocate 
bringing forward Oyate and Four Directions, nobody would 
have known about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate agrees that an 
independent review of the entire child welfare system would 
help. He has been told that there won’t be any legislation 
changes until 2009, and no child-first emphasis until at least 
2008. The Children’s Advocate says that these changes are 
needed so that we don’t fail or continue to fail and fall into 
patterns that don’t work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child-first principles are not contentious, so why 
should we take so long in implementing them? Would the 
minister commit to undertaking the child-first policies, 

practices, and legislation long before 2009, and will the minister 
have an independent review of the current child welfare 
system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s role in 
respecting the advocate’s office, the Children’s Advocate 
office, and working with them, is to make sure that we not 
interfere with his independence. Mr. Speaker, the Children’s 
Advocate is independent. And he has on many occasions given 
us advice, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to hear that advice and 
listen to that advice. 
 
And I should point out to that member that when we have 
questions of this nature from that party opposite, they proposed 
a $50 million cut to the department of community budget, the 
Social Services budget, Mr. Speaker. So how is it, Mr. Speaker, 
that they on one hand want to talk about children first and 
trying to move the agenda forward, and on the other hand they 
say, well we’re going to cut $50 million because we think that’s 
a waste of money? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side we’re going to take the pragmatic 
approach. We’re going to provide leadership. We’re going to 
work with as many people as we can to make sure that the best 
interests of our children, it’s first and foremost in all of our 
minds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to talk 
about jurisdiction and policies and political. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, a child’s a child’s a child. It’s his responsibility as a 
parent to that child to do his job. Simple question: why won’t he 
implement this process of a child-first strategy immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And as I’ve indicated at the outset, our timelines with the 
Children’s Advocate is somewhat different. He obviously wants 
to see some of the progress made immediately. And our 
department, certainly from my perspective, agree that we have 
our processes to go through. There’s a lot of consultation, 
there’s a lot of discussion. There are many parties we have to 
talk to. But we do, and we have begun that work, Mr. Speaker. 
We have begun that work but it’s going to take us some time to 
get there. And we certainly want to encourage the advocate to 
continue his prodding because that’s his independent way and 
we continue to respect that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s also very surprising coming from across the way again, 
Mr. Speaker — $50 million cut. And you know what? When he 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

mentioned a child’s a child’s a child, all they have ever brought 
up in this Assembly is some of the negative challenges that 
many First Nations people have and nothing else and nothing 
more, Mr. Speaker. So again I would say perhaps it’s time to 
park their politics, get out of the way. We will lead this file, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Supply of Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find 
myself once again rising in the Assembly to question why the 
people of Kamsack are such a low priority for this Minister of 
Health and this NDP [New Democratic Party] government. 
 
With unwanted regularity, local officials have had to reduce or 
temporarily eliminate services because of shortages of medical 
professionals. And once again I find that starting today through 
until 8 a.m. Friday, there will be no evening and night service at 
the Kamsack Hospital because of a shortage of doctors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of my area, the people all across rural 
Saskatchewan deserve better. Why has the minister allowed 
health care in rural Saskatchewan to deteriorate so 
significantly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to answer the question again. As the 
member opposite in phrasing his question has indicated, it is 
again a temporary closure for a couple of evenings to ensure 
that the physicians that are serving the Kamsack Hospital can 
do the things that they need to do there. 
 
The regional health authority makes decisions with regards to 
temporary closures, Mr. Speaker, to ensure and assure the 
safety of individuals within the region. Mr. Speaker, the 
regional health authority has indicated that the emergency room 
is open in Canora and it’s open in Yorkton. And again the 
regional health authority is urging people with emergency 
circumstances to call 911 and the ambulance services. 
 
The regional health authority is doing all that it can to support 
the safety of the individuals there. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a letter from the town of 
Kamsack to the Minister of Health, and it’s dated May 2, 2007. 
And I quote: 
 

Your Government must become more pro-active in the 
field of physician recruitment . . . 
 
We have many questions that are just not being answered 
and all we see are an increasing number of days that our 
hospital is on bypass. Your immediate attention to this 
matter is imperative. 

 
Mr. Speaker, from the Human Services Committee on April 11, 
when I asked the minister the question as to how many days the 
Kamsack Hospital had been on bypass in the previous fiscal 
year, this was his response: “In Kamsack we had a closure 
duration of 47 days.” Mr. Speaker, 47 days. Those aren’t my 
figures. Those are the minister’s figures. 
 
When will this minister begin giving this serious problem the 
attention that it deserves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been giving this important matter our consideration for 
quite some time, Mr. Speaker. In fact back in 1999 we began 
the action plan, and in December 2005 we built the action plan 
for the health workforce. We’ve negotiated two contracts with 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association, Mr. Speaker, with 
significant components about recruitment and retention of 
physicians, Mr. Speaker. And the list is very long as to what we 
are doing. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, compare that to what they’ve been doing on 
the opposite side. Mr. Speaker, they’ve been calling for the 
installation of new auditors, Mr. Speaker, in the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker, new auditors who will take a look at the 
system. They prefer to hire auditors, Mr. Speaker, than hire 
physicians. Our principles are to work with the SMA 
[Saskatchewan Medical Association] to hire and recruit 
additional physicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a letter from the mayor of 
Canora, Terry Dennis. This letter is dated May 3, 2007. And it 
states, and I quote: 
 

Ongoing efforts by health regions and provincial agencies 
to attract local doctors seem to be proving fruitless. In the 
meantime, the merry-go-round of doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan continues. 

 
Mr. Speaker, local people are in agreement. What this minister 
has done so far is inefficient. He has not solved the problem. 
When will the minister take steps to assure people get the 
medical services they require? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Regional health authorities, Saskatchewan Health, and this 
government are supporting initiatives that are making life better 
for Saskatchewan people through the health regions. Mr. 
Speaker, we are supporting 37,000 people within the health 
system. Mr. Speaker, we are providing human, we are 
supplying health workers to 269 facilities across this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On Thursday of last week I was in Preeceville. The member 
opposite was in Preeceville. What did we announce? A new 
doctor in Preeceville, Mr. Speaker — something that the 
member opposite has been calling for for some time. Mr. 
Speaker, we have recruited to many locations across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and the member opposite should stand 
up and congratulate us when we do a good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you can bet that we will when 
this minister does a good job, but so far he’s failed, and he’s 
failed in all parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing closures and 
service cuts with alarming regularity. Health care in our smaller 
centres is collapsing. In Saskatoon, our largest health care 
district, paramedics are filling in because there aren’t enough 
nurses. In Weyburn, the birthplace of medicare, you soon won’t 
be able to have a baby. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister has failed to deal with this growing 
problem in recruitment and retention of health care 
professionals. The concerns of people from all over 
Saskatchewan have fallen on deaf ears. When will the minister 
begin taking this issue seriously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think everyone in the province — except the members opposite 
— know that we have taken this issue seriously. And the only 
thing that the members opposite have done, Mr. Speaker, is go 
to where some of the most significant challenges are, and they 
have not acknowledged where the successes are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We put in place a $25 million recruitment and retention strategy 
that the members opposite said was a good first step, and then 
said it wouldn’t work. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve recruited now 
141 individuals in less than a year; 84 of those are nurses, Mr. 
Speaker. This is 347 years of return-in-service commitment that 
we have generated, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the work that 
we’ve done. 
 
All they’ve done across the way, Mr. Speaker, is said we need 
more auditors in the system to make this more difficult. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re having success, and we will continue to have 

success. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Building Communities Program 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when Human Services 
considered estimates from Culture, Youth and Recreation, we 
discussed the building communities program. As opposition we 
were surprised to learn there were no applications for funding 
received last year under this program because there was none 
available. But we were also surprised to learn there was 
fourteen and a half million dollars given out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister responsible tell me how it’s 
possible to hand out in excess of fourteen and a half million 
dollars when there’s no applications for funding under the 
program? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when the building 
communities program was designed, it was intended to support 
for the people of Saskatchewan facilities for sports, culture, and 
recreation that will serve regional needs for a long time into the 
future. Mr. Speaker, there are some projects that were in 
progress or had been recently completed that the communities 
went ahead and served regionally. They achieved the entire 
objectives of the building communities program and did that 
having requested the province for assistance and not being able 
to get any because there was no program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was decided to assist those projects in the cities 
of Swift Current, Lloydminster, Yorkton, and the Wanuskewin 
project, all of whom, Mr. Speaker, had requested funds. We’re 
meeting all of the objectives of the building communities 
program. If the hon. member, if the hon. member wants to lean 
over and ask her seatmate from Swift Current if he thinks that’s 
a bad idea, then she should just let him speak for himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: I’ll speak for the 
number of communities who didn’t have an opportunity to put 
an application in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of thing that drives people crazy. 
Culture, Youth and Recreation spent more than $14 million on 
the building communities project. There was no applications 
received. There was no clear criteria. Yet the minister magically 
picked four programs to support, and out of those programs, 
two of them had completed construction and one where 
construction was in progress. At the same time the town of 
Nipawin was advised not to apply because their project was 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

completed. 
 
The minister had told us during estimates, projects would be 
dealt with on the basis of their own merit, and there would be a 
possibility of projects that were already under way. So why on 
one hand were projects given money, on the other hand people 
weren’t even allowed to apply? How is that fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in the centennial there is the 
centennial facilities program, which provided up to four and a 
half million dollars for smaller projects. In 2006 there was the 
community shares program, which provided capital monies to 
communities to use for their priorities. Then, Mr. Speaker, came 
the building communities program to enhance capacity in 
sports, culture, and recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were four large projects, all of which were 
well over $10 million in size and all of which had caused the 
communities to assume a fair amount of deficit in order to 
achieve them, even though they’re meeting regional needs — 
which is the objective of the building communities program. 
 
If the hon. member thinks that that doesn’t make sense, then let 
the member for Lloydminster, let the member for Swift Current 
stand up and say that they don’t believe that those monies were 
well spent to serve the people not only of their communities but 
the surrounding region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an investment in the future for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to suggest that the 
minister ask whether the mayor of Eston or the mayor of 
Nipawin thinks it makes sense. Their projects weren’t even 
looked at. Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s handling of the building 
communities project has angered civic leaders all across this 
province. 
 
Mayor Al Heron of Eston writes his community is trying to 
reduce the energy costs through solar heating of the local pool 
and improvements to the ice plant. When building communities 
project was announced, hundreds of communities thought 
they’d get as much as $50 per capita for qualifying projects. 
Then they learned, after the fact, that any community planning 
to spend less than $1 million wouldn’t even qualify. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, how is that fair? How is this a building 
program in all of Saskatchewan? Is this anything more than the 
minister’s personal slush fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 

Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Interesting concept, Mr. Speaker. The 
Swift Current slush fund, the Lloydminster slush fund, she 
suggests. Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the program is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Minister of Culture . . . 
Order please. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the program is designed to 
support regional enhancement of community facilities for 
sports, culture, and recreation. And community and regions can 
work together, including rural municipalities with urban 
municipalities. Mr. Speaker, it is intended to enhance capacity 
for significant projects and has a threshold of $1 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that their Conservative 
cousins in Ottawa, their Conservative cousins in Ottawa, in 
order to qualify under the MRIF [Municipal Rural 
Infrastructure Fund] program, to have funds from the federal 
government to support sports, culture, and recreation facilities, 
has a threshold of $25 million — $25 million. And I ask the 
hon. member, has she lobbied her Conservative cousins from 
the country of Canada to support the projects across the 
province of Saskatchewan to build the regional facilities that 
Saskatchewan people want and need and deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Severance for Former Caucus Employee 
and Police Documents 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
two weeks now the Premier has refused to stand in his place 
and answer what I think is a very simple question: why is Jim 
Fodey entitled to severance if he resigned? The rules of the 
Legislative Assembly clearly state that if you resign, you don’t 
get severance. So either Jim Fodey resigned and is not entitled 
to severance, or Jim Fodey is entitled to severance because he 
didn’t really resign. Which one is it? 
 
Will the Premier stand up today and explain to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers why is Jim Fodey getting severance if 
he did indeed resign? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I wish to advise the Assembly 
that the question is out of order. I will only allow a response if 
it’s voluntary. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already indicated 
to the public that it’s our intention to follow the rules of the 
Legislative Assembly. But I will say this. Why is it that the 
Saskatchewan Party continues to try and deflect from the fact 
that the Leader of the Opposition and his chief of staff had 
illegally obtained or stolen documents from the city of Regina 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

police in their position for well over a year? And why is it that 
they allowed two of their critics to go out in the rotunda and 
mislead the public that they’d only been in possession of these 
stolen documents since the beginning of this session, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know what this is all about. It’s a deflection of 
the fact that the members opposite had stolen police documents 
in their possession for well over a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly clearly state, they clearly state that severance is 
provided at the direction of caucus and the Premier is the leader 
of that NDP caucus. Yet he refuses to act like a leader by 
refusing to answer this very simple question. 
 
The good news is he cannot run and hide forever because today, 
later today, the Saskatchewan Party will ask this question again 
in the Premier’s estimates. And the Premier will have to stand 
up and he will have to answer that question. So why doesn’t he 
just save us all some time and why he doesn’t he act like a 
leader for once, and why doesn’t he get up and answer a 
question? Why is Jim Fodey getting a taxpayer-funded 
severance if he resigned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite talks about leadership. And I have a question, and I 
quote; and this is from the Leader of the Opposition’s scrum on 
May 8: “You also want to bring it forward at a time when it’s 
going to capture the attention of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan so that they understand.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they kept a stolen document in their 
possession for over a year so that, quote, the people would 
“understand” why the big Leader of the Opposition secret . . . 
And then he says, “I just don’t think people are interested in the 
nature of who got the documents or when the documents were 
received.” On May 8, 2007, he says this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are some people who want 
to know how long they got the document, where they got the 
documents from, and the people who want to know are the city 
of Regina police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 

I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,480 through 
1,484 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Responses to questions 1,480 to 1,484 
have been submitted. The Chair recognizes the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce a motion related to a sitting calendar in future years 
for the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce a motion regarding the sitting calendar. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Rules and Practices of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as we will all be aware, the 
House during this session has been abiding by the newly 
developed calendar which provides for 25 sitting days in the fall 
and 40 sitting days in the spring. And both the government and 
the opposition have had some reflections on how that has 
effectively served our tasks and the schedule by which we 
operate here. 
 
We’ve come to a common conclusion, Mr. Speaker — and I’m 
going to move a motion in just a moment that is seconded by 
the Opposition House Leader — we’ve come to a common 
conclusion that it would serve the House just as well and the 
purposes of the members, particularly in their own 
constituencies, to make a slight alteration in the sitting 
schedules. 
 
And therefore I have a fairly, unfortunately, lengthy and 
somewhat complicated motion, the objective of which is to 
change the spring sitting days to still remain at 40 days, but 
compared to the current calendar to start two days earlier and 
then provide a five-day sitting break for the week following 
Easter Sunday. And part of the motion then, Mr. Speaker, puts 
in place the consequential notice of motion requirements in 
order to achieve that and to permit the House to continue to 
operate in a regularized kind of way. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Opposition 
House Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That rules 6(3), 21(4), 22(4), 23(2), and 60 of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan be replaced with the following: 
 
6(3) The Assembly shall not meet on the following 
designated days: New Year’s Day, Family Day, Good 
Friday, the week after Easter, Victoria Day, Canada Day, 
Saskatchewan Day, Labour Day, Thanksgiving Day, 
Remembrance Day, Christmas Day, and Boxing Day. 
 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

[Rule] 21(4) Notices of priority items of business 
designated under this rule is to be provided in writing and 
tabled no later than 2:30 p.m. each Tuesday. When the 
Assembly does not sit on a Tuesday, the terms of this rule 
shall be applied on the preceding sitting day. 
 
[Rule] 22(4) Notice of motion may be given orally in the 
Legislative Assembly under routine proceedings on the 
preceding Tuesday, and the written notice shall be tabled 
no later than 2:30 p.m. on the preceding Tuesday. When 
the Assembly does not sit on a Tuesday, the terms of this 
rule shall be applied on the preceding sitting day. 
Notwithstanding anything else herein contained, notice of 
the debate may be waived with unanimous consent. 
 
[Rule] 23(2) Notices for private members’ motions shall 
be tabled no later than 2:30 p.m. on the Tuesday preceding 
the Thursday on which the motion is to be debated and, 
where more than one notice is tabled, government and 
opposition notices shall be listed alternatively on the order 
paper. When the Assembly does not sit on a Tuesday, the 
terms of this rule shall be applied on the preceding sitting 
day. 
 
[And finally rule] 60 Two sitting days notice shall be 
given of a motion for first reading of a Bill, a motion for a 
resolution, order, or address, or for the appointment of any 
committee; but this shall not apply to public Bills, after 
their introduction, or to private Bills, or to the times of 
meeting or adjournment of the Assembly, or to notice 
provisions otherwise specified by the rules. Such notice 
shall be laid on the Table and be printed in the Votes and 
Proceedings of that day. 
 

And further, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the amendments to the rules and practices of the 
Legislative Assembly, as specified by this motion, be 
adopted and brought into force effective immediately. 

 
Seconded by the Opposition House Leader, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion moved by the member for 
Moose Jaw North and seconded by the member for Melfort, 
will the members please take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Will take it as read. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — Before this committee is Executive Council 
estimates, found on page 63 of your Estimates booklet. I would 
invite the Premier to introduce — are all the officials present? 
— to introduce officials that are now present and to make any 
introductory comments when officials arrive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, the officials have not 
quite arrived. We’ll start as soon as they get here. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you very much. 
 
Thank you. As I mentioned the matter appropriately before the 
committee is the estimates for Executive Council found on page 
63 of your Estimates book. And I would ask the Premier to 
introduce his officials and any comment he would like to make 
before beginning the deliberations. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I’m very 
pleased that we’re joined this afternoon by Mr. Dan Perrins who 
is the deputy minister to the Premier. We are joined as well by 
Ms. Lois Thacyk, chief of staff to the Premier. We’re joined by 
Mr. John McLean, director of senior management services, and 
Ms. Bonita Cairns, director of corporate services, Madam 
Chair. 
 
As you know, Madam Chair, the estimates of Executive 
Council, sometimes described as the Premier’s estimates, 
provide an opportunity to look at broad ranging issues across 
government as well as the more specific issues attached to the 
Department of Executive Council. 
 
And I’m hopeful this afternoon in the next two hours that we 
will be able to engage in some debate and some discussion 
about some of the important public policy issues that face the 
people of Saskatchewan as we seek, as a government, to build a 
better life for Saskatchewan families in this province, to build a 
better future for our youth here, as we intend to keep on doing 
that through strengthening our economy, strengthening the 
social programs of our province, and strengthening the 
environmental foundation of sustainability that will carry us 
forward, Madam Chair. And therefore I’m very much looking 
forward to this discussion of public policy that we can engage 
in this afternoon over the next couple of hours. 
 
The Chair: — In subvote (EX01) central management and 
services, is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Swift Current. 
 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam 
Chair. I want to join with the Premier in welcoming his officials 
to the Assembly today. We’re also looking forward to a 
discussion of a number of issues that are very important to the 
province today and into the near-, medium-, and long-term 
future of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to begin, if I may, Madam Chair, in the issue of 
health care. We have spent some time over this current sitting 
of this session back to last fall and years previous — in fact 
every year since I’ve been elected in 1999 — talking about one 
particular issue in health care, and that is the human resource 
issue in the province of Saskatchewan or the shortages of both 
nurses and doctors. 
 
Madam Chair, when we have raised those questions in the past, 
often the answer from the Health minister and maybe at times 
from the Premier — I don’t recall — has been, well this is a 
problem that the entire country faces. And it is true to an extent 
that there is a shortage of nurses and a shortage of doctors in 
jurisdictions other than our own province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what is different it seems when you look at the national 
evidence, when you look at what has happened in other 
provinces, is that other governments — who like this 
government cut training seats for nurses, for example in the 
early 1990s — much more quickly recognized the mistake they 
made and started to make adjustments in training seats, started 
to come together with stakeholders to develop a recruitment and 
retention strategy. 
 
And while those challenges still exist in other provinces, I 
would argue, Madam Chair, and more importantly groups with 
much more credibility than any politician — groups like SUN, 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and others on the front lines 
of health care in the province — would argue that because of 
the fact that our own government, the NDP government, has not 
recognized the problems they caused when they cut those 
training seats, when they failed to present recruitment and 
retention strategy that was the product of stakeholder 
consultation, that our problem in Saskatchewan now is more 
acute than it ought to be and more acute relative to what we’re 
seeing in other provinces. 
 
It was interesting, Madam Chair, to go over some of the 
warnings that came to this government when the current 
Premier was first the associate minister of Health in 1992, later 
appointed the minister of Health in 1995. Consider that the 
Canadian Nurses Association were long ago predicting the 
problem that we would face in Canada today, that we’re now 
facing in the province today, if there wasn’t adequate training in 
the province, if there wasn’t a plan to deal with recruitment and 
retention. 
 
Consider the headlines from 1996 with respect to shortage: 
“Plight of rural doctors needs addressing says College of 
Physicians and Surgeons.” In 1998, “Health care workers 
frustrated with the system.”. Just a little bit later on, P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Daily Herald: “Nurse shortage forces operating 
room closures”; “Canadian Nurses Association said the degree 
program today does not graduate anywhere near the number of 

nurses that were graduated in total in 1991.” 
 
There were warnings that obviously other governments heeded 
including the NDP government in Manitoba — I would point 
out to be fair and non-partisan about it. This Premier today, 
when he was the Health minister, ignored the warning lights 
that were going off in the dashboard, Madam Chair. And this 
Premier today presides over a budget and a government that 
still has no plan. And again you don’t have to take our word for 
it, Madam Chair. The nurses have weighed in pretty 
unequivocally on it. You can see the billboards all over the 
province of Saskatchewan that point to this, the commercials on 
TV that point to this. 
 
And believe it or not, Madam Chair, but the budget this year 
was an opportunity obviously for the government to fix the 
mess that it had created and not addressed over the decades. 
And what was in there in terms of training seats for nurses? 
Eighteen, eighteen. What was in there for training seats for 
doctors — and we heard earlier today we have an acute 
shortage of doctors — four new seats. We’ll be up to 60. 
Manitoba is at 100. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why would anyone believe 
now that he has a plan to deal with the most important issue in 
health care, the shortage issue — when he ignored the warning 
lights as the associate minister of Health, when he ignored the 
warnings when he was the Health minister in the mid ’90s and 
since when he’s become the Premier, the problem’s gotten 
worse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to review events of the 1990s, early 1990s 
when I did have the privilege to be serving as associate minister 
of Health, and I worked a great deal with the health care 
providers, health care workers at that time. Madam Chair, I 
think the Leader of the Opposition has fresh memories in his 
own mind of those days since he was in this building right up 
until those days or thereabouts, and he knows what this 
province was dealing with at that time. 
 
He knows the debt and the deficits that we were dealing with at 
that time. He knows because he was part of the government that 
gave us those debts and deficits, Mr. Speaker. And was there 
reductions? Was there reductions? There were, Madam 
Speaker. There were, Madam Chair. There were some very 
significant difficult choices that had to be made at that time. 
 
Now at the very same time, Madam Chair, this government was 
leading the nation, leading the nation in health care reform in 
looking at new approaches to health care in building a model of 
wellness, investing not only in acute care but investing in 
opportunities to keep people well and out of the system. It was 
visionary, Madam Chair, and it has carried us to this day up and 
to and including the health care plan that now exists that’s 
carrying us forward, again internationally and nationally 
recognized. 
 
Now it’s one thing for the Leader of the Opposition to raise 
concerns, and that’s fair enough. It’s part of his role. It’s part of 
their role over there to raise concerns. And it is government’s 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

responsibility of course to act, and that’s what we’ve been 
doing, Madam Chair. 
 
And I just want to review with you and the House the number 
of actions that have been taken in just these very short few 
months past and in the past few years. In just these past few 
months, Madam Chair, we have provided recruitment grants to 
141 individuals, recruiting people to serve in our health care 
system. And, Madam Chair, 84 per cent of those, 84 of them or 
60 per cent of those recruits are nurses, nurses serving in our 
province. 
 
With these recruitment grants of course we ask for a guarantee 
of return-in-service commitments. Of those who have very 
recently been recruited, we now have 347 years — 347 years — 
of return-in-service commitments. Now this represents from 
this government a cost $1.78 million. And interestingly, Madam 
Chair, 40 per cent of these new recruits are coming from the 
province of Alberta. That’s in terms of recruitment just in the 
past few months under the leadership of the current Minister of 
Health. 
 
But equally important, Madam Chair, is the matter of retention. 
Retaining those valuable health care workers, whether they be 
nurses or LPNs [licensed practical nurse] or workers in services 
in the health care industry or physicians, retention is equally 
important, and we’re very committed to retaining our current 
workforce. 
 
And we fully recognize, Madam Chair, that there are a number 
of on-the-job pressures facing our nurses and other health care 
providers. We’re addressing them by the following. We’ve 
committed, Madam Chair, over $6 million, $6 million over the 
next three years for wage increases to remain competitive and 
provide good, good, good wages for our health care workers. 
We’re added RN [registered nurse] seats this year. We now 
have a total, Madam Chair, of 466 training seats for RNs in this 
province. We’re adding LPN seats. 
 
We’ve launched a new program for the training of our young 
Aboriginal people in the Aboriginal community. And you heard 
the minister from the North talk about this recently in the House 
this week. 
 
It takes us to training, Madam Chair. Since 2003 — note this — 
since 2003 this government has increased RN seats by 55 per 
cent, since 2003 a 55 per cent increase in training seats in this 
province for RNs. That brings us to the total of 466 this year. In 
terms of LPNs, licensed practical nurses, we’ve increased the 
total by 70 per cent since 2003 for a total of 210. And as I 
indicated, we’re supporting 360 new and continuing return in 
service bursaries to retain our graduates, Madam Chair. 
 
This is a government, Madam Chair, that is at work, that is at 
work with the health care providers in Saskatchewan, with the 
Department of Health, with our health regions to tackle the 
challenge which is a challenge facing virtually every 
jurisdiction not only in Canada but in North America, Madam 
Chair. 
 
Now in this debate, in this debate we should be hearing from 
the Leader of the Opposition. What is his plan? What is his plan 
for retention and recruitment? What is his plan, Madam Chair, 

as he seeks to become the Premier of the province? 
 
Well all that we’ve heard from that Leader of the Opposition 
and that opposition is a plan to audit health care expenditures in 
this province — not to add nurses, not to add doctors, but to add 
auditors to the system to audit the system. And, Madam Chair, I 
say to the health care workers of Saskatchewan, you ought to 
beware of the auditors that that party would put in place if 
they’re ever in government, Madam Chair. They’re not auditors 
who are worried about the health care of Saskatchewan people 
or Saskatchewan families or Saskatchewan children. They’re 
auditors worried about the bottom line. 
 
This is the party that went into the last election saying they’re 
going to keep the rate of expenditures in health care at only the 
cost of inflation, only the rate of inflation. That’s what they said 
in the last campaign which means, Madam Chair, had they been 
elected to government in the last election — you know what? 
— the health care budget today would be $200 million less than 
the budget that we’re now debating, $200 million less. 
 
So would the Leader of the Opposition please explain to this 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan how he would take 
$200 million out of the health care budget and at the same time 
build, build the numbers of health care workers providing . . . 
build retention, build recruitment? And how does he intend to 
do that with a bunch of auditors running around our hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Madam Chair, sometimes we on this 
side of the House wonder if the Premier even knows what’s 
happening inside of his own government because we know that 
Sun Country health district is currently undertaking an audit, a 
service delivery audit. I think Deloitte’s the firm that’s been 
hired. Those are the auditors that this government has hired 
presumably, or its regions have hired presumably to find out if 
there are efficiencies to ensure that we can focus resources on 
the front line instead of getting them caught up in 
administration and governments. 
 
We understand that there are two other, maybe three other 
audits going on in health care regions right now. His Minister of 
Health is sitting right behind him. He ought to have whispered 
it to him before he got up and went on his hire-more-auditors 
rant that we actually hear from the minister. Their regions today 
are doing these audits. My question to him is pretty blunt: does 
he think that’s a good thing or a bad thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, this of course is the 
normal course of business within the regions. Of course this is 
the normal course of business. This is quite a different 
approach, quite a different approach, Madam Chair, than what 
has been recommended by the party opposite. Now we first 
interestingly had this idea . . . it’s not a new idea. It’s not a new 
idea. 
 
I heard in this House once upon a time from what was then the 
leader of the Liberal Party. You’d bring in these auditors to 
look at value-for-money audit. That’s the difference, Madam 
Chair. These people talk about value-for-money audit. That’s 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

the kind of thing they’re interested in. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now I ask again the Leader of the Opposition, I ask again the 
Leader of the Opposition, he proposed and his party proposed in 
the last election to maintain the levels of health care expenditure 
in this province only at the rate of inflation. That was what they 
said — only at the rate of inflation. And somehow they would 
find, quote, “efficiencies.” They would find cuts in the health 
care provision in Saskatchewan to maintain expenditures at the 
rate of inflation. Well by our calculation, anybody’s calculation, 
that would mean we’d have $200 million less in health care 
today than we would have if they’d been elected, Madam Chair. 
 
So we’re not here talking about this value-for-money audit that 
they talk about. We’re not talking about freezing health care at 
the rate of inflation. We’re talking about providing real health 
care services, real nurses, real doctors, real LPNs, real 
caregivers in our hospitals, in our nursing homes, in our 
communities. That’s what we’re talking about, Madam Chair. 
We’re talking about real health care services for real people. 
 
Meanwhile they talk about value-for-money audits, and they 
talk about freezing the health care budget. I’d like the Leader of 
the Opposition to explain to this House and explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan how it is that he intends to provide for 
the recruitment and retention of health care workers by freezing 
the health care budget at the rate of inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, we’ve already established very 
early on in Executive Council estimates that the Premier’s 
unaware that his own government is doing these audits on a 
rotating basis. It happens in every region, presumably to find, to 
improve the delivery of service, to delivery of health care for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Madam Chair, one idea that the Saskatchewan Party has 
promoted, one option, one alternative that we have quite freely 
offered — and when the Premier limits it to just one point, he’s 
obviously not paying attention because certainly our Health 
critic has talked about it and I have talked about it around the 
province; more importantly, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
and other stakeholders in this whole nursing shortage issue have 
quite clearly pointed out to all of us — an idea, an alternative is 
for this government to show some leadership to ensure that our 
regions are offering full-time, permanent positions. 
 
In region after region, if you listen to the nurses — and we have 
been — they will tell you, they will tell you, Madam Chair, that 
that’s not happening. Too often casual, part-time positions are 
being offered to nurses. And then what happens in the regions 
— and it happens in mine; it’s happened in the Southwest; it 
happens all over — is they pay huge amounts of overtime 
because of course they have to fully staff with these casual, 
part-time workers. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, if you are a nursing graduate and you had 
a significant student loan — as you’re apt to have coming out of 
an intensive four-year degree program — and you had a choice 
to make between a jurisdiction that offered you full-time, 

permanent work with some assurances and some surety and 
Saskatchewan under the NDP that offers all too often casual, 
part-time work, which would you choose? 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why has his government not 
shown leadership in this regard? Why are regions under his 
watch continuing to go down the road of casual, part-time 
positions and then wondering why nurses choose other 
jurisdictions after they graduate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Madam Chair, the Leader of the 
Opposition may want to rethink what he just said. The fact of 
the matter is, the fact of the matter is that of the graduates recent 
in Saskatchewan in nursing, 90 per cent of them are practising 
in the province. They’re not leaving the province, Madam 
Chair; they’re staying in the province. 
 
Now that’s due to some very good work that’s been going on in 
the Department of Health and, if I may say, been going on in 
the regions. Now our regions are charged with the management, 
the day-to-day management of the health care system in our 
province. Now perhaps the, perhaps the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to change that. I don’t know; he hasn’t said 
but he might. 
 
But today the regions in Saskatchewan are in charge of the 
day-to-day. They have to deal with issues like maternity leave, 
parental leave, vacation, and so on. The Minister of Health has 
just informed me that where the regions find it possible to 
provide full-time employment, they are providing and they’re 
offering full-time employment. And the fact of the matter is 
again, Madam Chair, that 90 per cent of the graduates in 
nursing in this province are now working in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, there you have it. The Premier 
doesn’t think it’s important, this issue of full-time, permanent 
positions because certainly if he did think it was important, this 
government would have acted. His Minister of Health would 
have acted on the advice that they are getting, same advice 
we’re getting. Obviously SUN will talk to any legislator on any 
side of the House and tell them what are the issues, how do we 
deal with this shortage. 
 
Training seats is key. The government’s failed — 18 seats in 
the budget when the problem is about 500 nurses short right 
now in the province and with succession that’s coming — 
retirements and required succession planning — up to 1000 
vacancies, Madam Chair. Training seats, absolutely key. This 
government failed on that count miserably in this last provincial 
budget. 
 
And on the issue of full-time, permanent positions . . . which 
would help immeasurably in terms of not just attracting but then 
retaining nurses because remember, there’s two parts to the 
formula. The other part to this formula is that once we have 
successfully — and we congratulate the recruiters in the health 
regions for their work to date — but once we have successfully 
recruited those nurses to work, to stay in the province of 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

Saskatchewan or to come to Saskatchewan, then retention is 
key. And which province, under which government, has the 
worst retention rate in the country? Right here in the province, 
under the NDP. 
 
We have an issue. It relates to full-time, permanent positions, 
Madam Chair. It relates very, very clearly to full-time, 
permanent positions, and it relates to the number, to our training 
capacity in the province. And until the Premier is going to 
address those, until his government’s going to do something 
about that, why would he expect SUN or, most importantly, the 
people who need the health care system to have any faith at all 
in the health care system that he’s providing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I and I believe the vast 
majority of Saskatchewan people have a great deal of faith in 
the health care system in this province, a great deal of faith in 
those who provide our health care services on a daily basis. I 
want to remind the Leader of the Opposition again — I know 
the Minister of Health pointed this out to him in the House just 
this week — that there are today in Saskatchewan 1,500 
individuals in training seats for nursing in this province, 1,500. 
 
Are we encouraging more? Yes, we are, Madam Chair. Are we 
developing more capacity? Yes, we are. And we’re developing 
that capacity across the province. We’re developing the 
capacity now to educate young people in the North for service 
in the North. We’ve got programs of bursary support to ensure. 
And we’re seeing the track record, Madam Chair, of graduates 
choosing to live and work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in the area of overtime, yes, we’re working with the 
regions to try and provide more full-time opportunities. Of 
course we are. But there will always be the mix in the system to 
account for various issues that will arise, maternity leaves and 
so on. There will always be the mix in the system. We’re 
encouraging, we’re working with the regions to see more 
full-time employment but the record is a record of 
accomplishment. There are more people training for nursing in 
this province today. There is better recruitment and retention 
efforts. 
 
And this is because, Madam Chair, this is because of the 
budgeting of the province of Saskatchewan. We are the funder 
for health care in this province, Madam Chair. We have a 
budget with a record health care expenditure, a budget that’s at 
least $200 million more than the party opposite would have if 
they were in government — a budget, Madam Chair, that they 
will vote against and have voted against. 
 
Now I don’t know how this works, Madam Chair. The Leader 
of the Opposition gets up and says there should be more full 
time, there should be more retention programs, there should be 
more recruitment programs, but then he also says but we should 
cut the budget for the Department of Health. We should cut the 
Department of Health’s budget. That’s what they ran on. On 
inflation in the Department of Health would be frozen at the . . . 
the period of expenditure would be frozen at inflation. 
 
Well, Madam Chair, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t 
stand in the House and say spend more and more and more, and 
at the same time not vote for the budget and at the same time go 
out and tell the people of Saskatchewan, well you can hold the 

health care budget at the rate of inflation. It just doesn’t work, 
Madam Chair, and the Leader of the Opposition should just 
come clean on this and say it can’t work. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, Madam Chair, I wonder does the 
Premier have any thoughts at all on what might be saved in the 
system if we put a priority on full-time, permanent nurses 
instead of paying overtime? Has the Premier even had the 
interest to direct his Minister of Health to ask the question? Or 
will he just sort of continue to — when it’s convenient for them 
— you know, put it on the health region? Say, well that’s up to 
the health region to deal with that and we’ll gently . . . we can 
gently nudge them, and basically use those regions as human 
shields for any sort of criticism that comes with respect to 
health care policy. 
 
Under this government the health care system apparently is set 
up to pay more overtime, while we are unable to do the best job 
we could possibly be doing of recruiting and then retaining 
nurses. There are other recruiting and retention issues that 
remain unaddressed by this government. Again if they were 
listening to stakeholders, if they were listening to SUN, maybe 
even if they listened to the Saskatchewan Party who has been 
listening to those folks, that they could move on and it would 
help the situation especially with respect to retention. 
 
We’ve heard nurses tell us over and over again that the lack of a 
mentoring initiative within the health care system is a problem 
in terms of retention. We have heard pretty compelling stories 
of a brand new nursing graduate who on her first shift is left to 
deal with 27 patients by herself, and the next day, surprisingly, 
isn’t very interested in coming back to work. These are issues in 
the workplace. 
 
The system under this government, under that minister and the 
Premier, lacks mentoring. It lacks — as the nurses have 
advocated — a more staged process for brand new graduates so 
we’re not putting them into the highest stress possible role of 
the nursing profession, but rather that they would have the 
opportunity to work with more experienced nurses and move 
into those other areas of health care. 
 
Is there absolutely anything offered by this government, by that 
minister or by this Premier, in terms of leadership on that 
count? The answer is no. And so again there’s another idea. The 
Premier keeps saying, well what would the Sask Party do? 
There’s another idea. Is the Premier prepared to act on that? 
Will he start listening to SUN? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, again to remind members 
of what is happening today in the health care system, in health 
care delivery in this province. With the $6 million that we have 
allocated to retention initiatives, the Minister of Health just 
informs me that we now have 30 applications in place from the 
workplaces of Saskatchewan to address just some of the very 
same issues that the Leader of the Opposition is talking about. 
 
Madam Chair, if there’s a full-time position available in this 
province, of course we’ll offer it. Where the positions can be 
full-time, of course they’ll be full-time. As I’ve said before, the 
Department of Health and the regional health authorities are 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

working together to try and build the full-time positions. But 
there will be the mix. Is the Leader of the Opposition saying 
that he will eliminate overtime in the health care system? Is that 
what he’s arguing, Madam Chair? 
 
Madam Chair, we have put in place a $25 million fund for the 
recruitment and retention of health care workers. We are 
working with a broad range of health care providers, their 
associations, their unions, Madam Chair, and we are seeing the 
positive results, Madam Chair, and that’s just the fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for 10 years — and I could go 
through the quotes again — for 10 years nurses, doctors, and 
others, more importantly the patients who need the health care 
system, have been calling on this government for action. The 
Premier at the outset of this topic said, well the government was 
facing some fiscal difficulties early on in its term. There’s no 
arguing that at all. 
 
Madam Chair, that same fiscal crisis was being faced in every 
single province in Canada because, Madam Chair, because, 
Madam Chair, in the 1980s provincial governments of every 
stripe, including Bob Rae Ontario, including the government in 
Alberta, the Conservative government in Alberta, including the 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan, racked up huge 
debts — deficits and debts. So other governments, other 
governments made some cutbacks in training seats for nurses. 
It’s true. The Premier’s right. But then those governments 
recognized that mistake early on in the mid-’90s, in the mid- to 
late -’90s at the very latest, and they started to act. They started 
to act. But not our government. Not the social democrats here in 
the birthplace of medicare, Madam Chair. 
 
So here’s the question. Here’s the question to the Premier. My 
last question was on another alternative that he would hear if he 
met with SUN, if he met with the stakeholders, that he would 
hear if he was listening to the members on this side of the 
House, and that is the need for mentoring. That is the need on 
the part of especially new nursing graduates to ease into some 
of the higher stress areas of their work. What leadership is he 
providing, is his government providing in the area of workplace 
mentorship and ensuring that nurses don’t want to leave only 
days after they start because they’ve been thrown into too 
stressful a situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, again to reflect on the 
Leader of the Opposition’s comments. He wants to go back 
again and talk about the 1990s. Fair enough, we’ll talk about the 
1990s. And he makes this assertion that somehow in the 1990s 
Saskatchewan was really no different than any other province in 
Canada, that every other province had deficits, debt. Well, 
Madam Chair, everybody in Canada and everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows that was simply not the case. 
 
The fact of the matter is in 1991 this province had the highest 
debt per capita ratio anywhere in Canada. We had members of 
that government at that time standing in this House, right here, 
standing in this House saying the province is on the very verge 
of bankruptcy. That party that he was a part of and that 

government that he was a part of brought this province to the 
verge of bankruptcy. And let’s not forget it. And the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t forget it, and no sugar-coating by 
discussing other provinces and their fiscal problems come 
anywhere close to what the people of Saskatchewan faced in the 
1990s. And let’s not forget it. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now in terms of, Madam Chair, the circumstance today, the 
circumstance today, I’ve just been provided some information, 
some figures about the realities. The realities are that in 2005 — 
these figures are from 2005 — in our province, 54.8 per cent of 
RNs are employed full time compared to 54.4 in the Canadian 
RN workforce. 54.8 of our RNs are at full time compared across 
the country, Madam Chair, across the country with 54.4, so 
marginally higher — marginally higher — full time in 
Saskatchewan than is across the country. 
 
And if you use the ratio in terms of casual hours, the rate of 
RNs working casual hours in Saskatchewan today is 11.4, 
which is comparable, marginally higher, than the Canadian rate 
of 11.1. So the fact of the matter is the RN positions in 
Saskatchewan are comparable with RN positions across the 
country and casual is comparable with RNs casual across the 
country. 
 
Does this mean we are seeking . . . not seeking further full 
time? Of course it does not. That’s just what we’re doing. 
That’s just what the regions are doing. 
 
And, Madam Chair, to encourage the retention of our workers, 
we are putting substantial financial dollars, I’ve just reported $6 
million, into . . . [inaudible] . . . initiatives. I’ve just reported . . . 
The Minister of Health tells me there’s already been 30 
applicants for this support, and those are significant dollars, 
Madam Chair, to those applicants — significant dollars. 
 
Now that’s what’s happens, Madam Chair, when you sit down 
and you work with health care providers as the Minister of 
Health has done, both with the regions, the professional 
associations, and with a variety of the unions. They are working 
with Minister of Health. They are working with him to build 
this retention and recruitment strategy to meet our needs, not 
just for today but for tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well there you have it, Madam Chair. I’m sure 
SUN is going to be interested in this, the other stakeholders in 
health care. The Premier just doesn’t think it’s a problem, 
doesn’t think it’s an issue, says we’re doing just fine. 
 
I’ll take the word, we’ll take the word of SUN every single day 
over the word of this government because the evidence of 
course is hospital closures. That’s the evidence of a nursing 
shortage in the province of Saskatchewan. The evidence of a 
nursing shortage is the fact that this government’s going to be in 
the position of actually posting temporary openings of health 
care facilities rather than when they’re closed. Those are the 
facts. 
 
The Premier has not come anywhere near the other alternative, 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

the other suggestion on the issue of mentoring, on the other 
workplace issues that nurses have raised. 
 
No wonder they’re sick and tired of this government, of the 
Premier, and especially of the minister. No wonder they’ve 
been left to have to erect billboards on the highway and take out 
television ads. The nursing situation is so well in hand by this 
government that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses are 
advertising on television, and they’re putting up billboards all 
over the province to draw public attention to the terrible and 
dismal record of this NDP government, Madam Chair. 
 
The other shortage that we face in Saskatchewan — again long 
ago predicted when that Premier was the minister of Health — 
is the doctor shortage. Listen to what Dennis Kendal, the 
registrar of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, said in 
1996 when he was speaking about the burden of work for 
doctors in rural Saskatchewan in particular: 
 

We’ll have to sit down, and that includes the health 
districts and the government and the professions, to 
discuss this. We will all have to be part of the solution.  

 
So there you have it. In 1996 the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons have identified a problem with respect to doctors, the 
number of doctors we have in rural Saskatchewan. They’ve 
identified the fact that this government needs to — and that 
Premier was the minister of Health, mind you, at the time — 
that this government needs to sit down and earnestly work with 
the stakeholders to ensure we can deal with the situation. 
 
And what is the situation, Madam Chair, today? Today well we 
obviously have a doctor shortage. Day after day in this 
Assembly members of the opposition have brought forward 
cases from their constituency that highlight the fact that we 
have yet another . . . that we have doctor shortages in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In Manitoba, NDP Manitoba, what have they done about it? I’m 
sure they have issues with respect to doctor recruitment and 
retention in rural Saskatchewan. But long ago, unlike this 
current government, they must have seen something coming. 
They must have listened to their health care providers in their 
province because in Manitoba they train 100 . . . there’s 100 
seats, 100 training seats for doctors. A comparable province, 
about the same size, same fiscal capacity when you throw in the 
equalization they get, and, Madam Chair, in the province of 
Saskatchewan with the whopping four seats — with the 
whopping four seats that we get in this budget — we’re up to 60 
training seats. 
 
Madam Chair, to the Premier. He was the minister of Health 
when the College of Physicians and Surgeons warned this 
government, when the SMA warned this government that a 
doctor shortage was coming. He did nothing then. He’s the 
Premier now. He’s doing nothing about it now other than to add 
four seats, bring the total to 60 when Manitoba has 100. Why, 
Madam Chair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, in this budget which this 
opposition is going to vote against, has voted against, and I 

suspect will vote against when it comes time. The fact of the 
matter is we are adding, adding 24 seats in the College of 
Medicine. That includes 12 seats in the undergraduate program 
and 12 seats in residency. We’re adding, Madam Chair, 24 
seats. Now why in the world would an opposition vote against 
that? Why would an opposition vote against that? But mark my 
words, come the end of the day, they’ll vote against it. 
 
Madam Chair, we have worked very closely with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. We’ve negotiated with 
them. We’ve established successful contracts, and as part of the 
contract negotiations, are significant components for the 
training and recruitment of new doctors. The new physician 
agreement with the medical association will strengthen those 
retention and recruitment efforts. That means fee increases. It 
means programs to give doctors time off. 
 
And this year, Madam Chair, again in the budget that they — I 
expect — will vote against at the end of the day, we’ve 
committed 29 million more dollars to fund an array of programs 
aimed at recruiting and retaining physicians. Madam Chair, it’s 
one thing to just offer criticisms; it’s another thing to get the job 
done. And we’re getting the job done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Madam Chair, I’d like to know the 
Premier’s definition of getting the job done. I think the people 
of Spiritwood would like to know the same thing because of 
course their hospital’s closed. I think the people of Big River 
would like to know what the Premier means when he says, 
we’re getting the job done, or the people of Shellbrook or 
Preeceville or Canora or Kamsack or Arcola or Bengough or 
Coronach or Broadview or Central Butte or Vanguard, Madam 
Chair. I think they’d be very interested in the definition of the 
Premier when he says he is getting the job done, Madam Chair, 
because the doctor shortage, the nurses shortage is having a real 
impact on health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Madam Chair, that we have the smallest 
College of Medicine in the country, Madam Chair, in terms of 
its training capacity. This Premier was the minister in 1996 
when the warnings came loud and clear, not from politicians, 
not from politicians, but from the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, from the SMA. They told this government back then 
that they ought to do something. 
 
Those same groups in their respective provinces told their 
respective governments of all different stripes. It appears that 
almost every other government listened except for the NDP in 
the birthplace of medicare. Madam Chair, we know that in 
terms of training capacity in this budget, notwithstanding the 
numbers the Premier wants to talk about, he’s adding four seats. 
That’s what he’s adding, to take us to 64 when Manitoba has 
100. How in the world is that getting the job done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I repeat, this budget — 
which they have voted against and will likely vote against again 
— adds the capacity for 12 more undergraduate positions and 
12 more residencies through the College of Medicine. But I 
remind the Leader of the Opposition, not only have we done 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

that in this budget, not only have we placed $29 million in 
recruitment and retention, Madam Chair; this government has 
placed in trust with the University of Saskatchewan $100 
million for the construction of a new health sciences building in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Chair, that’s what we’re doing. That’s what we’re 
doing. And we’re planning for that with the College of 
Medicine, with the College of Nursing to build, to build, 
Madam Chair, a state-of-the-art, a state-of-the-art health 
sciences complex for the people of Saskatchewan, and we put 
$100 million in trust. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition wants to know what it means to 
get the job done. Well let’s not just look to our own opinions. 
Let’s look to the opinions of others. Now, Madam Chair, the 
Conference Board of Canada, the Conference Board of Canada 
did a survey and has rated Saskatchewan’s health care as the 
third best health care system in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s getting the job done. That’s the 
Conference Board of Canada. More significantly, Madam 
Chair, perhaps, is the review of our own Health Quality 
Council. Our own Health Quality Council speaking to our 
health human resource plan, our efforts to build health care 
providers, our own Health Quality Council says this plan, 
quote, “leads the nation” — leads the nation. Madam Chair, 
that’s getting the job done. 
 
But perhaps most significantly of all is this, 95 per cent, Madam 
Chair, of Saskatchewan residents who were surveyed said their 
experience with the health care system in this province was 
good or excellent — 95 per cent, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now why is it good and why is it 
excellent? Well number one, Madam Chair, it’s based on 
fundamental principle, the fundamental principle that has been 
carried by the New Democratic Party and by its predecessor the 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], the principle 
that access to health care in this province, to hospital care and 
doctors, Madam Chair, should not be governed by what’s in 
your wallet, but by your health care need. That’s the 
fundamental principle. That’s why the system in this province is 
good and excellent according to 95 per cent of the people. 
 
And ever since day one, ever since day one, Madam Chair, 
these folks have fought that principle. They’ve looked for ways 
to violate the principle. And I tell you, when we see them in 
government in other locations, we know when they get to 
government they do violate that principle. 
 
And what do you know, Madam Chair? In this budget, the thing 
they don’t want to talk about in this discussion about health, 
they sure don’t want to talk about a drug plan for our seniors. 
They don’t want to talk about that because they’re voting 
against, and they oppose this universal provision for our 
seniors. They oppose it, Madam Chair. They oppose it on 
principle. They say it’s not sustainable. They say you know, 
everybody should be paying more. Well we believe, Madam 

Chair, as we are able to extend health care coverage to all of our 
citizens and we believe that the pioneers and the senior citizens 
of this province deserve, deserve that kind of care as we can 
sustain it through a growing economy, Madam Chair. 
 
So yes, you bet we’re getting the job done, and we’re getting 
the job done according to the Conference Board of Canada. 
We’re getting the job done according the Health Quality 
Council. But perhaps most importantly, we’re getting the job 
done according to 95 per cent of the residents of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Chair. Is there work yet to do? Yes there is work yet to 
do. Have we accomplished much yet? Yes, but there is much 
more to accomplish. And with the leadership of this minister 
and this government, we intend to accomplish just that. Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, I find it interesting that the 
Premier is quite happy to quote the Conference Board of 
Canada and hold it up as a gospel with respect to health care 
quality when his own minister who is just glaring at me over 
there, the minister responsible for TILMA [Trade, Investment 
and Labour Mobility Agreement] or not TILMA was panning 
the Conference Board of Canada. In fact I’ve heard the 
members on that side of the House and their staffers basically 
write off the Conference Board and the work that they’ve done 
with respect to a trade agreement. But apparently the Premier 
clinging to something, wants to cling to the Conference Board. 
 
We’ll tell him, we’ll tell him this, Madam Deputy Chair. We’ll 
tell him that he can side with his studies. He can keep all of the 
studies he wants. We’re going to side with the nurses. We’re 
going to side with patients, Madam Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And with respect, and with respect to the issue of 
prescription drugs for example, we’re still going to side for 
people like Bob Loeppky, the late Bob Loeppky, and like Terry 
Rak who have a pretty reasonable question: won’t you help us 
with at least some if not all of the costs of Avastin that could 
extend our life? 
 
It’s more than just a little bit duplicitous for the Premier to wax 
on about care for those who need prescription care and then say 
no to the Raks and say no to the late Bob Loeppky even for any 
help with respect to that particular drug when the cancer agency 
has recommended that it be funded. 
 
Madam Chair, I have a question for the Premier with respect to 
long-term care. This is a very important issue for seniors in 
Saskatchewan and their families of course. And there’s a, 
there’s a particular example I would like to draw the Premier’s 
attention to because I think it speaks to both the need for 
long-term care amongst First Nations but also the long-term 
care requirements off of First Nations reserves in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier may know that Muskeg Lake First Nation has 
spent about $2.5 million to build a care home for elders and 
special needs clients. And they will tell this government, they’ll 
tell the opposition or anyone that wants to listen, it makes a lot 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

of sense to make sure that the cultural traditions of First Nations 
surround their seniors in their golden years when they need 
long-term care. It opened on March 1, 2007. It’s a licensed 
personal care home, but it’s having trouble meeting operating 
costs right now currently. Obviously if the facility closes, it 
would be a shame, both for the role it can play with First 
Nations elders from Muskeg Lake and other First Nations, but 
also in other communities. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I’m interested to hear what the minister of Social Services 
has to say from his seat. He doesn’t seem to like the idea of 
long-term care on Muskeg Lake. Now . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . well that’s what he’s saying. The minister of 
DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] is saying, well, just talk to the feds. It’s up to 
them. Well I got a question for him, Madam Chair. Maybe the 
Premier can ask him, since it’s his estimates. What’s he done to 
make this case to the federal government? 
 
Because you know if those beds could be filled with First 
Nations elders who are too often and right now away from 
home, off of the First Nation, even though there are available 
beds right at home, if that change could be made, if this 
provincial government would be prepared to work with the 
federal government on that count, it would help make for 
vacancies in long-term care beds across this province and would 
ensure the Muskeg Lake long-term care facility is open. 
 
But you know what? The minister doesn’t have time for that. 
And neither, apparently, does the Premier. And that’s my 
question for him on this issue. Has he or his ministers actively 
done anything with this file? It’s truly a powerful template for 
the province as First Nations could be at home in their golden 
years, receiving eldercare, surrounded by their traditions and 
culture. Has he done absolutely anything about it, or is he just 
prepared to leave Muskeg Lake facility potentially to close? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Madam Chair, I’m not sure if the 
Leader of the Opposition’s been to Muskeg Lake; I have. Just 
weeks ago I met with, and many of my colleagues met with, 
people from Muskeg Lake, met with the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. This was one of the very issues 
that we discussed. And we are seeking solutions. 
 
Now, Madam Chair . . . well now, you see? I’m going to point 
out there’s a great deal of laughter coming from the opposition. 
Well let’s see how much they laugh about this. We have treaty 
obligations that are borne by the Crown, represented by the 
federal Government of Canada. The Leader of the Opposition 
wants to know what the Minister of Community Resources was 
saying here moments ago. He was inviting that leader and that 
party to look to their friends in Ottawa, their cousins in Ottawa 
to say, how are we doing in terms of our treaty obligations to 
First Nations people in Canada? How are we doing in terms of 
the funding of health care? 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Madam Chair, we were doing a whole lot 
better before these people got elected in Ottawa. I mean every 
premier in Canada sat with then Prime Minister Paul Martin in 
Kelowna. Every premier in Canada and territorial premier and 
leader sat at one table. We came from every political 

perspective in the country, sat at that table, and made an 
agreement with the national government to see substantial, 
substantial increases — substantial increases in the support for 
First Nations people whether it be in education or it be in health 
care, the very kind of support that should be flowing to the First 
Nations of Saskatchewan on-reserve for their health and 
education programs, Madam Chair. 
 
Then what happened? Well I’ll tell you what. This group of 
men and women over here and their cousins in Ottawa got 
together, and they won an election in Ottawa. They won an 
election in Ottawa. We elected 12 of them here with all of the 
support of the Sask Party over there. What did they do? What 
did they do? They tore up the Kelowna accord. They tore up the 
agreement between all premiers and the national government. 
They’ve disregarded it which would have provided, Madam 
Chair, significant, significant resources for First Nations people, 
for First Nations on-reserve in terms of health and education. 
 
Now we are participating, Madam Chair, with First Nations in 
new ways never before seen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We are partnering in new ways in terms of education, in terms 
of highways. I have visited a First Nations nursing home, senior 
citizens’ home, a care home that is being funded by the 
province just off-reserve, Madam Chair. 
 
We are looking for these creative solutions. We’re going to look 
for them with, in partnership with the First Nations of 
Saskatchewan. But I’ll tell you what we’re not going to, as 
apparently the Leader of the Opposition is willing to do. We are 
not going to allow the national Government of Canada to 
abdicate its treaty responsibility to the First Nations of 
Saskatchewan. We’re not going to allow it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And if the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to do something about seniors’ care on-reserve, he should 
get right on the phone to his good friends in Ottawa and see 
what he can do to move them along because he ought not to 
think for a moment that we’ve been silent on this issue — not 
silent on the Kelowna accord like they’ve been silent and by the 
way, Madam Chair, not silent on other significant issues that 
would impact on First Nations in our province. 
 
We are breaking the mould in Saskatchewan, Madam Chair. We 
are breaking the mould in our partnership and work with First 
Nations people. I invite you to look at the partnership we’ve 
established with the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies in terms of education. I invite you to look at the 
partnerships we’ve established in terms of transportation, the 
partnerships that we’ve established in terms of economic 
development, Madam Chair, because the First Nations of 
Saskatchewan, like this government, believe in the strength of 
economic development leading them forward so we can go 
forward together. And we’re working together in health care. 
We’re working together in youth and family services and child 
services. 
 
So now the Leader of the Opposition gets up today and wants 
us to partner more fully on-reserve, and that’s a fair enough 
observation. But why is it then his critic in child care is always 
criticizing the First Nations of Saskatchewan for what they’re 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

doing? And why is it, why is it? Are they going to be criticizing 
next the First Nations for what they’re doing in elder care? 
 
Now, Madam Chair, one other point. Again I invite the Leader 
of the Opposition to explain — never mind, never mind to the 
whole people of Saskatchewan but particularly to seniors — 
why it is he’s so opposed, why it is he is so opposed to a 
universal seniors’ drug plan in the province. Why doesn’t he get 
up and explain why he is so opposed and why he wants to get 
rid of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I don’t 
know what the Premier is, I don’t know why the Premier is 
refusing to answer the question with respect to Muskeg Lake. 
 
I’d like to know specifically what the Premier’s doing on this 
file because I think it’s important. Notwithstanding the rhetoric 
that I’m sure I’ll get into in this time — and I’m sure the 
rhetoric the Premier will get into; we’ll both do that — but I 
would be personally interested in finding out what’s going on 
with respect to the Muskeg Lake long-term care and potentially 
what help that we could be in opposition, if any. Because I 
think this is an important project and potentially a bit 
pioneering and trail-blazing in terms of what can happen on 
other First Nations. 
 
Not that the province wants to step in and fulfill the treaty 
obligations of the federal government. Certainly that’s not the 
case. But can our health regions be forces for facilitation in this 
regard? Can our government show some leadership? I think that 
they can, Madam Chair. And if that’s happening today, fine. 
But I haven’t heard it so far. 
 
Madam Chair, I’d like to move to an area of interest to the 
minister the Premier was just referring to — at least I hope it’s 
an area of interest — the minister of DCRE. And it has to do 
with the government’s policy with respect to working with 
community-based organizations. We know that the government 
works with a number of community-based organizations, the 
vast majority of which do an amazing job. They do a lot of 
heavy lifting on social issues, arguably better than any 
government department could ever do regardless of who the 
government of the day happens to be. 
 
And we’ve talked about the need for accountability in 
community-based organizations and we can get into that in a 
bit. But I’d like to ask the Premier his own personal views on 
the role of faith-based organizations, what role that that they 
can play. 
 
Under the broadest term, of course, that’s happening today. If 
there is a cultural or faith component from a First Nations 
perspective involved in some of the community-based 
organizations delivering service, we think that’s a positive 
thing. The same would be true in the area of drug addictions. 
The same would be true in any of these social issues. 
 
And I would wonder if the Premier would highlight for this 
Assembly why, in a letter to a group called Teen Challenge, 
which is an admittedly faith-based organization with a global 
success rate of 70 per cent — 70 per cent helping young people 

overcome addictions — they received a letter back from the 
minister when they were asking for some help. And they 
weren’t asking for operating money, mind you. They were 
asking for some capital help, a partnership. They got a letter 
back that said that “Inpatient treatment centres funded by 
Saskatchewan Health are non-denominational.”. That’s the 
quote from the minister’s letter. And I wonder how the Premier 
squares that. 
 
I don’t think necessarily that any faith group wants to be 
excluded from doing some of this powerful work — groups that 
can, I would say, argue, do it as effectively, maybe more 
effectively than secular groups. I wonder if the Premier would 
answer that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I just want before we pass 
further discussion about the Muskeg Lake proposal, to engage 
the province in a partnership around long-term care on Muskeg 
Lake, I want to assure the Leader of the Opposition that in fact 
discussions are going on. 
 
But I find it, I find it very peculiar, very peculiar that through 
all the hours of Health estimates that have gone on in this 
Chamber with the Minister of Heath or with the Minister of 
Healthy Living Services, and Seniors, with the full range of 
health care officials here to answer the questions, not one 
question was asked by that Leader of the Opposition or by the 
Health critic about the Muskeg Lake situation — none about 
Muskeg Lake. Now why is that, Madam Chair, if this is now 
today such a concern for the Leader of the Opposition? When 
all of the officials were here, when all of the officials were here, 
the Minister of Health was not asked — who is responsible for 
health care services. Now how is that work, Madam Chair? 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about the 
relationship between the provincial government and 
community-based organizations. And as the Leader of the 
Opposition knows, there is a broad, broad engagement and 
partnership with community-based organizations in this 
province, providing significant and very valuable services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But Madam Chair, that does not replace all of the other work 
that goes on in this province. There are a variety of agencies, 
faith-based and otherwise, charitable and otherwise — I was 
part of one of them, Madam Chair, for many years of my life — 
providing quality services without public funding, without 
asking for public funding, Madam Chair. And so we have a mix 
in this province, a mix of those agencies that will receive public 
funding, a mix that will not. In terms of public funding, some 
are faith-based and some are not. 
 
But, Madam Chair, the fact of the matter is there are limitations 
to the provincial budget. That seems to be unknown to the 
opposition, but there are some limitations to a provincial 
budget, and choices must be made. Madam Chair, we simply 
cannot fund every request that comes to government. And some 
very serious work is done before choices are made. But the fact 
of the matter remains, Madam Chair, there are valuable 
community-based services that are being funded by 
government. There are valuable community-based services that 
are not being funded by government. 
 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, the Saskatchewan Party believes 
it’s important to provide this funding based on results, period — 
based on results — what’s helping kids, young people, others 
who face addictions. 
 
It’s interesting in the minister’s letter . . . We’re not asking the 
question why they didn’t receive any funding. I’m asking the 
question about a quote from that, from his minister’s letter that 
says: “Inpatient treatment centres funded by Saskatchewan 
Health are non-denominational.” I wonder then if the Premier, 
or maybe if the minister would whisper in the Premier’s ear, 
what denomination is Teen Challenge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, I understand that the 
Leader of the Opposition is lobbying for funding for Teen 
Challenge. I understand that. And I’ve now been handed by the 
minister a copy of the letter to which the Leader of the 
Opposition refers, and it does say, “Inpatient treatment centres 
funded by Saskatchewan Health are non-denominational,” 
which means non-faith-based. The inpatient treatment services, 
as I understand from the minister, are non-faith-based, Madam 
Chair. 
 
Now does this mean, does this mean that the work that’s being 
done by Teen Challenge or other faith-based organizations is 
not valuable work? It doesn’t mean it at all. I’ve just said we’re 
going to have a mix in this province. Not every 
community-based service, not every faith-based service is going 
to receive public funding. That’s just the fact of the matter. 
 
Is it the position of the opposition then that any faith-based 
organization who approaches government will automatically be 
given funding? Is that the position of the Leader of the 
Opposition? Or is it any organization that comes? The member 
from Wood River says, well it’s picking winners and losers. 
Yes, I’m afraid that’s the responsibility of government, lost on 
an opposition here. We have to make choices, Madam Chair. 
You have to make choices. It’s been a policy decision as 
indicated by the minister in his letter that “Inpatient treatment 
centres funded by Saskatchewan Health are 
non-denominational,” non-faith-based. 
 
Now there are a variety of faith-based projects and programs 
that are funded by public dollars, but in this specific case a 
public policy decision has been made. Is it the position of the 
Leader of the Opposition that every faith-based program that 
comes along should be automatically receiving funding? It is 
his position, I guess, that Teen Challenge should be. But I can 
tell the Leader of the Opposition there are many other important 
faith-based programs out there providing very significant 
service to Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan young 
people that are not receiving public funding. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Chair, it’s the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party that in government — should we, should 
we have that opportunity — we will fund those projects which 
get results for families, for young people addicted to drugs. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And it doesn’t matter if they’re faith-based or 
community-based or if they’re provided by the government. 
 
It’s interesting. This particular government, I know that the 
minister’s department — the minister of DCRE — I believe his 
department is currently, certainly was working with another 
group called . . . I think the name is Door of Hope Ministries in 
Meadow Lake, which is a food bank. But they also offer 
training to adults who need that training. They offer 
employment training. The government’s made a decision that 
this particular group is providing good results for the 
community of Meadow Lake, for the clients of the Door of 
Hope Ministries in that particular community. And I’d say to 
the government that they’ve done the right thing in that regard. 
 
So why then is his Minister of Healthy Living off on another 
tangent, ruling out helping out those who, by performance, 
might be one of the better ways to deliver addictions treatment 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, the Leader of the 
Opposition, by some implication, would suggest that programs 
that are existing today are not meeting the needs of families. 
Well they are meeting the needs of families. And they are 
meeting the needs of children, Madam Chair. 
 
Now I’d like to know this. Under the Project Hope — by which 
we’ve been recognized, Madam Chair, by the Canadian Centre 
for Substance Abuse as taking leadership position — we have 
been, we have been, Madam Chair, seeking to provide new 
services, particularly for in-patient treatment: one in Prince 
Albert, one in the Saskatoon region, a new Calder with youth 
beds. 
 
Now, Madam Chair, we just had some very distressing news 
this morning that the RM [rural municipality] of Corman Park, 
I’m told, has turned down the health region’s request to build 
the new Calder Centre just outside of Saskatoon. And I 
understand the opposition; some of it was coming from 
members over there. 
 
Now isn’t this interesting, Madam Chair? We call for the 
government to provide these new beds. We provide the money. 
We trust the professionals to put them in place. And when 
they’re about to start the work, the opposition comes from over 
there. Now how does this work, Madam Chair? How does this 
work? 
 
So now the fact of the matter is, as the minister has indicated in 
his letter, in-patient services are provided in 
non-denominational facilities. That means non-faith-based. That 
does not change the fact that we participate, in partnership, in 
other valuable social programs, with faith-based organizations, 
whether it’s in Meadow Lake or elsewhere. 
 
But let me also say this, Madam Chair. There are a variety of 
work that goes on in our province, a variety of programs that 
are faith-based that do not receive public funding, that do not 
receive public funding. I know them well, Madam Chair. I was 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

part of some of them. Do not receive public funding. We are 
going to continue to have a mix of those community-based 
organizations in Saskatchewan that receive public funding and 
those community-based organizations who are doing valuable 
work who may not receive public funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, it’s not either/or for the opposition, 
Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. Certainly that wasn’t my 
position that I just said. The Premier’s misrepresented it. I’m 
not sure what’s going on over there because this could be a 
substantive discussion about social services delivery and he 
wants to put words into our mouth about what we would 
support or wouldn’t support. We do not believe it’s either/or 
public service delivery or picking community-based or 
faith-based organizations one over the other. The option is 
results. 
 
Well the minister’s chirping from his seat. He’s the one that 
wrote a letter to Teen Challenge and said that the money’s only 
available to non-denominational organizations. Teen Challenge 
in their proposal said clearly, clearly, that they’re not a 
denomination, that they’re providing a service, that they are 
faith-based but they’re providing a service. So the difference is 
clear. What we’re talking about here is a need to look again at 
social policy delivery, social service delivery in the province of 
Saskatchewan and ask this question: where do we get the best 
results? Is it in some cases the public sector? I’m sure it is. Is it 
in some cases the community-based organization sector? I’m 
sure it is, including faith-based organizations, but results must 
be the measure, not some predisposed bias against some 
particular faith-based organization or community-based 
organization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’d like to move on to the environment if I may, 
Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. I’m sure that the Minister of 
Environment’s officials have looked at some provincial 
legislation that has come into effect on the whole issue of 
climate change. And perhaps they’ve even looked at the Alberta 
model which certainly may be imperfect but has some 
interesting components here and I think it’s worth discussing 
with the Premier. 
 
We’ve been waiting for the strategy to come out. I think it 
continues to be delayed. It was originally going to be on Earth 
Day and it keeps getting delayed, notwithstanding the green 
plan that was announced and turned out to be not much of a 
plan at all and widely panned by most people who heard it. 
 
But the Climate Change and Emissions Management 
Amendment Act has an accompanying regulation for specified 
gas emitters that states that companies that emit more than 
100,000 tonnes of greenhouse gases a year must reduce their 
emissions intensity by 12 per cent starting July 1. Starting July 
1. That’s in the province of Alberta. 
 
Now we could argue about that target. It could be perhaps 
higher. Maybe some would argue that it could be lower. 
Penalties are $15 a tonne over the 12 per cent limit. And at the 
July 1 deadline, Mr. Deputy Chair, Alberta emitters have three 

options for compliance. And this is important. One, they can 
make the necessary changes to meet emissions reduction 
targets. They can buy offset credits from other Alberta 
companies, or they can contribute to an Alberta green fund that 
will in turn fund research and development of reduction 
technology, carbon capture and management, that sort of thing 
in the province of Alberta. 
 
It is a made-in-Alberta plan. In other words, all of these offsets, 
all of the penalties, the carbon credits are paid into an Alberta 
fund, they stay in the province of Alberta. They’re reinvested in 
important environmental technologies, in tech transfer and 
R&D [research and development] with respect to the 
environment. They are meant to benefit also green-friendly 
programs, other initiatives to reduce greenhouse gases. Again it 
may not be perfect, but directionally this is key, I think, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. And in order for it to work in Alberta, they’re 
going to need the federal government’s agreement that the 
federal legislation won’t trump provincial legislation. 
 
Question to the Premier is this: is our current government 
considering this kind of initiative — something that we believe 
is important for the province of Saskatchewan — but are they 
ensuring that the federal government understands that when we 
move in this direction we want that reinvestment for our 
province from the perspective of penalties and carbon credits 
and not to be trumped by any federal initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
and I may not agree on everything, but on this we are in 
agreement. And we are working very hard to ensure that this is 
in fact the case. 
 
I just want to go back again over some of Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments. Number one, on the Saskatchewan 
green plan recently announced, one of the broadest 
environmental and sustainability strategies that I’m aware of 
anywhere in Canada . . . and that’s not just my opinion, Mr. 
Chair; that’s the opinion of the United Nations. Just last week in 
the Dag Hammarskjold Theater in the United Nations in New 
York, the Saskatchewan green plan was discussed and was 
praised, Mr. Chair — this green plan, this broad plan for 
sustainability in our environment, a plan, Mr. Chair, that was 
not built by government alone but build through two if not more 
years of consultation and work with Saskatchewan people, with 
Saskatchewan communities, with Saskatchewan organizations, 
all of whom with a deep passion and concern for our 
environment. 
 
So the Leader of the Opposition may want to make light of 
Saskatchewan’s green plan. When he’s doing that, he’s making 
light of literally dozens and dozens of communities and groups 
and hundreds and thousands of people in our province who 
came together to forge that plan, recognized, as I say, last week 
in the United Nations and praised, Mr. Chair. 
 
On the matter then of a climate change strategy for this 
province, a sustainable energy strategy for this province to 
tackle what is very likely the most significant environmental, if 
not the most significant issue facing our province, our nation, 
and our globe at this point in our history, perhaps the most 
significant issue facing the future of our children and the 
children of earth — on this matter, Mr. Chair, we are building a 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

green, an energy sustainability, a climate change strategy for 
announcement later this spring. 
 
We have listened carefully to the plan announced by the 
national government. We are observing carefully the plan in 
Alberta and other plans across Canada. Mr. Chair, I can report 
to the House today we are not using the same technique of 
measurement that’s being used by the Government of Canada or 
the Government of Alberta, this intensity target. We’re not 
going to use that measure. We think there are more significant 
and more appropriate measures. That’ll be our view. 
 
We are sending a team, Mr. Chair. We are a sending a team of 
people to Ottawa next week to spend — not one, not two, but 
three days — three days with the federal officials to fully 
understand what the federal government intends to do. They are 
going with the clear understanding — and it’s the clear 
understanding of our cabinet and our caucus — that whether it 
be the research and development fund, the technology fund, or 
offset funds, that those dollars contributed, either by industry or 
by our own Crown corporations or by individuals or business 
for that matter, from Saskatchewan should not leave the 
province of Saskatchewan. They should be retained within the 
province of Saskatchewan to provide that fundamental pool of 
dollars which we will need, Mr. Chair, which we will need to 
make the kind of change to significantly reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in our own province. 
 
That is a fundamental principle I believe the Leader of the 
Opposition and I can agree on this, a fundamental principle. We 
may not agree on intensity. We may not agree on targets. We 
may not agree on some of the strategies. But I’ll tell you on this 
principle, I believe we’re in agreement that those dollars that 
are going to be contributed — whether it’s to the technology 
fund, whether it’s the R&D fund, or whether it’s in some offset 
funds — they should not be leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so if our companies that are involved in resource 
development, whether it be in the oil and gas industry, whether 
it be in the potash industry, or in the uranium industry, in the 
mining industries, whether it be in transportation or whether it 
be through the generation of electricity in our province . . . if 
there are requirements for offsets or payments, until we can 
bring our greenhouse gas emissions down, those offsets and 
payments should be left in the province of Saskatchewan for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this is exactly the same principle, if I may say, Mr. Chair, 
that motivates us around the fight we’re having with Ottawa 
concerning a fair equalization deal. The principle is the same. 
These revenues, these resources should be retained for the 
people of Saskatchewan to build our future. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Chair, as we debate in this legislature 
this afternoon, there’s going to be a vote in the House of 
Commons tonight, a vote in the House of Commons tonight 
where the federal MPs [Member of Parliament] are going to be 
asked to finally provide legislative approval for the federal 
budget, this budget that broke its promise, that broke the 
Conservative promise to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And just today, Mr. Chair, I have called again on our 12 

Saskatchewan Conservative Party MPs to stand up for the 
people of Saskatchewan and vote against that budget — vote 
against this legislation, stop this budget. Because you know 
what we see? We see Peter MacKay, we see Peter MacKay 
from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, as soon as I start 
on this subject, they get chirping over there. We see Peter 
MacKay from the province of Nova Scotia and the two MPs 
from Nova Scotia standing up on behalf of the people of Nova 
Scotia lobbying for a better deal. It’s reported in the national 
press. That’s what’s going on there. Where are the 12 from 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And what has the opposition and its opposition leader done 
today to encourage those 12 MPs to stand up today in the House 
of Commons, vote against that budget? Because the principle is 
the same. These resource revenues or revenues paid into 
environmental trust or research and development that are taken 
from the people of Saskatchewan are taken from the resources 
of the people of Saskatchewan, should be retained for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I too am frustrated with federal politicians 
who aren’t talking about Saskatchewan issues, including the 
Premier’s federal leader who’s more concerned, frankly, about 
who the captain of the national team is for the country in a 
hockey tournament that just happened. That is a little bit 
frustrating. We do agree on this issue. And I don’t think it’s a 
small point. 
 
But I remember, at the beginning of this spring sitting, I 
remember doing interviews with the media because the Premier 
had held a press conference and said the session will be about 
the environment. And I think there was an implication there, a 
bit of a forecast, that something like what we’ve seen in Alberta 
— though our government would have its own plan — would 
be coming forward to this legislature. In Alberta I think it’s Bill 
3 is now passed. I believe it’s passed their spring sitting. 
 
And I’m a little bit concerned about the sincerity of this 
government right now moving on these initiatives with respect 
to our own plan for greenhouse gases and making the case to 
the feds — that the Premier and I do agree on — that the money 
should stay here. Because if they were concerned about it, we 
could quite rightly ask the question, where’s the Bill? Where is 
the legislation? What happened? It was forecast to be coming 
on Earth Day and then a couple of weeks later and a couple of 
weeks later. What’s going on over there that they can’t agree on 
what we need to be proceeding with? 
 
Because it could well be — and we’ll get into this a bit later on; 
the Premier knows better than I do — but it could well be that 
we don’t meet again in this Assembly. And so whatever 
initiative the government brings forward, if it needs legislative 
support — I expect it would — is irrelevant because of course 
the session will have been over. So I’m a little bit concerned 
about the sincerity, I think, of the government because other 
provinces have moved and acted and now can work with the 
federal government aggressively to ensure their areas of 
jurisdiction are protected. We don’t have anything to build on 
because we have no, no tangible plan even produced in this 
legislature or in the province of Saskatchewan with respect to 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

climate change. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The other thing I would like to ask the Premier on this point, 
Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, is on the matter of intensity 
because I would caution the members opposite and the Premier 
that we ought not to just ignore the intensity factor or waiting 
that is part and parcel of the federal initiative because, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, it’s not just a part of what the federal 
government’s doing. Across North America, and significantly 
in the statehouse in California, they’re looking very much at the 
banning of synthetic fuels because the intensity rating — in 
other words the energy to produce that barrel of synthetic fuel 
— is too high, is beyond some arbitrary, not arbitrary, but some 
predetermined number. 
 
The intensity factor is very important for our province, not just 
with respect to our potential as an oil sands leader in North 
America and the world. And we believe, in the Saskatchewan 
Party, that there is that opportunity. But it’s also important from 
conventional oil recovery in the province of Saskatchewan 
depending on what that intensity level becomes. And so we 
must then lead in research, development, and technology to 
ensure that the intensity rating declared by other jurisdictions, 
significantly the state of California, doesn’t ban the final 
product from the province or preclude our oil and gas. 
 
And on that point, nuclear power — and we’ll get into that in a 
minute — may hold specific opportunity, especially as 
small-reactor technology is moving forward in the world. You 
hear about the pebble bed reactor technology. That’s four or 
five years away . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
minister for Government Services, for intergovernment 
relations, wants to talk a little bit about it. He should do some 
research. He should know that MIT [Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology] believes we’re four or five years away from 
commercial application, the small-reactor technology, that 
Japan may well be with there — I believe it’s called the C-6 — 
there in three or four years. 
 
Well what we have from the members opposite, they don’t even 
want to talk about it — the option that this holds for the 
province of Saskatchewan. They don’t even want to talk about 
it. They don’t believe it would happen. Even though we know a 
conventional nuclear facility will take 12 years in terms of 
commissioning — we’re talking about long periods of time 
anyway — we’re stuck with a government that doesn’t even 
want to ask the question. Well we do want to ask the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — It could be, it could be the future of our energy 
sector, Mr. Deputy Chair. It could be the future of our 
conventional oil and gas, and it may well be the future of 
cleaning up our oil sands development and reducing greenhouse 
gases in the province of Saskatchewan to the benefit of the 
country and the planet. 
 
So the question to the Premier is, why is he writing off this 
intensity factor because it’s important to our economy? And 
what is he doing to research R&D technologies, perhaps 
small-reactor technology, that could well benefit the province of 

Saskatchewan in the extraction — in an environmentally 
responsible way — of oil sands for Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Chair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think it’s pretty clear. 
It’s pretty clear from the Leader of the Opposition’s comments 
that their green plan is build a reactor. That’s their green plan 
— build a reactor. Now let me just say this about his 
wide-ranging comments. In terms of putting together a very 
solid climate change strategy for our province, we’re not going 
to rush; we’re going to do it right. 
 
Now we’ve been visited upon a new plan by the federal 
government. We’re going to incorporate that. I just finished 
reporting to the House — if the members could listen — I just 
reported to the House we’re sending a team to Ottawa to get the 
details. 
 
But you see what the Leader of the Opposition and the 
opposition don’t want to admit is that before something was 
called a climate change plan, this province — and more 
particularly this New Democratic Party government — has been 
leading the change, leading the change in Canada. Mr. Chair, 
you and members of the legislature should know this, that when 
I became the Premier of this province and this New Democratic 
Party government continued to govern, you know we didn’t 
have one electron in this province being generated through wind 
capacity — not one, not one electron. Well today, Mr. Chair, 
we lead Canada on a per capita basis in wind-generated 
electricity. We lead Canada. 
 
Long before, long before the Leader of the Opposition I think 
talked about anything related to the climate change, this 
government was at work. We’ve partnered, for instance, with 
EnCana oil, with the Department of Energy of the United States 
of America, with the University of Saskatchewan, with the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre and departments of this 
government in the carbon sequestration project that is just south 
of the city of Regina, which by the way, Mr. Chair, is the 
world’s largest, the world’s largest demonstration project for 
carbon sequestration. 
 
And just a year ago when the Minister of Industry and myself 
had an opportunity to visit France, to visit Paris, we visited with 
the International Energy Agency, the International Energy 
Agency, which has been doing the verification of the project 
here in Saskatchewan. You know what they tell us, Mr. Chair? 
They tell us that over 5,000 years the carbon dioxide that we are 
sequestering in the oil fields, only a percentage, a small 
percentage of 1 per cent will escape back into the atmosphere. 
 
We are proving the technology. We’re doing it in 
Saskatchewan. We’re doing it on a world-class scale, and that’s 
long before the Leader of the Opposition heard about climate 
change and started to raise the issue. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have developed a strategy for conservation and 
energy efficiency. We’re supporting the EnerGuide home 
program for homes. We’ve been engaged in energy efficiency 
appliances. We’re working with low-income housing to provide 
that energy efficiency. We’re leading in many ways in terms of 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

the standards for public buildings when it comes to energy 
efficiency. We are leading, Mr. Chair. 
 
Long before the Leader of the Opposition said anything about 
climate change or his solution, which is build a reactor, long 
before that, Mr. Chair, we were investigating biofuels. We led 
the nation in the work that was conducted first by the now 
Minister of Agriculture in terms of ethanol development in this 
province. 
 
We’re the first province in Canada to mandate the use of 
ethanol in our gasoline, in our fuel. We’ve led Canada in the 
production of ethanol. We’ve seen the private sector investment 
in Lloydminster with our great partners in Husky. We’re seeing 
the private sector development out at Terra Grains in Belle 
Plaine. We’re leading the biofuels. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re doing the research and soon to take that 
leadership also in biomass and biodiesel. We’ve got out STC 
buses using the biodiesel. We’ve got a transit system in 
Saskatoon using biodiesel. This is all long before the 
Saskatchewan Party heard that there was a climate change issue 
or the first time they raised it. Now they’re raising it. Fair 
enough. I’m glad they’ve come aboard. 
 
It wasn’t long ago that some of their members over there were 
denying there was a problem at all. That’s what they were doing 
not many years ago, denying there was even a problem. Well 
I’m glad to see they’ve come of light. They’ve come of age. 
 
Now I want to speak to the potential future of energy in our 
province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I’d ask members on both sides of 
the House to please keep the volume down so that those who 
are on their feet, both the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition, can be heard. In the last five minutes there’s been 
unacceptable interruption. I don’t want to interrupt constantly 
because the flow of questions back and forwards is important. 
But I ask members to please come to order. And I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Now we 
come to the issue of electrical generation in our province and 
we have some real challenges, Mr. Chair. You know that and I 
think all members know it and the public know it. We have 
some real challenges because 70 per cent today, Mr. Chair, of 
our electrical production is coming from coal-fired generating 
plants — coal-fired generating plants. Thirty per cent of our 
production is coming from other sources, and we’ve made some 
great progress as I said. 
 
We’ve significantly improved our capacity in terms of wind 
generation. We’ve got some hydro generation. We’re looking at 
cogeneration projects. We have celebrated the opening of a 
waste heat electrical generation capacity in terms of the pipeline 
developments in our province. But the fact is, Mr. Chair, we 
still have a very significant challenge with our coal-fired 
generation. So what are we doing? We’re looking at all the 
options, Mr. Chair. We’re looking at all of the options. 
 
We are pioneering in some ways some of the research around 
clean coal technology. I have very recently met with the coal 

industry and looking at some other new technologies that may 
in fact provide opportunities for gasification in the coal bed. We 
are working with partners in terms of a polygeneration capacity 
at Belle Plaine that will take a waste product from oil sands and 
turn that waste product into clean energy. That, Mr. Chair, 
offers significant potential for electrical generation and for the 
provision of hydrogen and other elements to the industries at 
Belle Plaine. These are real options. 
 
We’re looking at further conservation to reduce — to reduce — 
our demand of electrical capacity. We’re looking at issues like 
net metering where people can generate small capacity on their 
farms, in their homes, provide back into the grid, and the power 
corporation over years has looked consistently at the 
opportunities around nuclear. Is there an opportunity there for 
this province? 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stands today and indicates to 
the House — and I believe he’s correct — that some of the 
small-scale reactors that would be more likely appropriate for 
Saskatchewan, some of those small-scale reactors, that 
technology is at best four and five years away, four and five 
years away. The only technology that exists is technology that’s 
coming out of the 1970s. Nineteen seventies or we’re looking 
down the road four and five years. 
 
Well now, Mr. Chair, if you look down the road four and five 
years before the technology is even developed, and then if you 
look at the track record of approval of nuclear facilities in this 
country, you can be looking at a 12-year period in terms of all 
of the approvals, the construction before it’s online. Add 12 to 4 
to 5, we’re almost 20 years out, Mr. Chair, almost 20 years out 
before that capacity could be real. It still does not answer the 
questions: who’s capital is to provide for it? Are there electrical 
markets beyond our borders which could receive electricity? 
And significantly, Mr. Chair, in the costing of such things has 
anybody costed the decommissioning of that kind of a facility? 
 
Now as I say, the power corporation has looked at these 
options, continues to look at these options. But, Mr. Chair, I tell 
you this. We cannot wait. We cannot wait 20 years for new 
capacity. We cannot wait 20 years. We can’t keep that old 
coal-burning capacity going another 20 years nor should we. 
We can’t wait 20 years. 
 
We’re exciting new technology developing right in this 
province, whether it’s clean coal, whether it’s in wind, whether 
it’s in conservation, whether it’s in polygeneration. The options 
of solar, the options of biomass — all of these are a wealth of 
options for the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Chair, I will 
not wait. We will not wait, and I don’t believe the people of 
Saskatchewan will wait 20 years for a solution. We need 
solutions beginning today, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, you know, if you lack some vision, I guess 
you can look at this, the potential of small reactor technology 
as, if it’s not ready to come on right away, then we’ll just ignore 
the opportunity. You wouldn’t at all then consider the chance 
for us to lead, the chance for our universities potentially to get 
involved with the technology, with the research that’s currently 
going on around the world — whether it’s in South Africa or 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

whether it’s in Massachusetts or whether it’s in Japan. If you 
lack vision as this government does, you wouldn’t look at the 
other envelope with respect to our uranium resource, the rest of 
the envelope. You wouldn’t look, you wouldn’t aggressively 
pursue refining. 
 
And we could talk about his trip to France. The Premier might 
want to talk about any particular parts of the tour that he didn’t 
want to go on because he was worried his picture might be 
taken at a facility involving uranium value add. We could talk 
about enrichment, Mr. Deputy Chair. We could talk about 
recycling. We could talk about leading. We could talk about 
leading research, R&D, on the whole storage issue or on the 
recycling issue. Or you can just say, well the technology’s too 
far away so we’ll just forget about it. It’s not an option for us. 
 
Alternatively even with conventional technology from AECL 
[Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.], with a larger reactor we could 
be saying as a province, maybe it’s time that we would pursue a 
national transmission grid for the country. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I apologize to the Leader of the 
Opposition. I would ask members on the government side to 
please come to order so that the Leader of the Opposition can 
be heard. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Another option might be, Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
focus some federal-provincial relations on the potential of a 
national grid, a national transmission grid, which may not force 
us to have the either-or debate that we have had in this province 
under the NDP. It’s either gas and the combinations of hydro 
that we currently have, or nuclear. And that’s why we really 
can’t have a discussion about nuclear because it’s either-or. Or 
is it? Is there an option for us to be in an export position? 
 
We don’t know the answer to that, Mr. Deputy Chair, because 
while the Premier has said he is supportive of nuclear power for 
our province if it makes sense — and that’s what he said, he’s 
on the record as saying it — his actions belie the fact. His 
actions certainly don’t demonstrate any earnest attempt to 
explore the option, not just with respect to transmission, but all 
of the other attendant economic benefits that could come from 
if we were to be a global centre of excellence in terms of the 
uranium cycle. I think he’s got a minister on the front bench 
who’s had enough of that, frankly, and he’s leaving in part for 
this reason. 
 
And so again to the Premier: what is his strategy around 
uranium? Certainly when he is the Premier of a province that 
supplies a third of the world’s supply of uranium at a time when 
it’s now I think about $120 a pound, at a time when prices are 
going through the roof, when world markets are talking about 
the potential of uranium — not just in the form that we mine it, 
but also in all the value add opportunities — when the whole 
world’s talking about it, when we mine a third of the world’s 
supply, what is our Premier’s plan and vision for uranium? 
Does he envision a centre of excellence that looks at refining 
and recycling and enrichment and perhaps leading in terms of 
research and development on the storage issue? Though I would 
agree that the people of the province aren’t ready for the storage 
debate yet. We haven’t had any portions of the debate. Haven’t 
had it. Haven’t had it. 
 

[16:15] 
 
So the question to the Premier is: we’ve got a third of the world 
supply. What is his strategy around developing uranium to the 
benefit of the economy and to the benefit of the greenhouse gas 
situation in our country and around the world? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is rather amazing. I 
want to address what the Leader of the Opposition has been 
saying in some fashion. I’ll start in his latter comments. I don’t 
know where the Leader of the Opposition has been in the last 
number of months or years, but perhaps I could acquaint him 
with the facts about uranium development in our province. 
There is more exploration happening in terms of uranium 
development in Saskatchewan today than in the history of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what happening in uranium and 
that’s what happening as a result of a government that works 
very closely with the exploration industry and with the mining 
industry. There’s more exploration going on today than ever in 
the history of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, in terms of developing the industry, we’ve had 
a commitment. We’ve had a commitment to a brand new mine 
by AREVA in the province of Saskatchewan — a significant 
expansion of capacity, Mr. Chair. I don’t know where the 
Leader of the Opposition’s been for that. He says we need to be 
the centre of excellence. We are the centre of excellence in the 
globe, Mr. Chair. We are. 
 
Now as I said, yes, we were in France, and yes, we were in 
Paris, and yes, we met with the president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of AREVA. Yes, I did say to the Leader of 
the Opposition, has he done so? No, he’s not. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, in that conversation it was very clear that 
Saskatchewan seeks to see an expansion of refining capacity in 
our province to add the value add. That’s very, very clear. But 
does the Leader of the Opposition suggest the Government of 
Saskatchewan should do the refining or does he suggest that 
AREVA and the private sector will make their decisions? But 
there is no mystery in the minds of the most senior executives 
and executives of AREVA that Saskatchewan seeks to have the 
refining capacity in this province. 
 
Now, now let’s talk about disposal and storage of the waste. I 
have said very clearly, Mr. Chair, that we will not host the 
waste in our province because of some of the very significant 
challenges in transportation of that waste. There are some very 
significant challenges in the transportation and better if there’s 
permanent disposal mechanisms to dispose the waste where it is 
most closely used. It’s very simple. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Chair? I think the Leader of the 
Opposition stood right out here in the rotunda and said, me too. 
I think he stood right out here in the rotunda and said, me too, 
we’ll have no part of waste disposal in Saskatchewan. Now he 
says we should have a debate about it. Well which is it? Which 
is it? You’re opposed to it or you want it. You’re opposed to it 
or you want a debate. 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

You see this Leader of the Opposition and this party goes on 
like this all the time. They say one thing to one audience and 
one thing to a different audience. 
 
Now I know what he’s saying. I know what he’s saying here 
today. His total green plan — it’s all very clear now — his total 
green plan is build a reactor. That’s it. He says we should lead 
the nation. We should lead the world. Well where’s he been? 
Where has the Leader of the Opposition . . . We are leading the 
world in green technologies. We are leading the world at the 
University of Regina at the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre, at the carbon dioxide sequestration work, in wind 
generation, in polygeneration, in biofuels. We’re not just 
leading Canada. We’re leading the world in many regards. 
 
That’s a fulsome green strategy that takes advantage of each 
one of our natural resources to build a better future, and at the 
same time we’re reducing our electrical consumption and our 
energy demand. He apparently has one plan. He apparently has 
one plan — a reactor, which by his own admission, by his own 
admission the technology’s not ready for another four or five 
years, and it would take 12 or more years to put it in place. 
Twenty years out — he calls that a vision? Twenty years out. 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, we have a vision that takes us long 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. I’d ask members of the 
opposition to come to order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, his vision, it’s a vision to 
build a reactor 20 years from now. We have a vision that’s 
going to take us long past 20 years from now. We have a vision 
that starts today, that builds from the natural strength and the 
innovative technology of Saskatchewan people that will take us 
10 and 20 and 50 and 100 years out. Our vision is to look at the 
full range, Mr. Chair, the full range of strategies that can deal 
with climate change in a real way, in a real way. We’re not 
going to wait for 20 years with one idea — build a reactor. 
We’re not going to do that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the Premier asked an interesting rhetorical 
question. He said, what’s a vision? Twenty years? That’s what 
his question was moments ago. Well we could start with that, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, because the alternative is sitting right over 
there where their vision does not extend past the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We are talking, we better be talking about issues 
that are 20 years down the road. We better start talking about 
issues like, if states in the United States of America begin to 
ban synthetic fuel because the intensity rating is too high, what 
are we doing about it in order that we can develop potentially 
our oil sands on our side of the province? That’s not an issue 
that’s going to benefit any particular government, any party, 
anyone sitting in this legislature. It is about who will be here 20 
years, 30 years, 40 years from now and what the position of this 
province will be and should have been for decades before, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. That’s what the issue is about. I can’t believe it. 
Well . . . [inaudible] . . . 20 years from now? Well we’ll start 
there maybe, Mr. Deputy Chair. We will start there. 

Well you know in this discussion of the environment, we have 
waited from this Premier and from his minister who 
foreshadowed at the beginning of the session that a greenhouse 
gas, a climate change plan was coming. Other provinces have 
done it. The province of Alberta have moved on the issue and 
the government can take issue with what they’ve done but 
they’ve looked at penalties at $15 a tonne over the 12 per cent 
limit. They’ve looked at emission intensity at 12 per cent, 
starting July 1, 2007. They’re working to meet emissions 
reductions targets by that particular time. They’ve set up their 
plan to buy offset credits in Alberta. They’re contributing to an 
Alberta green fund with some of those penalties and offsets and 
will invest in research and technology in Alberta. They’re not 
talking . . . They are talking, actually, about nuclear power as 
well. But that’s their plan. 
 
What has been remarkable about this particular exchange is that 
though this was to be the point of the session, nothing from the 
government, absolutely nothing. And I don’t know what’s 
going on over there but we’d better act because we do need to 
ensure that we’re protecting the area that the Premier and I 
agree needs to be protected, which is the assurance that offsets 
and penalties will stay in the province of Saskatchewan to the 
benefit of technologies here, to our own green plan here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If I can move to the issue of agriculture, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
have a question with respect to the crop insurance plan. Just a 
very basic question, Mr. Deputy Chair. Is it the Premier’s belief 
that the crop insurance plan we’re offering to our producers 
should at least be as strong, should at least be comparable to 
what is offered to Manitoba farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, no, no, we’re not going to 
quite conclude this discussion about the future of our 
environment, not quite as easily as the opposition apparently 
wants to now. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, I heard from this Leader of the 
Opposition today, the first time in this session — I can’t say it 
hasn’t been raised because I’m not always able to be present in 
the House — but it’s the first time I’ve heard the Leader of the 
Opposition talk about the environment since this legislature sat. 
I’ve heard him talk a lot about other issues but never have I 
heard the Leader of the Opposition until this very day in this 
House talk about the environment. Not once before. Which is 
telling, Mr. Chair. Now that he is talking about the 
environment, the one thing that he focuses on is the creation of 
a reactor to provide some electrical capacity or for export. That 
is his one, one green plan, Mr. Chair. 
 
And what is also very interesting is that every reference he’s 
made here in bulk comes from the province of Alberta. Now I 
know the Leader of the Opposition spends a lot of time in 
Alberta raising money. That’s when he’s not selling tickets to 
golf tournaments in Augusta or Atlanta, Georgia or wherever it 
is. Augusta, Georgia. Now he spends a lot of time in Alberta 
and what does he do while he’s in Alberta? I guess he collects 
money and then he collects his green plan; he collects his 
environmental plan. Because that’s all we’ve heard today is 
what Alberta is busy doing other than this notion that 20 years 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

from now we might have a reactor and that should, that should 
get us ahead. 
 
That’s not vision, Mr. Chair. That’s not vision. Vision, Mr. 
Chair, is looking at the full range, the full range of opportunity 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I apologize to the Premier. I’d ask 
members of the Assembly to come to order please. I’m having a 
lot of difficulty hearing the speaker. And I would ask members 
to come to order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it’s hardly a vision to suggest 
on the very final closing days of a legislature that now we 
should be debating the green strategy, when you’ve spent most 
of the bulk of your time in this session debating everything else 
under the sun except substantive policy issues. Isn’t that 
interesting, Mr. Chair? 
 
It is a vision to look at the challenge which is before us and 
look at the broad range of opportunities that exist for 
Saskatchewan people. I believe a broader range of opportunities 
than perhaps exist for any other citizens of Canada — whether 
it ranges from solar power to wind power to conservation and 
efficiencies, to building standards, to what we do as individuals 
in our own lives, to recycling, to the safe management of our 
water; whether it is looking at those large, major industrial 
approaches which we are looking and exploring, being 
polygeneration capacity. I mean, the polygeneration capacity at 
Belle Plaine can provide a very similar level of megawatts to 
our power grid as a small reactor. 
 
We’re looking at the real potential of clean coal, to use this 
energy resource in a clean fashion and developing the 
technologies in Saskatchewan. You know, we can provide those 
technologies to the world to heal, to heal environment globally. 
We’re looking at opportunities of coal gasification. We’re 
looking at all of the opportunities that come from this vast land 
base which is ours in terms of biofuels and biomass. 
 
We’re looking at the forest as an opportunity for agroforestry, 
again healing the atmosphere with that God-made invention for 
removing carbon dioxide from the air — the tree, the simple 
tree. We’re looking at carbon sinks in our province. We’re 
looking at the opportunities that may yet be explored in 
small-scale hydro. We’re looking at small-scale generation 
capacity in terms of our homes and our farms and our small 
businesses and allowing that to come back into the grid and 
help meet our needs. 
 
We’re looking, Mr. Chair, at opportunities that set us in a path 
to take us not just to 2020, but to 2050 and to the next century. 
Because the choices we make today, Mr. Chair, the choices that 
we are making today will determine the future for our children 
and our grandchildren in terms of environmental sustainability 
of this planet, this nation, and this province. 
 
And they have one solution — that is build a reactor in 2020, 
build a reactor in 2020. Well I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, that’s not 
vision. And that’s not going to meet the challenge that’s before 
us. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition asks about crop 

insurance and the Saskatchewan crop insurance program as 
compared to Manitoba or other crop insurance programs. I want 
to say to the Leader of the Opposition, I believe that every crop 
insurance program in this country must be tailored to meet the 
needs — as best you can — of your jurisdiction. And the crop 
insurance program in Saskatchewan should meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan producers — their needs, their special 
requirements — as best as we possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well apparently, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the 
Premier thinks that the needs of Saskatchewan producers are for 
a program that has lower coverage and higher premiums, 
because that’s exactly what’s happening. And I’m sure he was 
in the Assembly on the occasions when the critic for 
Agriculture on the opposition side of the House presented the 
evidence. 
 
It’s pretty clear in this particular example, both for canola and 
for red spring wheat, in terms of crop premiums per acre and 
coverage per acre, we are significantly lagging behind even the 
province of Manitoba. And that’s the basis for the question that 
I asked the Premier. Hopefully, he’s going to get to answer it. 
 
There are other issues as well that we certainly want to get to 
before our time is over. And significantly one of them is, I 
think, an issue that’s important for all members of this 
Assembly and the province of Saskatchewan and that is, when 
is the next election going to be? Now the Premier knows the 
answer to that. It’s his, under the current rules that he’s 
unwilling to change. His government’s unwilling to move to set 
elections. And so it’s his prerogative to call the election when 
he sees fit. But I wonder if he wants to provide a bit of, provide 
a bit of expansion around this. 
 
Well now the Minister for Public Service Commission, I said, I 
think I just heard her commit to a set election, which is 
interesting. And we’ll be interested in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — She’s not running. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the member for Saltcoats points out that’s 
interesting because she may not in fact be contesting in the next 
election. But I hope that she gets her way within the debate 
because we need set elections in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier has on a number of occasions been on the public 
record about the need for elections, when he says on or about 
the four-year anniversary. Here’s a quote from May 31, 1991 
when he was in opposition. He said: 
 

Here we are, Mr. Speaker, here we are in the eighth month 
of their fifth year of a four-year mandate. The people of 
Saskatchewan give governments in this province four 
years. [He repeats it.] Four years. That’s the tradition here. 
That’s the tradition. [And I’m still quoting, he’s just 
repeating himself.] That’s the tradition and they have 
violated the tradition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re 
hanging on for the last breath. 

 
That’s what he said — I would argue quite rightly — when he 
was on the opposition side of the House. 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

[16:30] 
 
Since then he said, well on or about the four-year anniversary. 
But consider the last election was November of ’03. And if he 
goes beyond November of ’03, he’s not going to have a 
Christmas election. We’re very unlikely to have a winter 
election. So he will be into four and a half years at a minimum 
if he does not go on or before the four-year anniversary of the 
last election. 
 
Will he commit to that, Mr. Deputy Chair? Will he commit to 
an election on or before the four-year anniversary of the last 
general election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well this is interesting, Mr. Chair. He 
asked a 30-second question about crop insurance, a 
three-minute question about when’s the next election. Rather 
interesting I think. 
 
Let’s just for a moment talk about crop insurance, which is a 
matter that does concern Saskatchewan families and producers. 
Now I think the Leader of the Opposition is fully aware that the 
crop insurance program is a federal-provincial program that’s 
cost shared with producers. Well now you see the man from 
Saltcoats there. He always has opinions on crop insurance. I’ve 
heard him in debate with the Leader of the Opposition. And it’s 
kind of woke him up — now we’re on to crop insurance. 
 
All right. It’s a federal-provincial program. There are some 
pretty basic parameters that surround crop insurance. And one 
of those fundamental, basic parameters . . . And I don’t think 
the member from Saltcoats or even the Leader of the 
Opposition would suggest that a crop insurance program should 
not be actuarially sound. And that is one of the fundamental 
parameters of crop insurance; it must be actuarially sound. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is — and it’s plain to see if you read 
the annual reports and statements — that our crop insurance 
program is carrying some debt. Why, Mr. Chair? Why? 
Because we had some very significant drawdowns on crop 
insurance, occasioned by several years of drought, Mr. Chair, 
and some very early frost in certain areas of our province. 
That’s well known. That’s well known. 
 
Now the circumstance in Manitoba, they do not have some of 
these same challenges that our crop insurance has had to bear. 
So we’ve got a circumstance where the program is limited in 
some ways in what its capacity can be, because we’re going to 
maintain that actuarially sound principle of crop insurance. 
 
Now actuarially sound or financially and fiscally responsible is 
a concept that I know is lost on many members of the 
opposition, and that is so clearly demonstrated because every 
time they’ve come close to government in this province, the 
treasury, the treasury is lost. The treasury is lost. 
 
And the most recent example of course was in the 1980s, the 
1980s when they, that group . . . And the Leader of the 
Opposition was of course working in that government, working 
in this building. I mean, for goodness’ sakes, Mr. Chair, the 
Leader of the Opposition was at work two years in this building 

before I came to this building. So he’s now leading the 
Saskatchewan Party. He worked in that Progressive 
Conservative government. They don’t understand about 
actuarially sound or fiscal responsibilities. They brought this 
province to the verge of bankruptcy. We talked about that 
earlier in the day. 
 
So there are some basic parameters. As I said, given the basic 
parameters the crop insurance program should be, should be 
working with producers, working with the federal government, 
working with the province to develop the best program that you 
can to meet the needs. And there’s some very, there’s been 
some very, very positive developments in crop insurance under 
the leadership of the current Minister of Agriculture. So there 
are new varieties being covered. We’ve seen changes in the 
premium. Mr. Chair, there’s been expansion in crop insurance. 
Now is it everything that the Minister of Agriculture wants it to 
be or farmers or producers in the province want it to be? 
Perhaps not, Mr. Chair, but you’ve got parameters and they’re 
working very hard to make the program better. 
 
In terms of the next election, which seems to consume the 
thinking of the Leader of the Opposition and it seems to 
consume the thinking of the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone . . . You see, they’re very, they seem very, very 
anxious today to know about the election. Why is that, Mr. 
Chair? Well I think I know why it is. I listen, I listen very 
carefully or read some of the reports of . . . 
 
For instance, the member of Humboldt, the member of 
Humboldt was down in the Committee on the Economy, down 
in the Committee of the Economy not too many days ago and 
what is the member of Humboldt asking about down in the 
Committee of the Economy? Well you know what she’s asking 
about, members? She was asking about the state of the drapes in 
the Legislative Assembly building. I’ve read some of the 
transcripts. She’s worried about the dust in the drapes of the 
Legislative Assembly building. 
 
Well apparently they think they’re going to be occupying some 
of the offices of government soon. They think they’re going to 
be worrying about the drapes in the Assembly building. Well 
you know, Mr. Chair, they should quit worrying about the 
drapes on the government side because it’ll be a long time until 
they see those drapes, Mr. Chair, a long time. 
 
I’ve said, and I repeat again, when I sat in opposition and the 
current Leader of the Opposition was working in this 
government, that government delayed the election to the 
maximum legal limit of five years. Even they added one day on. 
In the tradition of the CCF and the New Democratic Party of 
this province, we’ve had a long tradition of four-year elections. 
There is a fixed election date. It’s fixed at five years by law, Mr. 
Chair. We’ve had a long tradition, a long tradition of four-year 
elections. 
 
Now every election call needs to made given the circumstances 
at the time — early or late harvest, whether there’ll be a federal 
election, whether there’ll not be a federal election. You want to 
be sure, Mr. Chair, you give the maximum opportunity for the 
people of Saskatchewan to participate in the democratic 
process. And I’m hoping that as we go to an election, as we go 
to an election that we will have an election based on public 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

policy debate, public policy debate, not the kind of debate that 
we’ve seen over the course of this session from that opposition. 
 
And anybody who has watched this House, whether it’s the 
journalists or whether it’s the public who watch this House, 
knows that this opposition has devoted the vast majority of its 
time to anything but public policy debate. And the question is 
why, Mr. Chair. Why do they not want to debate? Substantive 
issues like the seniors’ drug plan — why do they not want to 
debate that? Why do they not want to debate a substantive issue 
like the graduate tax credit that we’re going to provide to young 
people to encourage them to build their careers? Not a question 
about that. 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, all they could say in this session about 
the current budget was two things. Number one, they said it’s 
not sustainable. And then two, they said it was leaked. Well 
now I just want to share, I just want to share before I take my 
place on this question of sustainability of the budget which is 
now under debate. 
 
I want to announce — and I want the members of the 
opposition to know and government members to know and the 
public of Saskatchewan to know — that just as I came into the 
House today I was handed the credit rating report from 
Dominion Bond Rating Service of Toronto, DBRS Toronto, 
which, by the way, Mr. Chair, everyone will know is perhaps 
the most difficult bond rating service on the continent. The 
toughest bond rating service on the continent, they’ve looked at 
our budget. 
 
They asked the question of sustainability, and what does it say? 
What does it say? DBRS confirms the ratings of the province of 
Saskatchewan at AA low and R-1 middle. That’s a stable 
report, Mr. Chair; that’s the rate of the DBRS telling us that this 
budget is sustainable. What do they say? “The credit profile of 
the Province continues to slowly improve as highlighted by the 
ongoing declines in debt-to-GDP ratio, [the ongoing declines in 
debt-to-GDP ratio — get this] solid spending discipline [solid 
spending discipline] and increasing tax competitiveness . . . ” 
 
Well you know, Mr. Chair, I’m almost looking forward to an 
early election call . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So I can go to the people of 
Saskatchewan with this kind of record of sustainability, of a 
budget that builds for the future of Saskatchewan people that 
has as its interest the future of Saskatchewan people, the future 
of Saskatchewan families, and the future of Saskatchewan 
young people. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chair, there will be an election. And yes, it will fall 
well within the legal limits, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, the set 
election limits. And again I say it is my preference that 
elections should be held on or about the fourth anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair and now 
Madam Chair, we would be, I would be happy to stay a little bit 
longer. It’s turned out I think, especially on some issues, with 

respect to health care, uranium, the economy, to stay a little bit 
longer. The Premier’s wondering why there was only the one 
question on crop insurance. Unfortunately we’re running out of 
time that we both agreed to, but if we can also mutually agree to 
go a little bit longer, we can talk more about crop insurance. 
 
We can talk more about school closures. I’d like to know if the 
Premier is happy with the process that he has seen unfold right 
across the province of Saskatchewan. We could talk about, we 
could talk about whether or not he will preside over a caucus 
that will break the rules of the Legislative Assembly by offering 
severance to somebody in his organization who has resigned. 
There are those kinds of matters. There are bigger issues. 
 
So I ask the Premier today, Madam Chair, is he prepared to stay 
a little bit longer? Is he prepared to have our House leaders 
meet and agree to a time where we can talk about these issues 
because, frankly, we’re prepared to stay for a long time tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, this has been a legislative 
session that’s consisted of how many days? Sixty-five 
thereabouts. But since we returned, 47 since we returned here in 
the spring, we’ve had that many question periods. And the vast 
majority of that time has been consumed by questions from the 
Leader of the Opposition on everything but matters of 
substantive public policy. We’ve introduced substantive public 
policy because we’ve introduced a budget that is under debate 
in this House; that’s part of this process, a debate of this budget. 
 
But isn’t it interesting that the most significant, the most 
significant parts of the budget now under debate are not 
mentioned by the opposition. We do not mention this visionary 
program, this expansion of medicare to provide a universally 
accessible drug plan for seniors. They don’t mention that. They 
don’t debate or mention the most significant program for young 
graduates in this province, in this province that I think this 
province has ever offered, providing for the young graduates of 
Saskatchewan and, by the way, for young graduates from right 
across Canada an opportunity to build their careers in 
Saskatchewan and have $100,000 of their income tax-free over 
the first five years with extensions to 10. They don’t want to 
talk about that in question period. They don’t want to talk about 
it in my estimates. 
 
Well, Madam Chair, we’re talking about issues like that. We’re 
talking about issues that are going to make life better for 
Saskatchewan families. We’re talking about issues that are 
going to make life better for the future of the young people of 
our province. And you know, Madam Chair, we’re seeing the 
young people coming home. We’re seeing the job growth, 13 
consecutive months of job growth. We’re seeing our population 
increasing. We’re seeing all of the indicators of our economy 
increasing. They don’t want to talk about that, Madam Chair. 
 
Well again we’ll have opportunity I guess over the next couple 
of days to talk about some of these issues. But obviously we’re 
going to have opportunity when we leave this building, Madam 
Chair, opportunity to speak to our constituents, to speak to the 
people of Saskatchewan about issues that do matter to families 
in Saskatchewan. 
 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well again I hope we’re able to stay a little bit 
longer because there are some important issues to debate and 
discuss. I’m interested in the Premier’s opinion as to whether or 
not the Manitoba crop insurance plan is actuarially sound. And 
if it’s actuarially sound, then it’s true that the Manitoba NDP 
government is providing significantly better coverage at a lower 
premium than our farmers receive in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That was the question. The Premier didn’t come 
anywhere near it. 
 
And I can tell from the banter across the way that the 
government opposite isn’t prepared to even go another 15 
minutes to discuss the issues including perhaps the prescription 
drug plan because there are a number of drugs that have been 
presented to us by pharmacists, for example, which are used 
significantly in large numbers by seniors — some of them we 
could get into specifically — that are not part of the formulary 
and so therefore will not be subject to the $15 prescription 
program. 
 
Those kinds of issues are exactly what we have asked in 
committee. We could get into that discussion now as to what 
the government’s long-term plan is for the formulary because, 
Madam Deputy Chair, it’s true that research, that science is 
going to give us new drugs. And each and every time they do, 
there’ll be a new opportunity for seniors to receive pharmacare, 
but it is irrelevant, Madam Deputy Chair, if the government 
refuses to acknowledge the formulary. So those questions have 
been asked. There are no answers. 
 
We’ve also asked questions around trying to get a handle on 
exactly the cost of this program, and it ranges by millions of 
dollars depending if we’re being told by the deputy minister of 
Health, the Minister of Health, or perhaps some other 
government official. It’s very difficult to get into a debate and 
get some answers from this government if they themselves 
don’t know the answers, Madam Deputy Chair. 
 
So just for the record, we would be very interested — I 
personally would be interested — in staying and discussing the 
school closures, not just the schools that have closed but 
whether or not it is appropriate now for the government to 
assess how the school closure system happened. I think it’s 
reasonable that we would all want to answer the question, ask 
the question certainly: are we comfortable with the process that 
every single question was answered with respect to keeping 
schools open? 
 
I think we would want to stay a little bit longer tonight and 
discuss the foundation operating grant because, Madam Deputy 
Chair, here’s the interesting part. After forced amalgamation by 
this government, after changes to FOG, [foundation operating 
grant] Madam Deputy Chair, what’s happened? And remember 
that amalgamation happened, Madam Deputy Chair, to 
eliminate zero grant boards. If you remember that — they 
wanted to eliminate zero grant boards. What’s going to happen 
next year or the year after in the Chinook School Division? 
We’re going to have a zero grant board again. Well what does 
the Minister of Learning have to say about that? The Premier’s 
not answering any questions; maybe she would. 
 

Well I think, on the record she said that question or I was pretty 
slimy; is that what you said? I think it’s a reasonable question. 
We’re talking about the foundation operating grant, Madam 
Minister, and Mr. Premier. And we’re asking, is it reasonable 
now to look at some issues around whether or not assessments 
in certain school districts are going to ensure that those regions 
become zero grant boards again? And if they do, if they do, 
that’s worth a discussion. That’s worth a question or two from 
the opposition to the Premier that says, what’s your plan to deal 
with that? What is the plan of the government to deal with the 
bias in the foundation operating grants in favour of busing 
because you know, Regina, the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Sask Learning will pay, will cover busing costs almost to 100 
per cent and not so much the other . . . classroom time for 
example or the other facets of education. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Is that a bias that’s healthy when it’s easier to bus than it is to 
provide an education? All of these questions are important to 
answer. And I don’t think the minister should characterize them 
in the way she has characterized them, Madam Deputy Chair, 
because it isn’t the opposition that’s asking them. It’s parents 
across the province of Saskatchewan. It’s teachers across the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s people who expect good 
education. That’s who’s asking the questions. So maybe she has 
a message for them. 
 
Madam Deputy Chair, it was interesting on March 27, 1990, the 
current Premier was sitting in opposition and here’s what he 
had to say. He said: 

 
My central point is that we have a crisis of confidence in 
the province of Saskatchewan, that we have a government 
that has been stripped of its credibility, a government that 
has no longer the confidence of the people [of the province 
of Saskatchewan], a government that no longer seems to 
have a vision or a clear direction. In short, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, [the current Premier said back in 1990] I believe, 
[it is] a government that has lost the capacity to govern. 

 
And in a democracy — I repeat — [it’s him saying that, 
not me] in any democracy or in any nation, in any nation 
when a government has lost the confidence of its people, 
when a government is stripped of its credibility, when a 
government has no vision, then it is time to defeat that 
government and give another group of . . . women the 
opportunity to govern. 

 
The Premier was right then, and if he were to say those words 
today or if I were to say them, we would be right today. So the 
final question, the final question of Premier’s estimates is 
simply this: will he commit to call a provincial election at the 
earliest possible opportunity so men and women and the people 
of the province who are waiting for vision, who are waiting for 
a long-term plan, who are waiting desperately for a positive 
change from a tired, old, four-term government can get positive 
change in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the change that is 
recommended by the Leader of the Opposition would get us 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

exactly to the place we were in 1990 when I stood on that side 
of the House and said this is a government without vision, that 
this is a government that has created grief for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition raising that quote 
today because I believe it to be absolutely true. It was 
absolutely true. And now the Leader of the Opposition, who 
was part of that government, who was part of that government 
as a staffer in that government, now recommends that the 
people of Saskatchewan should choose that same philosophy all 
over again, that same group of people. It’s the same old 
right-wing philosophy that every time it comes near 
government I tell you, the treasury shudders and the people 
should too. 
 
Madam Chair, this has been a very interesting session, I know, 
for members of government, I think for members of the 
opposition. It’s been a very interesting session for the 
journalists to observe and the public to observe because 
obviously this opposition came into this session with an 
endgame, with an endgame. And the endgame was to make the 
prospects of the Sask Party better politically. That’s their 
endgame and we know that and we’ve watched it. 
 
I mean the Leader of the Opposition now wants to talk about 
school closures. He’s had 40 question periods and more to talk 
about school closures — 40 question periods and more to talk 
about what he might do and finally once share something that 
he might do about this that would be real or tangible, 40 
questions. I’m told the Whip has carried in answers to 1,400 
different questions put by the opposition — lots of opportunity, 
lots of opportunity. 
 
But the endgame here wasn’t for information. The endgame 
was clearly not to discuss public policy or to expose any of your 
own policy. The endgame was to score political points for the 
Saskatchewan Party. Now they’ve had some success I think, 
Madam Chair. I believe they’ve had some success at that. 
 
But now I want to tell you about the endgame, the endgame for 
government, the endgame for government. The endgame for 
government was to come into this session and make life better 
for Saskatchewan people. That’s the endgame for government. 
To make Saskatchewan families see a brighter future, that’s our 
endgame, our endgame to make a better life for our young 
people in this province, to build a future for the young people in 
this province. It’s our endgame. Our endgame is to heal an 
environment. Our endgame is to build an environment for the 
future. That’s our endgame. Our endgame is to improve health 
opportunities for our seniors, to improve opportunities for our 
graduates. That’s our endgame. 
 
Well they may have scored a little in their endgame on building 
the politics for the Saskatchewan Party but, Madam Chair, this 
government has built for the people of Saskatchewan in spite of 
them, in spite of them. And I can tell you this, Madam Chair, 
when that next election is called and when it is held, it will be a 
New Democratic Party government that continues to build for 
Saskatchewan people and for the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Chair: — The vote before the Assembly is (EX01), central 
management and services in the amount of 4,296,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Vote (EX07), Premier’s office, in the 
amount of 553,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. (EX04), cabinet secretariat and cabinet 
planning unit in the amount of 1,453,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. (EX03), chief of communications office 
in the amount of 1,879,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. (EX08), House business and research in 
the amount of $431,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Statutory vote (EX06), members of the 
Executive Council. Are there any questions? 
 

Be it resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
12 months ending March 31, 2008, the following sum for 
Executive Council, $8,612,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — This concludes the matter before committee in 
the estimates for Executive Council. The next matter before the 
committee will be the appropriations. I want to thank the 
officials, and recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Chair, just before we move on to 
the appropriations Bill and just before our officials leave the 
Chamber, I want to extend, on behalf of all members, our 
thanks to the officials who have joined us here from Executive 
Council. And because these officials work with the broad, broad 
cross-section of the Saskatchewan public service, because my 
deputy serves as deputy of deputies and is in many ways the 
chief civil servant, I want to express through our officials to all 
in the Saskatchewan public service who serve the people of 
Saskatchewan the deep gratitude of this government and this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks, Madam Deputy Chair. I’d 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2007 

also like to extend our thanks to the officials who were here to 
provide this resource to the entire Assembly, to the Premier, but 
through him to the Assembly so that we can have an exchange. 
I’d also like to thank the Premier for his time and the debate we 
were able to have this afternoon. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I 
move, no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2008, the sum of $6,303,099,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The question before the committee on estimates 
is: 
 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 
granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2008, the sum of $6,303,099,000 be granted out 
of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Chair: — Carried on division. The Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I move, no. 
2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2008, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
on March 31, 2009, the sum of $154,421,000 be granted 
out of the General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Chair: — The motion before the committee, no. 2: 
 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 
granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2008, which to the extent that they remain 
unexpended for the fiscal year are also granted for the 
fiscal year ending March 31, 2009, the sum of 
$154,421,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Chair, I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move the 
resolutions be now read the first and a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 3) 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 
I move that Bill No. 69, The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 3) 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave of the 
Assembly to move the motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 69, The Appropriation Act, 2007 be now 



May 15, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In what is likely to be my last official 
act as the Minister of Finance for the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move by leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 69(2) that the Bill be now read a second and a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is required. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 69, The Appropriation Act, 
2007 (No. 3) be now read a second and third time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:01.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1603 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1604 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1605 
 Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1605 
 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1605 
 Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1606 
 Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1606 
 Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1610 
 Pink Day at the Legislative Assembly 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1610 
 Accomplished Pinehouse Athlete Prepares for Summer Games 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
 Medal of Valour 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
 Multicultural Celebration 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1611 



 

 Provincial High School Curling Champions 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
 Saskatchewan Party Policies 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Children’s Advocate Recommendations 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1612 
 Supply of Health Care Professionals 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1614 
 Building Communities Program 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
 Severance for Former Caucus Employee and Police Documents 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
MOTIONS 
 Rules and Practices of the Legislative Assembly 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1619 
 Motions for Supply 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1640 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1640 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 69 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 3) 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1640 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


