






















































Hansard: May 17, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 64A  THURSDAY, MAY 17, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1665 
 May 17, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on this, the last 
sitting day of the spring session to again bring petitions to the 
Assembly and in regards to the needs for a dialysis unit in 
Broadview Union Hospital, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petitions I present today are signed by folks from the 
communities of Broadview and . . . basically mostly from 
Broadview I see, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise today 
on the last day of session to introduce a petition to improve 
Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Foam Lake. 
They’re from Sheho, Quill Lake, Saskatoon, Lanigan, Wadena, 
Wynyard, Yorkton, and again from Kuroki. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition to present to do with Highway 49. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington 
and Lintlaw, Preeceville and surrounding areas. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the areas of Kelvington 
and Yellow Quill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of Estevan 
who are very concerned about the future of the Estevan campus 
of the Southeast Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar who are 
concerned about the possible reduction of health care services 
in their community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Handel, Landis, and Biggar and 
district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present yet another petition on behalf of the 600 
children under six years of age and their parents in the 
Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek, Willowgrove 
neighbourhood of Saskatoon. Recognizing the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government’s propensity for only doing 
things in election years, they are hoping their long wait will 
finally be over. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek, Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from northeast Saskatoon — 
Beckett Crescent, Kucey Crescent, Brunst Crescent, and Bonli 
Crescent. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

rise with a number of petitions to turn in today from citizens of 
south Saskatchewan that are very concerned that the withdrawal 
of lab services at the Lafleche and District Health Centre would 
cause undo hardships, especially to seniors. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from all of the affected 
area around Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to present a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the health care system and the lack of 
recruitment and retention of our doctors in those areas. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Shellbrook 
and Leask. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to rise on 
this last day of the spring session to present a petition on behalf 
of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
with the fact that Highway 255 and Highway 320 have road 
bans on them, and that causes heavy traffic to deteriorate the 
RM [rural municipality] roads. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action immediately and address the serious concerns of the 
people affected by these road restrictions. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Domremy, Aberdeen, and 
St. Louis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to bring forward 
a petition of people of Saskatchewan concerned with the current 
road ban on Highway No. 225 from Highway 2 to Batoche and 
on Highway 320 from Highway 2 to Highway 20. It is causing 

extreme hardship to the farmers and business people in the area 
and has the potential for economic disaster. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action immediately and address the serious concerns of the 
people affected by these road restrictions. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the people of Tway, Wakaw, 
Domremy, Saskatoon, Bellevue, St. Louis, Edmonton, and 
Hoey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on the last day of session I am 
pleased to rise to present a continuation of a petition requesting 
an allocation of long-awaited funding for a provincial children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon, and we look forward to that funding 
action materializing, and we hope that it will. The prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon; 
I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 63, The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall . . . Order please. When shall Bill 
63 be heard in Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — . . . leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes once 
again the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration for Committee of the Whole for Bill 63. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 63 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minster of Justice 
that Bill 63 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly 55 grade 5 to 8 students from St. Paul 
School which is located in the beautiful constituency of 
Saskatoon Meewasin. They are sitting in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And with them are their teachers: Francois Rivard, 
Maria Coupal, Lorna Plemel, Jocelyn Miller, and Chantal 
Brown. 
 
I hope to be meeting these students. The vast majority — 
perhaps all of them — appear very bright eyed and attentive. 
And I hope to be meeting with them at 11 a.m., briefly this 
morning, Mr. Speaker. But in the meantime I trust that my 
colleagues will join me in welcoming them to the Legislative 
Assembly Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you a group of grade 6 students from the 
Valley Christian Academy in Osler. There are 33 of them here 
today with their teachers, Randy Priebe and Carla Fehr, and a 

few chaperones I see. 
 
And they’re the first school group that I’ve been able to be with 
since I was elected, so I’m looking forward to meeting with 
them after question period today and to answer their questions. 
And I find that that age group has probably the most perceptive 
and interesting questions. And so I look forward to meeting 
with them after. And I ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and, through you, to 
members of the Assembly a young gentleman who I have had 
the opportunity to work with in the past few weeks — Mr. 
Jason Miller. Jason is sitting in the west gallery. He is originally 
from Eatonia. He is at this present time attending the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan], and he’s working on his political 
science degree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Jason has been a great addition 
to my staff. And I’m going to make a prediction. And my 
prediction is that one day Jason will be joining members of the 
government on this side of the House as he does have some 
political aspirations. I want to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Jason to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and, through you, to members of this House a 
group that are seated in the opposition gallery. They are a 
sampling of the very excellent Saskatchewan Party caucus staff. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And by way of this introduction, we want to say 
thank you to them for the work that they, that they have done on 
behalf of not only the opposition but the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. So if I can, I’ll just quickly introduce them in 
no particular order, Mr. Speaker: Neal Pobran, Cole Goertz, Bill 
Cooper, Drew Wilby, Reg Downs, Kathy Young, and Ian 
Hannah. 
 
And while I’m on my feet . . . Welcome to the Assembly. I 
think we should . . . 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Oh and, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, Terry 
Gudmundson has also just joined that group. 
 
I also want to welcome to the Assembly again the leader of the 
Liberal Party, Mr. Karwacki. I understand yesterday he has now 
claimed a victory over the NDP. And he’s now going to come 
after the Saskatchewan Party. And we look forward and 
welcome that debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], the 
member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
each year I’m joined by a class from Meadow Lake, and this 
year is no exception. So I’d like to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly a class from Meadow Lake, 44 
students. 
 
Now I don’t know if anybody’s noticed this other than me — 
probably not — but they seem to join us on the last day or very 
close to the last day. And I think a couple of years ago, they 
arrived in fact about 10 minutes before the session ended — I 
think that was two years ago. So they’ve picked it again today. 
So I think that if we ever have sort of a little legislative pool 
again about when the session might end, I might phone this 
class for advice about that. 
 
Anyway, we are joined by 44 students in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. Joining them is their teacher, Mr. Terry Paley, and 
chaperones Sheila Chisholm, Leanne Neudorf, Brian Graham, 
Sam Ho, and Sherry Carson. I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. Thanks very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you some very sharp looking young people who 
are just starting work here in the legislature, and these are the 
additions to the visitor services’ team who will be starting 
working extended hours for the summer. The Legislative 
Building will be open from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily with tours in 
both official languages offered every half hour. These are our 
front-line legislative ambassadors, and I’d ask them to rise as I 
call their name, and remain standing. 
 
In the front row we have Kari Olson, Sean Stephenson, Mukesh 
Rambaran, and also we have Adam Zelmer, Marita Wacker, 
Amy Dancsok. Seated behind them are their supervisors and the 
senior members of the team: Patrice Tremblay, Annelise 
Stoppa, Arnold McKenzie, Marianne Morgan, and the director 
of visitor services, Lorraine deMontigny. 
 
They’re all decked out in their brand new Saskatchewan tartan 
and, members, I ask you to welcome them to the Legislative 
Assembly which they so proudly promote on our behalf. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Norwegian Celebrations 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Norwegian.] 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the national anthem for Norway, and it’s 
sung around the world on this day to celebrate the Constitution 
Day in 1814. There are many descendants of Norwegians in 
Saskatchewan, and the celebrations take place in a number of 
different places. This year I especially want to emphasize the 
celebration that’s taking place at Birch Hills, Saskatchewan 
because they’re having a special celebration there. 
 
I’d also like to say that today in Norway is a double holiday. 
They have a holiday which is called Kristihimmelfartsdag, 
which is Ascension Day, and so in Norway they’re celebrating 
both of these. We can celebrate those holidays here as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members from Regina 
Coronation Park, The Battlefords, Rosetown, Biggar, Saltcoats, 
Saskatchewan Rivers, Lloydminster, and all those others who 
are here in Saskatchewan who want to be Norwegians, let’s all 
celebrate Norwegian Constitution Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

 
Aboriginal Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, next week is Aboriginal 
Awareness Week across Canada. During this week people all 
across Saskatchewan are encouraged to learn more about our 
First Nations people, their history, their culture, and their 
traditions. 
 
I believe that Aboriginal Awareness Week plays an important 
role in further understanding our Aboriginal peoples. I also 
believe that Aboriginal awareness must continue beyond this 
week and throughout the entire year. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that one way of ensuring that 
this happens, especially amongst our young people, is to have 
treaty education as a mandatory part of the core curriculum in 
our schools. Our leader has often said that when he was in 
school, he learned about the Treaty of Versailles but nothing 
about Treaty 4, the treaty that allows him to own his home in 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Party’s critic for First 
Nations and Métis Relations, I have had the great privilege of 
meeting with hundreds of people from First Nations all across 
this great province. From elders to senators, chiefs to tribal 
councillors, entrepreneurs to hoop dancers, men, women, and 
children — I’ve been truly blessed by the great conversations 
and experiences I’ve shared with them, and I’ll be forever 
grateful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all citizens of Saskatchewan to 
get out next week and participate in Aboriginal awareness 
events to ensure that we move further towards . . . for people to 
understand and respect one another in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

International Day Against Homophobia 
 

Ms. Morin: — Today is a day to confront the truly misguided 
beliefs of an unfortunate segment of our population. Today is 
the International Day Against Homophobia. 
 
To celebrate Saskatchewan’s proclamation of this occasion, the 
Pink Triangle is hosting a barbeque later today here in Regina. 
There will be many exciting speakers, including representatives 
from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the Canadian 
feminist action network, Regina Pride, and of course, the Pink 
Triangle. The member for Regina Elphinstone will also bring 
greetings on behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker, as a part of 
the proclamation presentation. 
 
Homophobia is a complicated form of discrimination. It is a 
systemic problem that pits individuals against themselves as 
well as against their own perceived cultures. 
 
Unfortunately Canadians are not yet free from the terrible 
effects of this often subtle form of harassment, Mr. Speaker. 
The insipid ideology of the far right continues to perpetuate the 
problem even here. In fact Canada’s own Public Safety 
minister, Stockwell Day, once said that, quote, “Homosexuality 
is a mental disorder that can be cured through counselling.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this International Day Against Homophobia, it 
is important for each and every one of us to affirm a 
commitment to make ignorant and intolerant statements like 
this figments of the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Spring Session in Review 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, at the close of today’s 
spring session, I’d like to review the session that was for that 
tired, old, scandal-ridden NDP government. 
 
The session kicked off with the NDP government announcing 
that it had decided to reward Murdoch Carriere, the former 
senior government official and NDP friend who had been fired 
for harassment and convicted of assault . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The member for 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Again to repeat, with a whopping 
$275,000 and a generous top-up to his government pension. 
This ludicrous decision prompted justified outrage and sent a 
loud message to all women in Saskatchewan that the NDP 
government does not take sexual harassment in the workplace 
seriously. 
 
Then we had the NDP fraud scandal cover-up that resulted in 
the resignation of the NDP caucus chief of staff, who by the 
way, Mr. Speaker, is in line to receive a Murdoch Carriere 
golden handshake in the form of a severance payment that is 
clearly against the rules of the Legislative Assembly. 
 

Most recently the Regina city police announced that they have 
turned over their files on the NDP fraud scandal to the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] for a full investigation. With 
the NDP government and its caucus now under investigation, 
the Premier finally accepted the resignation of the former House 
leader yesterday, something he should have done three weeks 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the spring session has been one where the NDP 
government has lurched from crisis to crisis, careened through 
internal messes, and failed to take responsibility for anything. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to do the right thing and 
call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Ethical Conduct 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party doesn’t want to talk 
about policy or about what matters to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well that’s fine. If they want it, then let’s talk 
about ethical conduct — their ethical conduct or lack of. 
 
For the third time in two years, we have released a document 
chronicling the ongoing potential ethical violations of their own 
code of ethics by members of that party. And what’s been the 
response, Mr. Speaker? They’ve ignored it just like they ignore 
policy and just like they ignore what is good for Saskatchewan 
people. If the Sask Party takes their own code of ethics 
seriously, wouldn’t they at least make a statement or publish a 
document or in some way address the pages and pages of 
evidence presented? 
 
No, no, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to policy and ethics, the 
Sask Party is no better than their predecessors, the Devine 
Conservatives. The only difference is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I invite the member to complete his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To conclude . . . No, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to policy and ethics, the 
Saskatchewan Party is no better than their predecessors, the 
Devine Conservatives. The only difference is instead of deny, 
deny, deny, it’s now, the mantra is ignore, ignore, ignore. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Farewells 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last 
six months, six veteran NDP MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and cabinet ministers have decided not to stand with 
the Premier or to run for his team in the next provincial election 
— the member from Saskatoon Greystone, the member for 
Regina Rosemont, the member for Saskatoon Massey Place, the 
member for Prince Albert Carlton, the member for Regina 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

Wascana . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The correct 
procedure is not to refer in any way to the Speaker in debate. I 
would ask the member to withdraw that part of the statement. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I withdraw the words Prince Albert 
Carlton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And most recently the member for 
Regina South, the province’s Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fridays at this building have now become known 
as farewell Fridays. According to the sources from the 
government’s bench, these six are about to be joined by at least 
four more veteran MLAs — perhaps the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, Prince Albert Northcote, Saskatoon 
Meewasin, Regina Lakeview, and, last but not least, the 
member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their fortunes are sinking in the polls. The Premier’s popularity 
is dropping like an anchor. The RCMP are investigating the 
NDP. And even the lifeboats appear to have holes in them. 
Oliver Cromwell once said, and I quote: 
 

You have sat too long here for any good you have been 
doing. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. 

 
The people of Saskatchewan could not agree more when it 
comes to this tired, old, scandal-ridden NDP government. Mr. 
Speaker, as the members opposite pack up their lifejackets, I 
hear them faintly humming Gordon Lightfoot’s, “Alberta 
Bound.” 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

The Future 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — It seems the Saskatchewan Party is no better at 
predicting the future than they are at an informed political 
debate or for that matter adhering to their own code of conduct. 
They predicted nothing but doom or gloom for the province 
under this NDP government, but the facts speak for themselves. 
 
The NDP has taken Saskatchewan from bankruptcy to boom 
times. And today in the province, job numbers are up. 
Population numbers are up. Farm cash receipts are up. Urban 
housing starts are up. International exports of goods are up. The 
value of building permits are up. Retail sales are up. New motor 
vehicle sales are up. Average weekly earnings are up . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member for Regina 

Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Average weekly 
earnings are up. So much for Sask Party predictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session has provided a stark contrast between 
the NDP and the opposition. While the Saskatchewan Party has 
taken the low road and placed their own interest in power above 
the interest of Saskatchewan people, on this side of the 
Assembly we have focused on improving health care 
opportunities for seniors. We have focused on improving future 
opportunities for young people. We have focused on creating a 
healthy future environment. 
 
And we are going to continue to work on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people and for the brightest possible future for 
our province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Retrospective Views of Session 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Desperate to deflect 
attention from the Murdoch Carriere scandal, this NDP 
government hastily put together some legislative changes. 
However, no one from outside government was even consulted 
— not business organizations, not unions, no one. Murdoch 
Carriere’s victims would have been helped if the legislation 
already in place would have been enforced back in 1994, but it 
wasn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should Murdoch Carriere’s victims feel any 
better today than they did at the beginning of this session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I do note is 
that the members of the opposition did support this most 
progressive piece of legislation. That means that Saskatchewan 
is only the second jurisdiction in all of North America that has 
legislation that protects workers against intimidation and 
bullying in the workplace — and we’re proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s what I know 
about this session. What I know about this session is that the 
members of the opposition had stolen documents in their 
possession for over a year, that they posted people’s private, 
personal information on the Sask Party website, that they had 
secret cameras in their offices, Mr. Speaker, that they requested 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

people’s private information, citizens’ private information, day 
in and day out in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 
implied that they were above the law throughout this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this is what happened this 
session. The NDP government refused to release their secret 
legal opinions. The NDP government refused to release its 
settlement agreement with Murdoch Carriere. The government 
failed to allow Murdoch Carriere’s victims to have a copy of 
their own settlement. The government failed to allow this 
scandal to be investigated by a legislative committee. This 
government failed Murdoch Carriere’s victims and they have 
failed the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government admit their failure, stop 
hiding, and release the information that the people of this 
province deserve to have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the members of the 
opposition have tried to do throughout this session is to get the 
Government of Saskatchewan to release people’s private, 
personal information, Mr. Speaker. So what the members of the 
opposition have failed to understand is we have laws in this 
province and we are there to protect citizens’ information, Mr. 
Speaker. But what I will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what this whole session 
has been about for the Sask Party is distraction — distraction 
from their agenda, distraction from their history, and most of all 
distraction from the Sask Party leader’s history and relationship 
to the Devine government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they won’t tell us what they stand for, but they did 
yesterday. What they’ve decided to do, Mr. Speaker, is to keep 
the poorest artists, who have the highest education, poor. And 
why is that? Because they don’t want their friends to have to 
share into their profits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for . . . Order. The member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
paying Murdoch Carriere $275,000 and bumping up his pension 
was the wrong thing to do. The people of this province want the 
Premier to know that it was the wrong thing to do. They have 
phoned. They have written letters. They have sent emails. And, 
Mr. Speaker, about 7,500 Saskatchewan people would like to 

say to this Premier: you’ve got mail. I would like to send these 
over to the Premier right now. 
 
Will the Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I do believe the 
Pages have a job to do here. Order. The members will . . . The 
members will come to order. Order. I would ask members to 
keep the personal remarks away from the debate. Let’s stick 
with the issues. 
 
I ask the member to recall the rule . . . Order please. I would ask 
the member from Martensville to recall and to respect the rule 
about exhibits. The member for Martensville is recognized to 
complete her question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Premier promise to read the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier promise to read 
the opinions of 7,500 people who took the time to voice their 
disgust over his handling of the Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand the 
Sask Party has about 12,000 members. Their own members 
didn’t sign these forms. Yet they sent out over close to half a 
million of these little black slips for us all to sign. So I would 
say it’s not a great return, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will say this, that in this session of the legislature the 
government has focused on the citizens of this province. We 
have changed and we have seen significant growth in our 
population. We’ve seen a change in the corporate capital tax, 
the corporate income tax. We have seen a significant investment 
in our young people, in our senior citizens, and in the citizens of 
this province through infrastructure and social programming. 
 
But the members of the opposition, what they continually try to 
do is distract the public from their agenda — their secret 
agenda. They haven’t told us one thing in terms of where they 
stand but we do know they want to continue to keep artists poor 
this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Caucus Issues and Parties’ Policies 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was defending his 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

outrageous decision to reward harassment. And you remember 
what he said at that time, Mr. Speaker? He said, “Would I do it 
again? You bet I would.” 
 
Well you know what? He wasn’t even kidding, Mr. Speaker, 
because he is going to do it again. Now the Premier’s going to 
write another big, fat severance cheque to his chief of staff who 
resigned over the NDP fraud scandal. And just like Murdoch 
Carriere, the Premier still won’t explain why. Mr. Speaker, why 
is the Premier breaking the rules of the Legislative Assembly of 
paying out severance to someone who resigned? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’d like to bring to the attention 
of the Assembly that the question is out of order because it is 
not dealing with the responsibility of a minister. I will allow a 
voluntary response. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I find 
interesting is that the opposition chose that particular member to 
talk about harassment. But, Mr. Speaker, what the members of 
the opposition continue to try and do is to divert the public’s 
attention away from the real agenda. 
 
Here’s what we know. They go to Alberta for their leader’s 
dinner with the business community in Alberta, and what do 
they talk about? They talk about changing Saskatchewan’s 
labour laws. That’s what they talk about, so that they become 
more business-friendly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe, we believe that the workers in 
this province are entitled to occupational health and safety. 
They’re entitled to minimum standards in their . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. The 
members are interrupting the debate. Several members are 
interrupting debate, and I ask members to cease that. I 
particularly request members to stop hurling personal remarks 
across the floor. The Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We believe in a minimum wage that at 
least keeps up with the rate of inflation. We do not believe in a 
two-tier minimum wage where the members of the opposition 
would have young people at a minimum wage lower than the 
rest of the citizens in our province, Mr. Speaker. We stand for 
something. All they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have a government that has 
the Conflict of Interest Commissioner doing an investigation. 
The RCMP are doing an investigation, and now the NDP House 
leader has resigned. So the problem here seems to be a lot 
bigger than just Jim Fodey. Mr. Speaker, Pat Lorjé told police 
that it was the intention of the NDP caucus to conceal fraud. 

The question is, who was involved in this cover-up? Why can’t 
the Premier just answer any of these questions? Why do we 
need a conflict of interest investigation, an RCMP investigation 
just to get to the truth? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was at the Prince Albert caucus 
meeting in 1994 when the matter was fully discussed. Was 
everyone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again the Premier 
was at the Prince Albert caucus meeting in 1994 where the 
matter was fully discussed. Who knew about this cover-up? Did 
the Premier know about this cover-up, and if so why is the NDP 
House leader the only one that’s resigning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, here we are on the last 
day of the session and what the members of the opposition 
continue to try and do is distract, because they don’t want to 
talk about their record. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about their 
record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced for the first time in 25 years a 
social policy so that senior citizens in our province can have 
access to drugs for their medical purposes, Mr. Speaker. And 
what did the members of the opposition do? They said they 
were opposed to a universal seniors’ drug plan, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t want to talk about that. Well I can tell you this. The 
seniors in my constituency — which they think that they’ll win 
in the next provincial election — are pleased with that drug 
plan, Mr. Speaker, and they want the opposition to come clean 
and tell us where do they stand on the day-to-day issues 
confronting the citizens of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Candidates Seeking Election 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Premier: today’s the day, today’s the day the Premier’s deadline 
for his MLAs to declare whether or not they’re running in the 
next election or if they’re running for the lifeboats. He already 
has six NDP MLAs who have donned their lifejackets and 
bailed off this shipwreck of an NDP government. The question 
is, how many more? Mr. Premier, how many more NDP MLAs 
are heading for calmer waters and abandoning this NDP 
government by not running in the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

[10:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
number of our current members of the legislature who have 
served with great distinction have chosen not to run in the next 
election. A fair number, if I may say, Mr. Speaker, of the 
members opposite are choosing not to run in the next election. I 
believe the member of Lloydminster is not running in the next 
election. I believe the member of Rosetown is not running in 
the next election. The member of Carrot River Valley is not 
being allowed to run in the next election. The member of 
Kindersley is not running in the next election. 
 
But here’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. There are a team of men 
and women who are standing for the New Democratic Party 
who are going to renew this government and who are going to 
bring their vision and their hopes to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The difference, Mr. Speaker, the difference is: 
who are they bringing? The retreads. The retreads. The former 
leader of the Conservative Party, Bill Boyd; Ms. Arlene Julé 
who once ran as Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order please. 
Order. Member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that 
some members over there don’t even take the Premier seriously 
any more. Some of them are openly defying the Premier’s 
deadline. The member from Saskatoon Nutana said she wasn’t 
making her decision until the end of May. And now the 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] minister is going even further. He told the P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Daily Herald that he doesn’t base his decisions 
on what other candidates do. His decision will come shortly 
before the Premier calls the election or possibly during the 
election. Now there’s a real vote of confidence, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s going to wait until the campaign is halfway over and if it’s 
not going well, he’s going to bail out before the ship hits the 
bottom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should the people of Saskatchewan take this 
Premier seriously when his own MLAs don’t take him 
seriously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what we take 
seriously. We take seriously the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we know full well, as evidenced by 
this session, what they take seriously. They take seriously the 
interests of the Saskatchewan Party. That’s what they take 
seriously. Well we’re taking seriously the interests of 
Saskatchewan family and the future of this province. And this 

session has been the best illustration of that in living memory 
where you have a government, a New Democratic Party 
government, providing benefits for our seniors in drug plans. 
Where we’re providing benefits for our students; we’ve frozen 
tuition with a graduate tax credit. Where we’re providing 
benefit to our environment through a green strategy that’s being 
recognized across the country, Mr. Speaker. Where we’re 
taking interest in the interests of working people in this 
province. Legislation to protect our reservists. Legislation to 
end mandatory retirement, Mr. Speaker. And legislation we 
wanted to pass to protect artists in our province that’s been 
stopped by that opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you remember at the beginning of 
this session when the Premier said he said he was going to 
make this session about the environment and specifically about 
the government’s climate change plan, about their plan to 
reduce greenhouse gases. That’s what he said. It never 
happened, Mr. Speaker. It never happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government also this session failed to 
meaningfully address the most important health care question 
facing the province, the shortage of nurses and the shortage of 
doctors. This government failed to provide leadership in the 
area of education, as schools closed across the province. And 
it’s not hard to see why that happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll tell you what’s not going to fix this government. A 
cabinet shuffle isn’t going to fix this government. A new ad 
campaign with angry punctuation will not fix the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. Not even the human dynamo that is the member for 
Regina Douglas Park can save this government. What will fix 
things for the province of Saskatchewan is a general election. 
Will the Premier call one this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, some of my 
colleagues have just observed that Leader of the Opposition, he 
ought to be careful what he wishes for, Mr. Speaker, I tell you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is the result. Here are some of the results of 
this government, this New Democratic Party government, at 
work in this session. Mr. Speaker, during this session we have 
added, we have added 2,118 training seats for young people in 
our province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve dedicated every cent of 
highway, of road tax being collected at the gas pumps to the 
building of highways in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this session, Mr. Speaker, we’ve extended benefits for 30,000 
low-income workers, extended health benefits to 30,000 — 
health benefits. We’ve provided a $10 increase for those of our 
neighbours who are living on social assistance, Mr. Speaker, 
and that adds to the increase of last year. 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence is this. The Leader of the Opposition 
and the Sask Party, they’re interested in one thing — elections 
and the future of the Sask Party. We’re interested in the future 
of Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s one thing the 
Premier and I could agree on and that is we’re at a very 
important juncture in the history of our province. And so we 
have important questions to ask as a result of that. Is now the 
time for a government mired in scandal, Mr. Speaker? I think 
the answer is no. Is now the time for a government that’s under 
RCMP investigation? I think the answer is no. Is now the time 
for a government that’s losing all of its more youthful, certainly 
more progressive members of the cabinet? I think the answer is 
no. Is now the time for a government whose new source of 
youthful energy was elected when Wang Chung topped the 
charts, well before Al Gore even had a chance to invent the 
Internet, Mr. Speaker? I think not. 
 
Now is the time for a provincial election, for that debate about 
the issues. I want the Premier to commit today that that general 
election will happen before the calendar changes to 2008. Will 
he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, is now the time, is now the 
time for a Premier whose capacity for one-liners is about what 
he brings to the debate, Mr. Speaker? No. The time is now for a 
Premier and a political party, the time is now for the New 
Democratic Party to bring, as we have brought, a future vision 
for this province and policy that matters to Saskatchewan 
people. That’s the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I’m handed a 
copy of the Sask Party’s news release for today for the end of 
the session. Again I find no, no debate about substantive policy. 
And then what do I find out? The Leader of the Opposition 
says, well most of our plan will be released during the election 
campaign. What is this plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What is this secret plan that they will not 
talk about? What is this secret plan that they will not share with 
the people of Saskatchewan? Is it no plan or a secret plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order, order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame the Premier for 
wanting to know a little bit about the plans that the 
Saskatchewan Party has. And certainly he can review the things 

that we’ve already presented, our Enterprise Saskatchewan plan 
for the economy. He could look at our 36-point plan for the 
labour shortage or our biofuels plan that we’ve offered. He can 
look at all of that. 
 
But I don’t blame him for being interested in wanting to know 
what our plan is. I want to assure him this, Mr. Speaker. It is 
right. It’ll be a plan that is absolutely right for the province of 
Saskatchewan. There will be opportunities for everyone, 
including unemployed former NDP politicians, Mr. Speaker. 
We want to assure him of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the best way to end this session, the 
best way to end this session where the government has been 
exposed to be mired in scandal and now under RCMP 
investigation, the best way is for the Premier to stand up and 
commit to a general election before 2008. We will have that 
debate in the province. The people will make their choice and 
they will choose positive change. What will he choose? Will he 
call the election this year, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the 
Opposition is predicting that the people of Saskatchewan will 
choose positive change, they’re never going to choose the 
Saskatchewan Party. They’re never going to choose the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a leader and an 
opposition who by their own admission today in a news release 
say they will not share their plan with the people of 
Saskatchewan up and to an election. What’s wrong with the 
plan? Is it no plan? Is it a secret plan? Or is it the plan that’s 
being developed in Alberta every time he’s over raising money? 
Or is it a plan being developed in Augusta, Georgia when he 
sends his friend to Augusta to go golfing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session has told the truth. It has told the truth 
about a government, about a government that works to build for 
the future of Saskatchewan families, to make life better for our 
young people — that works with the people of Saskatchewan. 
And it has told the truth about an opposition that’s only 
interested in their own political agenda, only interested in the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. The people will choose and 
they will choose the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would . . . Order please. 
Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — Before we go to written questions, I wish to 
advise the Assembly that question 1,486 and question 1,487, 
both of those questions, are out of order because they do not fall 
within the responsibility of any minister or of the government in 
general. 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to questions no. 1,488 to 1,509 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,488 to 1,509 inclusive have 
been submitted. 
 
I wish to advise the members that His Honour is here for Royal 
Assent. 
 
[11:00] 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 11:01 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Please be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 301 - The Eston College (Full Gospel Bible Institute 

Amendment) Act 
Bill No. 8 - The Paramedics Act 
Bill No. 61 - The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
Bill No. 62 - The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics 
Act, 2007 

Bill No. 64 - The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
Bill No. 13 - The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 59 - The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 50 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, 2007 
Bill No. 51 - The Public Employees Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 60 - The Revenue and Financial Services 

Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 65 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 38 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 17 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal 

Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 
2006 

Bill No. 28 - The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 56 - The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 57 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 58 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 2007 
Bill No. 9 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2006 

Bill No. 10 - The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 19 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 21 - The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 

2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
Bill No. 23 - The Securities Transfer Act 
Bill No. 44 - The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours 
collectifs 

Bill No. 47 - The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 49 - The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage 

Administrators Act 
Bill No. 37 - The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 

de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour 
d’appel 

Bill No. 43 - The Payday Loans Act 
Bill No. 45 - The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
Bill No. 52 - The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 

2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
Bill No. 53 - The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes 

(Inspections and Investigation) Amendment Act, 
2007 

Bill No. 46 - The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 48 - The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 

Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 66 - The Occupational Health and Safety 

(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 
Bill No. 31 - The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 

2006 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 63 - The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly accorded the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 69 - The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 3) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:06.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave of the Assembly to make a motion regarding the 
adjournment of the session as well as to make some closing 
remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 
requested leave to make a motion with respect to adjournment 
of the session. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government Deputy House Leader. 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we wind 
down this session of the legislature, it’s appropriate to make a 
number of remarks and thank those who make this House 
operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start by thanking you for your guidance 
in this House to all members and helping us to operate this 
Assembly in a manner that allows us to fulfill our duties in a 
professional and caring way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank the Clerks at the Table who 
through their support, organization, and attention to details have 
made this House a more enjoyable place, allowed us to fulfill 
our duties, and to accomplish the work that we are sent here by 
our constituents to do. 
 
I think at this time it’s also note . . . to give special 
congratulations to a successful first session to Mr. Ken Ring — 
his first time sitting at the Table as a Clerk. Ken, we want to 
thank you on your hard work and thank you for your dedication 
to this Assembly. 
 
It’s also appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to thank all the many, many 
staff that work for the Legislative Assembly that make our jobs 
easier each day — those who work in Hansard, who supply a 
record, a recording of the events each day so that we have the 
opportunity to review what has been said; to the library staff 
who help us with our research work, who provide information 
to us on a regular basis; to the broadcast services staff who are 
here every hour that the House is sitting, both in committee and 
in the main Assembly, providing broadcast of our proceedings 
each and every day. 
 
To the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff who provide security to 
this building and help us in many, many other ways as we go 
about doing our duties within this building; to the maintenance 
and property management staff who clean our offices, keep this 
building in top shape, and who take every opportunity to 
befriend each of us and give those kindly words each and every 
day; to the staff at the cafeteria who work and provide meals for 
us each and every day as we are here in the Assembly, who 
work very hard; to the media and press gallery who are here to 
provide to the people of Saskatchewan the news each and every 
day about what’s going on in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the Pages who help us each and every day in so many ways, 
both in the House and throughout the building, as they deliver 
each morning the Hansard and House proceedings to us before 
the morning; to the interns who are working with a number of 
members and have worked with members on both sides of the 
House, who helped to make this place a better place during the 
session as well. 
 
Mr. Chair, also to the . . . I’d like to thank all the Chairs and 
Vice-Chairs of committees, that have helped make the process 
work throughout this session, for all their hard work. We moved 
to a new process. It has been difficult at times. We’ve had to, at 
times, evaluate how the process is working. We’ve had to make 
some tweaks in order to make it work. But the committee 

process has worked very well for us, and it’s allowed us to 
continue to accomplish more in a period of time than we would 
have been able to in the past, Mr. Speaker, because now we 
have two committees doing the work that one used to. And that 
gives us the opportunity to do twice as much work in the same 
period of time, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s very valuable to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to now thank the former government House leader, the 
member from Moose Jaw North, who guided the government 
side with both integrity and professionalism in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 
North was instrumental in many of the reforms that we’ve seen 
over the last couple of years that have made this Assembly a 
better place to work, a better place to be, and more friendly to 
the public as we go about our work. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Opposition House Leader who worked 
with the member from Moose Jaw North and myself throughout 
this session to see that we were able to accomplish the work 
that was put before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — I’d like to thank my colleagues on both sides of 
the House. This has been a very difficult session, but we’ve 
managed to accomplish a great deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan during this session, and we should all be proud of 
what we have been able to accomplish during this session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank all the support staff in the caucus, 
in both caucus offices on both sides of the Assembly. Without 
their help and support, much of the work that we do in this 
Assembly and in our committees would not be achievable. So 
I’d like to thank them on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 
on behalf of all members of the House. 
 
I’d like to also thank all the staff who work in ministers’ offices 
and all those staff who work in Executive Council and media 
services because without their help on a daily basis the 
operation of the Assembly, the operation of the government, 
and the accomplishments that we are so proud of as members of 
the Assembly could not be done. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank our 
families. Many members have to travel and be away from their 
families for extended periods of time during the session. It’s 
difficult on spouses, on children. And for them, Mr. Speaker, 
and for their co-operation and support and help, we are able to 
do our jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, lastly I’d like to thank our 
families, those who support us each and every day and make it 
possible for us to do our work. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 24, 2007, unless 
earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon request of the 



May 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 
member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date 
and time. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 24, the year 2007 
unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 
the government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 
each member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such 
date and time. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise and join with the Deputy House Leader 
of the government to express our gratitude at the end of the 
session on behalf of the official opposition. The member from 
Regina, the Deputy House Leader, named all of the employees 
of the Legislative Assembly in detail, and I won’t repeat that. 
But I would like to add my voice to his in terms of thanking 
everyone in the Legislative Assembly who assist us so much 
each and every day, not only when the House is sitting but also 
intersessionally. 
 
I would as well like to join in expressing the gratitude of the 
official opposition to our caucus employees and as well the 
government’s caucus employees. There’s so much work that 
happens behind the scenes that allows us to conduct our duties 
and discharge our responsibilities that it’s important to 
acknowledge and to thank those many workers on both sides of 
the House who help us do our work. 
 
I would like to join as well with the Deputy House Leader in 
acknowledging and thanking the member for Moose Jaw North, 
the former House leader, who has worked very closely with 
myself over virtually this entire session. It not only is something 
that is a pleasure to deal with someone who will keep their 
word, who will honour their word, and who realize that this 
Assembly is a place that has to function in the best interests of 
the people of Saskatchewan despite times wherein emotions get 
very heated and the debate gets very energized. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Certainly I think that notwithstanding the fact that those events 
occur, it’s important that all of us respect the fact that House 
leaders have to operate on the word of each other. And certainly 
I’ve always come to respect and trust the word of the member 
from Moose Jaw in regard to our House business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I also am going to make these 
remarks with the assumption that there is going to likely be an 
election before we reconvene on the date that the motion talks 
about, and in particular to thank colleagues who are not going 
to return — those who have already announced and those who 

are yet to announce and perhaps those who will not be 
successful in the election — and point out in particular on the 
opposition side of the legislature and thank the member from 
Lloydminster, the member from Carrot River, the member from 
Kindersley, and the member from Rosetown-Elrose for their 
service to the people of Saskatchewan and the work that they 
have done over the years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is the first full 
session where we’ve operated under the new rules of the 
Assembly that have been established and developed. And I 
think that in balance we have been very successful in bringing 
our Saskatchewan legislature to the forefront of parliamentary 
process, not in this province but also in this entire country. And 
I think that we can all be rightly proud of all of the work that 
we’ve done to accomplish these changes. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, are for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan firstly. And I think that the fact that there is more 
predictability also, in particular, benefits our constituents and 
the people, in addition to the people of the province generally. 
But most particularly I think it benefits in some significant 
manner our families who have some predictability when their 
fathers and mothers, grandmas and grandpas are going to be 
home with their families and have time that is quality time that 
many of us sacrifice in the discharge of our duties. 
 
I hope in closing that each and every one of us will go home to 
our constituents and to our families and enjoy the beauty of this 
province in the summertime. I would like to think, on some 
beautiful Saskatchewan summer evening as the sun is setting 
that all of us will reflect on the beauty of this province and the 
beauty of its people, and that’s what motivates us to contribute 
to public life. Have a great summer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the question, I would appreciate 
leave to be able to make a statement. I’ve appreciated the 
remarks from the Deputy Government House Leader and the 
Opposition House Leader very much. And I would like to echo 
their remarks in terms of the thank yous that are to be expressed 
to all in the public service, to those in the Legislative Assembly 
Service, the Clerks, and of course my personal office staff. 
 
And I do so appreciate also very much the work that was 
conducted in co-operation with the government House leader 
and the Opposition House Leader with respect to the progress 
that was made on rules of the Assembly. 
 
I do all of this in the context of two points. First of all, I feel 
that I have the best seat in the House. And from this vantage 
point, it just brings to my mind the very utter significance and 
importance of the processes that we use to make our decisions 
here in Saskatchewan and really throughout the country. The 
process enables the debate to happen, enables the decision to be 
made in a way that represents a victory for those who oppose 
certain positions and those who are for certain positions 
because, as members exercise their responsibilities, it’s the 
debating and the voting process that assures citizens that they 
have been represented and that directions are being taken 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2007 

legally and peacefully. 
 
The second point I want to make is, from this seat again, I 
observe the deep personal respect that members establish for 
each other over the years through the contact. The political 
differences are very obvious and often portrayed in the media, 
but there is the deep, personal respect that I see members 
establish between themselves, and the personal respect that I 
have for the members here, as well, I wish to express at this 
time. I couldn’t think of anybody working in a position with 
people that have greater integrity than the people that have been 
elected to office in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, to 
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 24, 2007, unless 
earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 
government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 
member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date 
and time. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the motion of adjournment, I 
wish to advise members that today the Canadian Forces 
Snowbirds have planned a historic flight over Regina. Flight 
will include nine members of the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police, and it’s intended to be a symbol of provincial heritage 
and patriotic spirit. The flight will pass over the Legislative 
Building at an altitude of 500 feet. This will give everyone in 
the building and close to the building an excellent chance to 
view the world-famous Snowbirds. It might also be a good time 
to have . . . oh pardon me. These two scheduled flights are 
scheduled at 1:30 and 1:45 p.m. 
 
It has been moved by the Government Deputy House Leader 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until the call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:23.] 
 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1666 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1668 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Norwegian Celebrations 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
 Aboriginal Awareness Week 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
 International Day Against Homophobia 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Spring Session in Review 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Ethical Conduct 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Farewells 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 The Future 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Retrospective Views of Session 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
 Caucus Issues and Parties’ Policies 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
 Candidates Seeking Election 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1672 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1675 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1675 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1676 



 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1677 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1677 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Acting Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Acting Provincial Secretary 
Acting Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Acting Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 

Minister of Community Resources 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

 
Hon. Eric Cline 

Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 

Saskatchewan Inc. 
Minister Responsible for Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


