




















































Hansard: December 20, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 8A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 20, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 197 

 December 20, 2007 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 

to you and through you the members of the village council of 

Pinehouse Lake, Saskatchewan. As many of you know, 

Pinehouse Lake, Saskatchewan is a northern community which 

is one of the most progressive, forward-thinking communities in 

the North. 

 

We have with us today the mayor, Mike Natomagan; deputy 

mayor, Greg Ross; alderman, Vince Natomagan; and project 

manager, Shaun Welcher; and alderman, Zedmund Maurice. So 

please show them a round of applause. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 

colleague in recognizing the northern village of Pinehouse’s 

mayor and council. Obviously I won’t go through all the names, 

but I want to especially welcome His Worship on behalf of all 

the council. And it should know that Pinehouse is working 

towards building themselves a brand new arena, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s going to be a beautiful arena. They’re having some 

challenges, but they’ll get it up. 

 

And the commitment I made to the mayor when we began this 

project — and he began the project and we certainly supported 

him — was that when that rink is open . . . It’s not if, but when 

that rink is open, I’m going to Pinehouse to play hockey against 

them. And on that ice, Mr. Speaker, on that ice there’s no 

friendship. There’s no friendship. There’s competition. So I’d 

like to welcome the mayor and the council here and to point out 

that D-Day is coming, and next year we’ll see them on the ice, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Hon. Assembly, first of all four individuals from Thunder 

Creek constituency involved in the poultry industry, Mr. 

Speaker: Alvero Santamaria, James Glen, and Dave and George 

Hofer, both from the Arm River colony, Mr. Speaker. I hope 

that all members will give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s also my great pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of this Hon. Assembly my sister, Cheryl Perry, 

and her husband, Neil Perry, seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Cheryl is a contract accountant in 

Calgary for the oil and gas industry and Neil is general manager 

of IPSCO’s scrap enterprises in Alberta. I have to say that I 

think I’ve known Neil a little longer than Cheryl has. We were 

school friends and hockey buddies and I’m happy to announce 

that they’ve purchased a house in my constituency . . . 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — In Regina Beach. And I hope that when 

the time comes, they’ll retire here. I hope that all members will 

welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join the member opposite in welcoming Alvero Santamaria, 

as well as James Glen and Dave and George Hofer. As the 

member said, they’re involved in the poultry industry and 

they’re keen observers of issues pertaining to agriculture in this 

province and also rural life. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 

colleagues to join me in welcoming these four gentlemen to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the member from Saskatoon Nutana in welcoming our 

poultry producers here today to their legislature and ask all 

members to welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to introduce three guests in our east gallery to this 

Assembly, friends of this Assembly, Joseph Dojack, Lois 

Thacyk, and Suzanne Thacyk. I ask all of us to give them a 

warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 

and through you all the members of the Assembly, a person 

very special in my life, instrumental in getting me where I am 

here today — my high school sweetheart, the greatest supporter 

in my life, mother of my three children; the one woman that has 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

taught me to make things better, not be bitter — my wife of 21 

years, Leone. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my distinct 

pleasure to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of 

the Assembly a very, very dear friend of mine, Mary Stochmal, 

and her fiancé, Yong Seong Seo, who are seated in the west 

gallery right there. 

 

Yong Seong is . . . It’s his first trip to Canada, Mr. Speaker. He 

encountered some difficulties unfortunately, when he arrived in 

the country, and so the fact that they are here today makes it 

that much more special. So I’d ask all the colleagues to wish 

them a Merry Christmas, welcome Yong Seong to Canada, wish 

them all the best in their future, and welcome them to the 

province and the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

sitting in your gallery is my son, Brent Michelson. Brent is 

fourth year of university at the U of R [University of Regina]. 

He is taking a break from classes now that the semester is done 

and has decided to join us here to see how his dad does at work. 

So I would ask everybody to treat me with the utmost of 

respect. 

 

Brent certainly helped me out in the campaign. He’s also no 

stranger to the members from Regina South and Regina 

Wascana Plains where he helped campaign during his first 

semester. So please welcome Brent to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I wish to present a petition to the Legislative 

Assembly on behalf of the citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to commit to reopening negotiations with 

Domtar based on the already existing memorandum of 

understanding so as to see a viable pulp and paper mill 

continue in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Community Theatre Production 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, Yorkton Community Theatre 

is a non-exclusive, varied group of people who enjoy musical 

theatre and contribute their varied talents and spare time to 

make it happen. Mr. Speaker, the result is among the best 

community theatre you will find anywhere, and has been 

rivalled only by Christmas as a reason to look forward to 

another Saskatchewan winter. 

 

After a year hiatus, the founding director, Gloria Herauf, is 

planning to return from the West Coast to produce and direct a 

spectacular show — Irving Berlin’s I Love a Piano. Mr. 

Speaker, the upcoming production will run from January 25 to 

27, 2008 in Yorkton. This production marks the Yorkton 

Community Theatre’s eighth musical production over the past 

seven years, and financial profits from the shows have been 

returned to the community for scholarships, music lessons, and 

workshops through the Children Are Our Future program. 

 

The cast of 34 singers and dancers with its orchestra including 

Malcolm McKitterick from Scotland, as well as many 

volunteers behind the scenes in production, lighting, sound, set 

design, and stage crews are sure to create a memorable 

production. The audience will be treated to over 40 familiar 

songs in this musical; as well, an elegant scenery, costuming, 

choreography, and fine singing that audiences have come to 

expect. 

 

On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to let it slip that Gloria 

was my elementary school music teacher and she must have 

been 12 years old back then because she still looks as beautiful 

and young as ever . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well she is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also her husband, Les Herauf, who is a big part of 

the production, was my fifth grade teacher and remains as one 

of my all-time favourite teachers and an excellent role model 

for a young boy growing up. He in fact is a big part of why I’m 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s statement has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatoon Firefighters’ Christmas Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, 25 years ago right around this 

time of year a group of Saskatoon firefighters piled into an old 

fire truck, drove throughout the city stopping at restaurants and 

pubs, and sang Christmas carols to their captive audience. Mr. 

Speaker, the singers were neither practised nor rehearsed. At 

each stop after the final note had faded, listeners were warned 

the firefighters would continue carolling unless they made a 

donation to charity. Listeners gladly paid. Somewhere along the 

way, Denny Carr, a well-known radio personality, got involved 

and Saskatoon’s Secret Santa Charity was born. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

This year volunteers and retirees from the Saskatoon fire 

department continued the tradition. Starting at Moxie’s 

restaurant they were provided with breakfast and a donation 

before they set off for a day of merriment and carolling that 

ended on Buds on Broadway at about 1 in the morning. Mr. 

Speaker, this year the firefighters raised a record high $25,400 

that’ll be used by Secret Santa Charity to purchase food 

hampers and Christmas gifts for children in Saskatoon. 

 

I want to make a special mention of Saskatoon firefighter, Ron 

York, who headed up this year’s carollers; Mercedes Waymans, 

who is in charge of gathering names for the Secret Santa 

Charity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in a huge thank you 

to Saskatoon firefighters for making this a merry Christmas 

both for their listeners and for many, many, families and 

children in Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

School Division Partners with First Nation 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the 

House of a new partnership between the North East School 

Division and the Kinistin Saulteaux First Nation. 

 

Kinistin students in grade 10 to 12 have been attending school 

in Tisdale over the past few years without a formal agreement 

between the North East School Division and the Tisdale Middle 

and Secondary School. Last week a formal agreement creating a 

partnership was signed and formally accepted. This agreement 

will govern the relationships between Kinistin students and the 

North East School Division and the Tisdale Middle & 

Secondary School. This partnership is the first for the North 

East School Division and one of the first in the province. The 

agreement will govern the interactions between boards, school, 

and students to best serve the needs of the Kinistin students to 

work toward their success. 

 

[10:15] 

 

In the Tisdale Recorder, quote: 

 

Kinistin Chief Felix Thomas said, “It has only been in the 

last generation that we have been expected to go to higher 

education and that expectation is not there with our 

children yet, they don’t for the most part expect to go to 

university. We are only one generation removed from 

having a population as a whole who were quitting school 

when they were in grade 10 and working in either a farm 

or rural-based economy.” 

 

For the North East School Division this partnership will form 

the template for the future, working towards the success of 

Aboriginal students — a goal shared by this government. Mr. 

Speaker, let us congratulate the North East School Division and 

Kinistin Saulteaux First Nation on their new partnership 

agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

St. Walburg Wins International Award 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate the leadership and the people of St. Walburg, a 

community just north and west of The Battlefords. You see, Mr. 

Speaker, this year St. Walburg has brought back to their 

community, and to all of Saskatchewan, two major awards at 

the world liveable communities annual event, hosted this year 

in London, England. 

 

St. Walburg won the gold medal in the competition for all 

communities and the silver medal in the competition for 

communities with populations under 20,000. This means, Mr. 

Speaker, St. Walburg can boast of being the world’s most 

liveable, sustainable community. 

 

What an accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. St. Walburg town 

councillor, Tony Leeson, and Mayor Gordon Lee Hall attended 

the awards conference in England and say they have been 

working to implement sustainability and environmentally sound 

practices for years, have involved volunteer groups from 

surrounding municipalities, and are proud of their 

accomplishments. 

 

I call on members of this Assembly to acknowledge and 

congratulate the people of St. Walburg for their significant 

achievement, an achievement that brings this community of 

about 800 wonderful people to the attention of the world and by 

extension makes us all proud to share our great province with 

them 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

60th Anniversary of the SaskTel Pioneers 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity to congratulate SaskTel and its employees 

on the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the SaskTel Pioneers. 

The SaskTel Pioneers volunteer organization consists of 4,350 

current and former SaskTel employees who share a common 

goal of helping to improve the quality of life in Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, since 1947 the SaskTel Pioneers have 

volunteered more than 2 million hours of their time to make life 

better for their friends and neighbours in our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the volunteers are involved in a wide range of 

activities throughout Saskatchewan. In 2007 here is just a 

sampling of the worthwhile causes that they have supported. 

The Saskatoon Pioneers will donate $50,000 to the St. Paul’s 

urology centre. The Yorkton Pioneers recently won the 

Communities in Bloom Award for revitalizing green space in 

the commercial area. The Weyburn Pioneers are continuing 

their long-time support of Weyburn and area United Way 

Communithon. And SaskTel Pioneer life members are 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

celebrating the 25 year of participation in the infant hearing 

assessment program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. The SaskTel Pioneers volunteer 

their time, talent, and skills for more than 100 ongoing 

community projects every year. I would like to commend them, 

and I ask you to join me in doing so. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Report Card for Saskatchewan Party 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. Today is the last 

day of the session, and that means report card day for the Sask 

Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we will start with the subject of 

math. The new Finance minister, just hours after being 

appointed to his new position, raised the alarm bells about the 

drastic state of our provincial finances. In the middle of this 

economic boom, he was in trouble. He couldn’t make the 

numbers work. But, Mr. Speaker, when the quarterly financial 

statements were released, between the General Revenue Fund 

and the Crown corporations there were nearly $2 billion in 

surplus. Mr. Speaker, a $2 billion miss — that’s an F. 

 

Next to language arts, Mr. Speaker. We all read the Sask Party 

ads during the election from the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton claiming a vote for Darryl Hickie is a vote to open the 

mill and put people back to work. Just days later the Minister of 

Energy and Resources tore up the memorandum between 

Domtar and the province, making sure the mill remained closed. 

Mr. Speaker, an F in language arts for not knowing the 

difference between the words, open and closed. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, on the subject of drama. We all heard 

or read the member from Indian Head-Milestone very clearly 

seven days before the election telling union leaders essential 

service legislation wasn’t needed. This was even reinforced by 

the leader of the opposition. Days after the election we heard 

the new Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour telling us he is moving forward with essential service 

legislation and that they have been working on the issue for 

more than a year. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster. 

 

Contemplating New Opportunities 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to rise here this 

morning to congratulate the member from Cumberland. It has 

recently been confirmed in a national newspaper that the 

opportunity to represent the people of northern Saskatchewan in 

the upcoming federal by-election is under consideration. As a 

new MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], I understand 

the hectic schedule of this job and give credit to anyone who is 

willing to take on both roles as both MLA and MP [Member of 

Parliament] at the same time. It is because I am certain that no 

member would, just weeks after a general provincial election, 

resign just because their party did not win — or would they? 

 

It is also a tribute to that member how popular and how 

politically ambiguous they are that not just one but two political 

parties are courting her. It is a further tribute that she would be 

willing to attach her rising star to either of these failing parties. 

If this were the case, to turn your back on so many supporters, 

volunteers, and constituents, it must be difficult — not to 

mention the friction this must cause in one’s caucus. Or is it 

more of a fight-for-the-door situation over there? 

 

I extend to all those members opposite who are rumoured to be 

contemplating new opportunities in the new future, the best of 

luck. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Support for Agriculture 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 

we’re joined in the gallery by gentlemen that are seeking some 

help from the provincial government. As members will know, 

the poultry industry in our province has hit some tough times, 

and we have three farms that have had birds that have 

contracted avian influenza. James Glen, who is in our gallery 

today, has seen 50,000 of his birds destroyed. And the industry, 

as we know, has come forward with $100,000 towards the 

$225,000 cost of cleanup. But, Mr. Speaker, these folks need 

further assistance. 

 

I guess my question is to the Minister of Agriculture. I would 

ask him, what kind of help will the Sask Party government give 

these gentlemen and the industry as a whole? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as the member for Saskatoon Nutana has stated — and 

I’m sure is aware — that this is a federally reportable disease, 

and the CFIA [Canadian Food Inspection Agency] compensates 

producers for destroying the animals and for their disposal. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the Sask poultry industry is 

providing, as she said, up to $100,000 to cover the cleaning and 

disinfecting costs of these barns. What she didn’t mention, Mr. 

Speaker, was that the organization of the Sask poultry industry 

has told us they feel that that should be adequate for the cleanup 

or, if it’s not, it should be not very much more that. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would ask the member opposite what 

she feels we should be doing in this case. Should we be putting 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars in to fund this when it’s 

actually a federal responsibility and being looked after by the 

CFIA? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a book here full of 

everything that member had to say about agriculture in this 

province prior to the last election campaign. Mr. Speaker, I 

have listened to the members opposite time and time again call 

on the province for assistance for farmers in their time of crisis, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have people in the gallery today that advise us it is going to 

cost $225,000 to clean up their three farms as a result of avian 

influenza. They have seen 50,000 of their birds already 

destroyed. Mr. Speaker, each day $100,000 of export revenues 

are lost by the poultry industry because the borders have closed. 

 

I ask the member opposite: what help can they get from this 

provincial government that claims to represent farming people 

in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a folder 

here listing everything the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government, when they were in power, did for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — And, madam minister, there’s 

nothing, there’s absolutely nothing. The downloading from that 

NDP government on rural Saskatchewan and farmers and 

ranchers in this province should be an embarrassment for that 

member to get up and ask what we’re doing in the first month 

of our being in power. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member that when this 

avian influenza broke out in British Columbia, what did the 

British Columbia provincial government do? They did not have 

to put $1 towards it because, number one, their opinion was it 

was a federal responsibility and, between the CFIA and the 

poultry industry in BC [British Columbia], they covered the 

cleanup and they’re dealing with the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to that member, after your record for 16 years 

you should probably look at your past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon, I would ask the members to allow members from 

both sides to actually be heard when they place the question and 

respond. Thank you. The member from Saskatoon. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite promised 

the citizens of this province that they would do better. The 

livestock industry is waiting. The hog industry is waiting. And 

now we have four people in our gallery waiting to hear what 

this government that promised rural people they would do 

better, what are they going to do to help these producers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will remind that 

member also that in the last 16 years they had no good 

relationship with whatever federal government was in power, 

whether it was Liberal, Conservative, whatever it was. And we 

see in our programs the families and ranchers who are paying 

the price for that. 

 

Every time a problem come up, they pointed at either the 

federal Liberals, the federal Conservatives, Grant Devine from 

20 years ago. Everything was somebody else’s problem. And 

now she gets on her feet and wants you to fix all these problems 

immediately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a big enough job dealing with the 

repairing of programs in this province to deal with farmers right 

now, rather than interfering with something that’s actually a 

federal responsibility. We have a big job to clean up the mess 

from the last 16 years, let alone get into an area that’s not our 

responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Housing Issues 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

booming economy is certainly great news for many people in 

the province, but not for ranchers and not for families in search 

of affordable housing. Saskatchewan’s rental vacancy rate is the 

lowest ever, and rents continue to rise. 

 

Back in June the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] minister seemed to be aware of the problems 

when he said, and I quote: 

 

You probably see some ideas come from us and from 

government prior to an election or just at the early part of 

the election. 

 

But now that they’re in government, Mr. Speaker, what is the 

Sask Party saying? Not very much, Mr. Speaker. Not a word in 

their platform and not a word in the Throne Speech. Even the 

Social Services minister admits, quote: 

 

Policy is very broad and we did not have a specific 

program to address housing within our policy. Was it a 

void? Perhaps. 

 

To the minister: why did the Saskatchewan Party say one thing 

before and during the election and then change its tune once it’s 

in government? 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you for that question. The 

quality of life is definitely a priority for a Saskatchewan Party 

government. And for the immediate, I have told the media that 

we will continue with the home ownership programs and the 

rental programs that were put in place just prior to the election 

by the former government. So I’m not sure if that member is 

suggesting that the programs that they put in place, not all that 

long ago, weren’t good enough. Obviously he doesn’t think 

their ideas were very good. 

 

Going forward, I’m happy to say that the Sask Housing 

Corporation is well positioned to do more, but we’re going to 

do so in consultation with the municipal level of government 

and the communities. We’re going to monitor the markets, and 

we will come up with something within the new year to address 

the different housing issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this party and this government 

put their money where their mouth was when it came to 

housing, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what they’re living off right 

now, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out in fact the current 

member from Saskatoon Northwest urged immediate action, 

Mr. Speaker. And I quote: “You can’t just wait. You’re not the 

one living on the streets.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder than words. In fact the 

Saskatchewan Party said that in their very own Throne Speech. 

But what are their actions on the housing front? Nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. A big, fat zero, Mr. Speaker. Even the minister 

responsible says, quote, “Was it a void, perhaps?” There’s no 

perhaps about it, Mr. Speaker. Again families are having a 

tough time finding affordable housing all throughout the 

province. Rents are going up. Some people are facing evictions, 

Mr. Speaker. To the minister: if action speaks louder than 

words, when are we going to see action from this government 

on the issue of housing, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand the 

member opposite. He just finished saying that his government, 

when he was in government, put their money where their mouth 

was. I have already said in this Assembly that we are going to 

continue the programs that were put in place by that member 

when he was in government. So if he thought they were 

adequate then, what is he complaining about now? 

 

I do think that we are in a position to do more, but we’re going 

to do so in consultation. That was something else that the 

members opposite asked for. Throughout the entire session 

they’ve been saying, well we need to consult. I’m telling them 

that we’re going to consult. We do feel this is a priority and a 

concern. However we have addressed some issues already with 

the bus pass issue in Saskatoon. We did that immediately. It 

was one that his administration totally ignored prior to an 

election. So things are being done in the Social Services file. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, when Weyerhaeuser announced 

the mill closure in Prince Albert, the Saskatchewan Party 

immediately called for government action. Later the member 

from Swift Current said, and I quote, “Anything less than a 

timetable for reopening the Prince Albert mill will amount . . . 

[in] failure on the part of the NDP.” During the election, the 

member from Prince Albert Carleton ran an ad that said quote, 

“a vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people 

working.” 

 

But their actions speak louder than words. Upon assuming 

office, they immediately tore up the signed agreement between 

the government and Domtar with absolutely no plan of their 

own to reopen the mill. To the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing: why did he say one thing during the 

election and do another thing after? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have said consistently that we are prepared to sit down and talk 

with Domtar at any time. The Premier has spoken to officials 

from the company. I have spoken to officials from the 

company. We’ve asked them to bring forward proposals with 

respect to the mill. We’ve asked them to bring forward 

proposals with respect to any kind of a cogeneration project that 

they might be interested in. We’re prepared to sit down with 

them at any time. We have told them that on a number of 

occasions, and that’s exactly what we’re prepared to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, unions and the workers they 

represent are shocked by this government’s actions and total 

disregard for the rights of working people. Before getting 

elected, the members opposite stated on numerous occasions 

that essential services legislation was not needed, not desirable, 

not on the table. To quote from the Minister of Health, one 

month before the election: “I don’t think we need to get to 

legislation, I don’t think we need to go there at all,” Mr. 

Speaker. In their platform, not a single mention of essential 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

services legislation. 

 

Well yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we got the real story. Yesterday 

we saw their approach to balancing labour laws. And it is clear 

workers will lose, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour president, Larry Hubich, called the Bill “the worst 

legislation . . . in the country.” To the Minister of Labour: why 

did you do one thing before the election and, immediately after, 

do the opposite? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, last week they couldn’t wait 

to get their hands on the document. Yesterday they received it, 

and they’re struggling to comprehend what the document 

means. Mr. Speaker, this documentation that has been tabled is 

consistent with legislation across Canada. It’s far from 

bottom-of-the-barrel. It’s middle-of-the-road, and it is helping 

to rebalance Saskatchewan’s labour environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Blackstrap Ski Hill 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here are a couple of 

questions posed to this new Premier and his new government on 

Tuesday’s StarPhoenix. Quote, “. . . did you not campaign on 

bringing a family-oriented focus to government, including a 

$150 tax credit for sports and music activities?” And quote: 

 

How then . . . are you going to justify your decision to 

close the Blackstrap ski hill for the winter? The place is a 

great training ground for kids trying to learn a new sport, 

and even better, it’s easily accessible via bus. 

 

Good questions, Mr. Speaker, to which the answer is simple. 

For the Sask Party, ideology trumps interests and needs of 

Saskatchewan people every time. Mr. Speaker, during the 

campaign the Sask Party was all about healthy families and 

supporting physical fitness and active youth. And yet one of the 

very first things they do is to ensure that easily accessible 

winter sport facility like Blackstrap remains closed. 

 

To the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport: why did 

the Sask Party tout physical fitness and activity throughout the 

campaign and then close a major facility that would promote 

the very thing immediately after? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the subsidization required or 

that was paid out by the members opposite was $225 per day 

per skier, capital and operating costs in 2007. Mr. Speaker, 

what a waste of taxpayers’ dollars. What this government is 

looking for, what we are looking for is a way to have the 

Blackstrap Provincial Park open 12 months a year, both winter 

and summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were complaints and concerns expressed 

from other ski hills in the province about unfair subsidization 

— again members opposite again picking winners and losers 

and choosing who was going to get subsidization. Mr. Speaker, 

what this government is about and what we are doing, it makes 

financial sense to the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call the members to order before I 

acknowledge the next member just to remind members that 

normal tradition has been roughly about a minute for questions 

to be placed and about a minute for the response. And I 

recognize there’s been give and take, but we’ve had allowances 

on both sides. So I just want to remind members of the normal 

procedure. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

School Closures 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a great deal 

from the members opposite when school boards were making 

difficult decisions regarding school closures. And now that they 

are elected, the silence is stunning. When in opposition they 

said the government needed to intervene. They said schools 

should not be closing when there was so much promise within 

Saskatchewan. They told families and communities that they 

had a plan to stop school closures. 

 

Now that they have come to power, the plan seems to have 

disappeared and their interest diminished. In fact the Deputy 

Premier now says and I quote, “School closures will continue to 

happen.” Mr. Speaker, it is clear they will not be living up to 

their promise to make changes to The Education Act or to 

provide funding that they promised before the election. My 

question to the Minister of Education: why did you say one 

thing on school closures before you were elected but do nothing 

after getting elected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have been very clear on 

this matter throughout many, many years in fact, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a clear indication in this province. As we look at the 

data that has been presented . . . is that in the 10, the last 10 

years of the NDP government, the number of students in the 

province of Saskatchewan has declined by 32,000 students, Mr. 

Speaker — 32,000 students have not appeared on the 

enrolments. What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? That will mean 

of course that there is going to be school closures. School 

closures where there is a decline in enrolment, where there is 

not a distance factor, those will continue to close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I did say is that we will consult with the 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

School Boards Association. We will consult with school 

divisions. And we want to put in place a plan that will indicate 

to all people that there is a structure that must be followed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Graduate Tax Rebate 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this government says 

they want to welcome young people from across Canada to 

Saskatchewan, and they say they want to welcome home young 

people from Saskatchewan, but their actions don’t match their 

words. Their grad tax rebate scheme is poorly thought out and 

excludes anyone from Saskatchewan who studies outside of the 

province and anyone from outside of the province who wants to 

move here to start a career. To the Minister of Advanced 

Education: why don’t your actions match your words? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, while I know the members 

opposite are used to declining numbers, since the change of 

government we see the population growing in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, our platform will focus on the graduate tax rebate 

program. We’re going to be moving forward on that rebate 

program, Mr. Speaker. And as we’ve said, programs that are not 

offered in Saskatchewan will be under review so that people 

will get credit for those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Election Promises 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in one month less a day of Sask 

Party government, we’ve learned one thing. They will say one 

thing before an election to get themselves elected and then do 

something completely opposite after the election, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve learned that, and the people of Saskatchewan have seen 

it. 

 

Let’s just use some illustrations, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

before the election they were all out to help Saskatchewan 

people. What’s the first thing they did after election? Well the 

first thing they did was to raise the salaries of their political 

staff. That was number one. 

 

Then they said before the election we’re going to have a 

professional public service. What’s the next thing they did? 

Well the next thing they did was to fire some long-term, 

valuable public servants. That’s what they did. You know, then 

they tried to move off of exposure by saying, well you know, 

the province’s finances are stark. They tried to make people 

believe the provinces finances were stark when they know 

they’re sitting on $2 billion of cash in the bank. 

Before the election, Mr. Speaker, you know what they said to 

the people of P.A. [Prince Albert]? A vote for the Sask Party, a 

vote for that member was a vote to reopen the mill, and they 

ripped up the deal that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is as follows: what 

other promises did the Sask Party make? What other positions 

did they take in the campaign and in opposition that they now 

are going to break on the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me just 

say this, that we are very grateful in the Saskatchewan Party for 

the opportunity, for the privilege to provide a government for 

the province of Saskatchewan. We are going to work very, very 

hard to earn the support that we received on November 7, and 

we’ve already begun to do that, Mr. Speaker. If you don’t mind, 

I wouldn’t mind reviewing — in one short month — the 

promises that have already been kept by the brand new 

government. 

 

We committed to no more PST [provincial sales tax] on used 

vehicles. We kept that promise, Mr. Speaker, already. We 

promised a smaller cabinet than the NDP. We kept that 

promise. We promised to, Mr. Speaker, we promised to get the 

taxpayers out from under a $100 million pulp fiction deal in 

PA. Mr. Speaker, we’ve kept that promise. Mr. Speaker, we 

promised a rebalancing of the labour legislative environment in 

this province with very specific commitments. We have also 

kept that promise, Mr. Speaker. We promised that we would 

move to create a new economic development authority, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. We introduced that Bill this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, well there’s more. I know there will 

be more questions. The list of promises we have, that we’ve 

already kept in a month, is even greater than that. And we’re 

going to continue to work hard to keep more promises. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as Paul Harvey says, here’s 

the rest of the story. Mr. Speaker, this government, before the 

election, promised to reopen the P.A. pulp mill. Then they tore 

up the Domtar deal. They said to the people of Saskatchewan, 

before the election, there is absolutely no necessity for essential 

services legislation, Mr. Speaker. Right after the election, we 

have essential services legislation. They said, before the 

election, well we’re going to get rid of the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. Bill no. 1, they put in place the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

on a permanent basis, even though the Premier says it’s going 

to disappear, Mr. Speaker. 

 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

Now there’s one thing they didn’t . . . I can’t accuse them of 

saying before the election and doing after the election, and 

that’s this marvellous idea they came up with to get rid of the 

provincial logo of the wheat sheaf. And I’d like to know from 

the Premier today, Mr. Speaker, who’s idea was that? Who’s 

idea was that? Was it the member of Humboldt that came up 

with that idea? Was it the member of Advanced Education? 

Was it the Premier’s idea? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pattern is clear. You say one thing before an 

election; you do something totally different after the election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may continue, in the 

month . . . in addition to that list of promises that we have 

already kept that I outlined in my first answer, let me add to that 

that we also promised in the election campaign to crack down 

on repeat drunk drivers in this province. We’ve already kept 

that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We promised to begin to deal with the provincial debt in this 

province, to make a payment of over $200 million, in the 

election campaign. That already happened in November — 

$263 million. We have promised, Mr. Speaker, we have 

promised a lower cost of the political arm of government, lower 

political costs for this government than we had under that tired, 

old NDP former government, Mr. Speaker, and we will keep 

that promise. We’re already keeping that promise as well. 

 

So I can understand then why the opposition is so negative, why 

they’re so gloomy today because, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re keeping our promises. The province is on a roll, and 

everyone’s looking forward to a great 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me go further with the 

list. Before the election this government, this new government 

promised that they would stand for the rights of Saskatchewan 

people in dealing with Ottawa for a fair deal on their resources. 

After the election — oh no — we’re willing to sign any kind of 

a deal with their political masters in Ottawa. 

 

Before the election, Mr. Speaker — and we’ve seen evidence of 

it here today — this party, this Saskatchewan Party said they 

would stand up for Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan 

farmers. Today they have abandoned Saskatchewan producers 

and farmers by saying it’s not our fault. There’s nothing we can 

do. It’s all Ottawa’s fault. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. They promised to open the 

mill. They’ve ripped up the deal that opened the mill. They 

promised to fight fair for equalization. They’ve walked away. 

They promised to stand up for schools and small rural schools 

in Saskatchewan. They’ve walked away from that. Mr. Speaker, 

they said they would get rid of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

They walked away from that. 

 

The one promise they’ve kept, Mr. Speaker, is a promise that 

the leader of the opposition, now Premier, once said on 

province-wide radio, that he would declare war on working 

people. Well I’m sorry; that’s about the only promise I can see 

that they’ve kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there will be an 

interesting choice to be made in this Assembly on the issue of 

essential services. Those members opposite are going to have to 

make a choice between the public safety of Saskatchewan 

people — people who need health care, people who need safe 

highways — or a choice between their political allegiances to 

union leaderships, union leaders who were outside at the 

rotunda yesterday swearing and sputtering rather than entering 

into a meaningful debate. They will have to make that choice. 

 

We will choose, Mr. Speaker, public safety and health care 

every single time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But, Mr. Speaker, we ought to end this 

session, this session, on some good news. And there’s a lot of 

good news to go around. And the Leader of the Opposition will 

be happy to know we’re now over a million people, Mr. 

Speaker. Wholesale trade numbers are up. And since the 

election, in December oil and gas sales are up, record-breaking 

sales. The Potash Corporation has announced a billion eight 

investment in the province after the last election. The Riders 

have won the Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker. You know, with all this 

good news I’m tempted, I’m tempted maybe to look at calling 

an election so there could be fewer negative people in the 

province. But we can’t because we’ll have set election . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Premier’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I invite the members to come to order. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I want to respond to 

a point of order. I call the member from Canora to order, please. 

 

Yesterday the member from Regina Dewdney raised a point of 

order regarding statements made by the Minister of the 

Environment during the debate on the address in reply. I 

reviewed Hansard and now wish to rule on the matter. The 

statement at issue begins by identifying the member for Nutana 

and then continues on to state: 

 

. . . I was cheered yesterday to hear that an NDP member 

finally told the truth about election advertising money. 

 

It was the contention of the member for Regina Dewdney that 

the effect of this statement was to indirectly call members of the 

New Democratic Party liars. While the member for Regina 

Dewdney characterized his point of order as an attempt to do 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

indirectly what could be done directly, I find that the issue is 

more properly framed as calling into question the character of 

another member. 

 

As noted in a ruling by my predecessor on March 26, 2001: 

 

. . . the proceedings of this Assembly are based on a 

long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of all 

members. The integrity or motives of members, whether 

individually or collectively, should not be questioned 

indirectly in debate. 

 

I’ve also sought guidance from the Assembly’s revised rule 

book which directs in rule 50(f) that no member may make a 

personal charge or accusation against any other member. 

 

Finally I refer members to Marleau and Montpetit, which 

provides on page 522 that: 

 

Remarks directed specifically at another Member which 

question that Member’s integrity, honesty or character are 

not in order. 

 

I find that the statement made by the minister could be 

interpreted as questioning the honesty of an identifiable 

member of this Assembly. Whether intentional or not, language 

of that nature can be inflammatory. I caution all members to use 

discretion in phrasing their comments in the future. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to table 

responses to question 191 to 218. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers are tabled. 

 

I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to make a 

statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in light of your ruling 

today, I withdraw my comments from yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 

Ottenbreit.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

first of all I want to begin by congratulating all members of the 

Assembly, both new members and members that are returning, 

for their successful election campaigns that we experienced on 

November 7. I also want to recognize that there are some new, 

bright young people that have been elected to the Assembly on 

both sides of the legislature. And I’ve had an opportunity to 

watch them, and I think that the province in the future will be in 

good hands as these young people become more seasoned 

legislators in the province. 

 

I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as 

Speaker to our Assembly. I believe you and I entered this 

Assembly together in 1986 as young members of the Assembly, 

and we still are at heart young members of the Assembly. But 

we’ve had the opportunity to watch each other as interest from 

both sides of the House. I know, Mr. Speaker, that you’re going 

to serve this Assembly with integrity and honesty. And we’ve 

already noticed that you’re prepared to correct yourself if you 

are in error, and you’re prepared to make tough rulings. And for 

that we thank you because we believe that your presence in this 

Assembly will contribute to our ongoing democratic process. 

 

Before I get into the text of my remarks I want to begin by 

thanking the constituents of Saskatoon Nutana for once again 

re-electing me on November 7 and showing their faith in me. I 

want to in particular thank the thousands of people who 

participated in the democratic process on November 7. 

 

And I note, Mr. Speaker, that in fact we had many, many people 

involved in the various political parties in our constituency 

assisting their candidates in that process. I want to thank Don 

Johannesson, who was the Sask Party representative, as well as 

Grant Karwacki, the Liberal representative, and Gwen 

Katzman, who was the representative for the Progressive 

Conservative Party, and as well as the Green Party candidate, 

the leader of the Green Party, and the Marijuana Party for their 

contribution to democracy in our province. 

 

I want to acknowledge the campaign team that assisted me 

during the election period. In particular I want to thank my 

campaign manager, Trevor Mackenzie-Smith, who is a young 

person that knows how to do political organizing, and he did a 

tremendous job, as well as Mairen, Judy, Fahmi, Skip, Rahana, 

and Wade, along with the 305 volunteers who helped us win 

our constituency, Mr. Speaker. These folks worked hard. They 

went door to door, they phoned, they put up signs, they raised 

money, and they worked hard. 

 

And I want to thank my dad. My dad is now living in 

Saskatoon. My mother, in the past, has been the person who has 

looked after the food supplies for all of the volunteers in our 

constituency, and this time it was my dad that stepped up to the 

plate. And my dad at the age of 83 has become a tremendous 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

cook. And people know he knows how to make a good chili, a 

good stew, a good roast beef, a good roast pork, and he also 

knows how to do scalloped potatoes. And all of these new 

things he’s learned in the last year and a half as living a life of a 

bachelor, Mr. Speaker. So I want to thank my dad in particular 

for really assisting our campaign. 

 

My dad also assisted some young people that were running in 

the province too, particularly a young woman that was running 

in Eatonia, or running in Kindersley. She’s a marvellous young 

woman and he made the decision to go and help her because he 

thinks it’s important that young people have the opportunity to 

come into this Assembly and be representatives of their 

constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what can a person say about a Throne 

Speech? And what can a person say about the actions of the 

Sask Party since being sworn in as government? You know, Mr. 

Speaker, I listened to the Sask Party members over there during 

their Throne Speech indicate to the citizens of our province that 

they in fact represent rural people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would 

say that — and I don’t like to say this, but it’s true — they were 

boastful about how they represent rural people in this province, 

and how they have come to represent 60 per cent of rural 

people, 75 per cent of rural people. And it’s true, Mr. Speaker, 

they do. They represent rural people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, what we will want to observe 

with great interest is how are they going to go about 

representing rural people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a group of poultry producers in our 

Assembly this morning. They came here, Mr. Speaker, because 

they have faith in the members opposite that they’re going to be 

able to deliver some assistance for those poultry producers 

because they’re in a bit of a pinch right now. And the pinch, 

Mr. Speaker, is this — they did the right thing. They had some 

sick birds and they contacted their veterinarian. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the veterinarian contacted the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency because the vet wasn’t quite sure what was 

going on in those barns. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of doing the right thing, the CFIA 

destroyed, destroyed 50,000 birds. And they’re now in the 

process, Mr. Speaker, of trying to find the money to clean up 

those three chicken barns. And, Mr. Speaker, the industry has 

come forward and agreed to provide $100,000 in support. But 

these gentlemen don’t have the $125,000. They have some 

money, but they don’t have the $125,000 to get those barns 

cleaned up. And, Mr. Speaker, they came to this Assembly this 

morning seeking answers from the members opposite because 

they believe that that party there, with all of the words that they 

said prior to the last provincial election campaign, would step 

up to the plate on behalf of rural people and farmers and 

producers in particular. 

 

And what did we witness this morning, Mr. Speaker? We 

witnessed a dodge. We witnessed the Minister of Agriculture 

who, time and time again, when he sat in a chair over there in 

opposition, called upon the Government of Saskatchewan to do 

something for agriculture producers in the province. And I 

would just remind the member of this, that BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] was also a federal responsibility. 

BSE was also a federal responsibility. And he called for the 

Government of Saskatchewan to do something, to step up to the 

plate. And we did. We did. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have some producers in the province . . . 

And let’s remember this. As a result of avian influenza in 

Canada, that border is now shut. It is shut for the entire feather 

industry in this country. They can’t ship an egg across the 

border. Ostriches can’t go across the border. Meat can’t go 

across the border. Nothing can go across the border because of 

the outbreak on that farm north of Regina. And what do the 

members opposite say to people who believe in them? They 

say, call the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well you know the members opposite are kind of cozy with the 

federal government. They know all about their cousins in 

Ottawa. And what has he said? Has he said, I’ll go to Ottawa on 

your behalf? Has he said, I’ll write a letter on your behalf? Has 

he said, I’ll pick up the phone on your behalf? He has said 

absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of those poultry 

producers that were in our Assembly this morning. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister . . . The minister has said, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s a federal responsibility. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . And then he 

parrots back what apparently our government said for 16 years. 

Well I have 16 years . . . or not 16 years — when did you get 

elected, 1995 — I have 12 years of the Minister of 

Agriculture’s words in this binder. And, Mr. Speaker, his 

actions, his actions do not meet the words that he spoke in this 

Assembly and outside of the Assembly for the last 12 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no sooner, no sooner had this government been 

sworn in . . . I think they were still over at Government House. 

After they were sworn in as government, the Premier, no sooner 

— I think it was that night — instead of talking, the Premier 

talking about his star candidates that were now cabinet 

ministers, what did he talk about? He told the entire people of 

the province that the place was broke; that the finances, I think, 

were stark. That what’s the Premier said. And then a few days 

later he said well you know, maybe it wasn’t that bad. 

 

And then the Minister of Finance comes out and he says, well 

you know, it’s manageable. And then what did we learn when 

the mid-year financial report was tabled with the citizens of our 

province? We learned that we had $1.9 billion in cash — 

billion, b-i-l-l-i-o-n — $1.9 billion in cash. 

 

Now I ask the citizens of our province, I ask them this: what 

government, what incoming government . . . And we can go 

back a very long time. We can go back to Tommy Douglas. We 

can go back to Thatcher. We can go back to Blakeney. We can 

go back to Devine. We can go back to the Romanow 

government. We can go way back. I almost feel like the 

Friendly Giant. We can go way back, Mr. Speaker, and not one 

government in the history of the province has ever come into 

this Assembly as a government and had $1.98 billion in cash, 

Mr. Speaker. Not one government has ever come into the 

Assembly, walked up the steps of this Assembly and had an 

economy that was running on all cylinders. Not one government 

has ever come into the Assembly with the highest population 

growth in Canada prior to them getting here, Mr. Speaker. And 

not one government has ever walked up the steps of the 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

legislature that had an economy like we have. 

 

And what do the members opposite try and do? They try and 

spin us, spin us, that we’re in stark, dire straits. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that that’s nonsense and the people of the 

province know it’s nonsense because on coffee row, people 

were exasperated by these people trying to spin them a line that 

the place was broke. Well, Mr. Speaker, so then shortly after, 

they acknowledged that well maybe things aren’t that bad. It’s 

not stark. It’s manageable. 

 

Then they provide a couple of press releases. The first press 

release announces that they are dismissing eight deputy 

ministers and then shortly thereafter they dismissed a associate 

deputy minister. 

 

Now five of these nine people have 132 years of public service. 

Barb MacLean, the deputy minister of Culture, Youth and 

Recreation had 28 years. That was a pretty long time to be a 

public servant. And I think Barb MacLean was a young person 

when she entered the public service in the province of 

Saskatchewan. John Wright, 31 years of public service. He too 

was a young person when he entered the public service of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Bonnie Durnford, 21 years. She too was a young person that 

entered the public service of Saskatchewan. Lily Stonehouse, if 

you count her regional college service, her SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

service, and her government service, 30 years of service to the 

citizens of our province. And then Paul Osborne, 22 years. One 

hundred and thirty-two years of dedicated public service to the 

people of the province. 

 

These people are career civil servants. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the 

honour as a cabinet minister in working with several of them. 

And I can tell the people of the province that not once, not once 

did these dedicated public servants ever indicate to me that they 

supported a particular party whether it was Liberal, 

Conservative, NDP, or something else. Mr. Speaker, they acted 

as dedicated professionals who were there to serve the people of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they were there to do 

and, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they did. 

 

What did the people opposite decide? That they were going to 

take 132 years of dedicated public service and send it down the 

road, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has 

confirmed that this little exercise will probably cost the 

taxpayers of this province $4 million for nine civil servants. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have indicated in this Assembly during 

this session that they are going to fire more people. There are 

more people coming. And when we asked them, when we asked 

them, are there career public servants, people who have 

dedicated their working life to the citizens of this province — 

are they going to be gone? — not once would they answer the 

question. Not once would they tell us whether or not dedicated 

career public servants, who came into the public service as 

young people, spent their working life on behalf of the public, 

not once would they say that there are people like that that they 

are not going to fire, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well along with that little press release where they announced 

the people were going to go someplace else out of government 

— these people with 132 years of public service — they 

announced their new chiefs of staff. And what did they tell us? 

They told us that they were going to double their salaries. So, 

Mr. Speaker, $10,000 a month. 

 

But I did notice, when we read those questions yesterday that 

we asked, that the women cabinet ministers, their chiefs of staff 

earn less than 10,000, but there are several male cabinet 

ministers where their chiefs of staff earn 10,000 or more, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess I want to know what’s wrong with the 

Minister of Tourism that her chief of staff doesn’t get $10,000. 

What’s wrong with First Nations and Métis affairs? Cathe 

Offet, who is a long-term ministerial assistant — she served in 

the former Devine administration — she doesn’t get $10,000. 

Or the Minister of Social Services. Why are the women cabinet 

ministers, Mr. Speaker, why aren’t their chiefs of staff quite at 

the top with some of the male cabinet ministers over there, Mr. 

Speaker? I want to know why don’t they make as much money. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I call the members to 

order. I call the members to order. I invite the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana to proceed. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member over there from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I call the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone to order please. The member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now the 

member over there is having quite a little hissy fit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d just invite the member to proceed with her 

comments, and not directly involve the other members, and 

speak through the Chair. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well through you, Mr. Speaker, I note that 

the Minister of Health is having quite a little hissy fit, and he’s 

saying that I am bringing civil servants’ names into the House 

who can’t defend themselves. Well, Mr. Speaker, the five civil 

servants that I’ve talked about are gone. They no longer work in 

the public service. They are the five who were fired. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I can talk about chiefs of staff. And 

you know why? Because they are political staff. And what I 

said was why would Cathe, who I know, Mr. Speaker, why 

doesn’t she make $10,000 a month? I’ve noticed that the male 

cabinet ministers have several . . . or have chiefs of staff that 

make this kind of money. I’m just asking the question: why is it 

that she’s not making that kind of money when she is a 

long-term chief of staff? She knows how to serve a minister, 

Mr. Speaker. But you know, I guess that’s something they’ll 

have to figure out for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also note that they want to rebrand 

government. I note that they are going to go to ministries away 

from departments. And when you look across the country, 

which provinces call departments ministries? Well I think 

Alberta does. I think Ontario does, and I think that came 

through in the Mike Harrison government. And I think BC 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

does, Mr. Speaker. So I guess that’s kind of a Tory thing to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at Wikipedia, I do note that 

there’s another ministry, there is another ministry that will be 

. . . There’s another ministry called, I think it was in Harry 

Potter, and they were make-believe ministries, Mr. Speaker. 

And I also, who was the other guy that had a ministry? I can’t 

quite . . . Oh, Monty Python. Oh yes, the ministry of silly walks, 

Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this ministry thing is 

kind of a Tory thing to do. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about Domtar. Let’s talk about 

Domtar. Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, what did 

they decide, what did they say before the election? They told us 

that we better have a timeline to get this mill up and running 

because we have an integrated forest industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we had to have a timeline. Get that mill up 

and going now, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, people worked 

hard. They worked really hard to find someone who was 

interested in restarting the mill, and Domtar stepped up to the 

plate. And we entered into an agreement with Domtar. And in 

fact the fellow from Prince Albert, who became a member of 

this Assembly, he promised that a vote for him was a vote to 

reopen the mill and get people working again. 

 

And what was the first thing that they did before they even 

spoke to Domtar? Did they phone Mr. Royer? Did they talk to 

anybody at Domtar? Did they talk to the mayor? Did they talk 

to the forest industry advisory committee? Did they talk to the 

workers? Did they talk to Darryl, even . . . I mean, pardon me, 

did they talk to the member from P.A. before the minister went 

out at 3 o’clock on a Friday afternoon? Note the time — 3 

o’clock on a Friday . . . 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member knows you’re not to 

make note of a member’s presence in the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Did they go and talk to anybody before the 

minister went out at 3 o’clock in the afternoon and said, that 

deal is ripped up? No, Mr. Speaker. So much for consultation. 

They didn’t even have the courtesy to contact the president of a 

large company that, you know, Mr. Speaker, people in the 

forestry industry in some parts of the world rely upon for jobs 

and contracts in small business. They didn’t even have the 

courtesy to phone him and have a discussion about this before 

they did it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, not only did they rip up the Domtar 

deal, they can’t tell the people of Saskatchewan what they’re 

doing to get the place up and running again. They don’t have a 

plan. They don’t have a timeline. They have nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, then I want to talk a little bit about essential 

services, essential services. Well it’s very interesting. I know 

that the Minister of Health prior to the election told, I think it’s 

about 35,000 health care workers in the province — who, by the 

way, their contracts are coming up, some of them — he told 

them, we don’t need essential services legislation. No, we don’t 

need it. Don’t worry, be happy. You can vote for us. We won’t 

put essential services into legislation; we can negotiate it. We 

don’t need legislation. And then what happens? Then what 

happens? These members come up the steps of the legislature 

into this Assembly and they decided to introduce essential 

services legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are 100,000 unionized workers in this 

province. There are over 60,000, as I understand it, public 

sector workers in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, they try to 

lead us to believe that this is balanced legislation, just kind of 

like Manitoba. But I note that Manitoba’s legislation doesn’t 

include the University of Manitoba or The University of 

Winnipeg. I note it doesn’t include municipalities. I note it 

doesn’t include police officers. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask 

this question. Did they tell the police officers in this province, 

the police unions, that they were going to introduce essential 

services legislation before the election? Did they tell the three 

members of their caucus who come out of the police profession 

in this province that they were going to introduce essential 

services for police officers? I don’t think so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member from Sutherland, 

was she told that they were going to take away the right of 

police to strike by essentially allowing employers, Mr. Speaker, 

to designate people that do not have the right to go on strike? 

Did they tell the Minister of Tourism that we’re introducing 

essential services, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. Did they tell 

the member from P.A. that they’re taking away the police 

officers’ right to strike? Because, Mr. Speaker, I can imagine 

that they will need to have many police officers designated as 

essential services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suspect not. I suspect they did not come 

clean with the police associations of this province and tell them 

that they were introducing essential services legislation into this 

Assembly. In fact I suspect they told them that they wouldn’t be 

covered by this legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, they are. The 

police are covered by this legislation, and I suspect they told 

them that they were not going to be covered. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that we will have many more things 

to say, many more things to say about their agenda in the days 

ahead, Mr. Speaker. We know this. We know this. They are 

going to, quote, “go to war on working people in this province.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know this, that they believe that they 

represent rural Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, we will see. 

We will see. We will see what they do to their friends in rural 

Saskatchewan. They promised them that they would stand up 

for the livestock industry, the poultry industry, the hog industry, 

school divisions to keep rural schools open. 

 

Well we’ll see. We’ll see whether or not at the end of this 

four-year term what kind of evidence we have to support their 

views that they’re going to stand up for rural citizens. Because I 

suspect at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that they will treat 

rural citizens no different than they treat working people in this 

province. And then we’ll really know who they stand for. And I 

suspect, Mr. Speaker, there are a few of their friends that they’ll 

work for. There’s a few of their friends that they’ll work for. 

But at the end of the day working people and farm families and 

rural families will be let down by the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Member may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce a guest seated in the 

west gallery. My daughter, Lindsay, has arrived from Calgary. I 

think she was up at about 4:30 this morning to catch a flight and 

has arrived here in Regina and will be travelling home with me, 

I believe this evening when we’re all finished, and she’ll be 

spending Christmas at home with family. And I’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming Lindsay back to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 

Ottenbreit.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

privilege to enter the debate with respect to the Throne Speech 

that was read here in this Assembly, well just under I guess, two 

weeks ago now. 

 

Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, let me take the opportunity to 

congratulate you on your election, acclamation to the Speaker’s 

Chair. I think what you’ve heard from members on both sides 

of the aisle in terms of congratulations is indicative of, well of 

the reputation that you have earned — after a very many years 

in this Assembly — for honesty and for integrity and for 

fairness. And we’ve already been witness to that here in the 

early days of this new Legislature. And I just want to 

congratulate you very personally on this and welcome your 

leadership here in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I also want to offer a congratulations to the new Deputy 

Speaker for the Assembly. I’ve seen him as well in that Chair 

looking, well a little more comfortable than you might want him 

to look, frankly, when he’s in that Chair, Mr. Speaker. And we 

also have appreciated his officiating over the proceedings and 

his presiding over the proceedings and look forward to the 

fairness that he will bring to the job as well. 

 

I have a number of other thank yous to make to those who are 

around me today. I am very grateful to each and every one of 

these new, well newly elected members — some newer than 

others; some a little older, Mr. Speaker; some a lot older, Mr. 

Speaker. But I want to say for the record how grateful I am to 

all of them for their support as a leader of the party and I also 

want to say in an extended way to their respective teams in their 

areas, to their families, to the party — to our Saskatchewan 

Party if I may — through the Assembly. 

 

A big thank you on behalf of Tami and I for all the very 

personal support and encouragement that we have received 

since the ides of March 2004 when I had the privilege and 

honour to become the Leader of the Opposition. And we saw 

that support in our family and our house to just an amazing 

degree in the immediate time before the campaign and during it. 

So I say to my colleagues here thank you very, very much for 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

want to single too many people out, but a new government has 

to be able to have a successful transition. And there’s a couple 

of thank yous in this regard. 

 

I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 

Riversdale. We met immediately after the election and plans 

were in place, including the government — the former 

government — making the first necessary severance moves in 

terms of the political staff of the government. They were also 

— with a few exceptions that had nothing to do with the hon. 

member — very co-operative just in terms of the physical move 

and the rearrangement that occurred. And I want to say for the 

record that I am grateful to the member for Riversdale and to 

the members opposite for their co-operation in those early days 

of transition. 

 

As I also would like to thank the civil service of this province, 

the professional civil service, who have also worked hard and 

were actually working hard — just in case, I assume, in a 

contingency sort of a way prior to the election — to be ready to 

provide advice to a brand new government. And I want to thank 

them all because we have appreciated that advice and we have 

leaned on that advice in many respects. So we thank them as 

well. 

 

And from our perspective on this side of the House, I think on 

behalf of all members here, I want to thank the member for 

Canora-Pelly, my friend the Deputy Premier, for his leadership 

on transition. He has just done an excellent job in what can be a 

very difficult task and answered questions publicly and 

privately and I thank him today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I have some thank yous to make to people 

in Swift Current if I may, Mr. Speaker. And I know the Deputy 

Leader of the Opposition, the member for Nutana, went quite 

long, so I hope I can perhaps have the indulgence of members 

including the huge numbers of members that have stayed on the 

opposite side to hear this speech. I hope I have their indulgence 

to maybe go a little bit longer this morning as we saw from the 

member for Nutana. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

I do want to say thank you to the people that helped with our 

campaign in Swift Current. I wasn’t there. In the two previous 

elections in 1999 and 2003 I had a goal, and we met the target. 

We met the goal of knocking on every door in Swift Current or 

almost every single door in Swift Current. I don’t think there’s 

any better substitute by the way, campaigning, than to be on the 

doorsteps and talking to people, and that was my priority in the 

first two elections I ran in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this time I was unable to do it because we had to 

knock on other doors in other great places, in other great places 

like Greystone and Regina Wascana and Regina Qu’Appelle 

and well, before the election, up in Carrot River Valley where 

not too long ago I made a poor decision to actually fly with the 

hon. member for Carrot River Valley in a plane that he was 

piloting. 

 

But we, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t get a chance to door knock in 

Swift Current at all, to campaign there at all. So you can 

imagine how heavily we relied on the team in Swift Current to 

get to every doorstep because we did get to every doorstep in 

Swift Current. We wanted to make sure that everyone in Swift 

Current received the Saskatchewan Party platform, “Securing 

the Future.” We wanted to make sure they saw what it is we 

were offering, the vision that we have for the province. And I 

think just north of 70 per cent of the vote is a good indication 

that the team did a great job in Swift Current and the platform 

that we’re now implementing was well received. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So thank you to Shanuna Fjaagesund and 

Crystal Martens and my parents, John and Alice Wall, and the 

campaign Chair, my very good friend Bryon Campbell, and 

Dwight, and many, many others in Swift Current too numerous 

to mention for all their work in Swift Current in the election 

campaign. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, let me just say again, as I enter the 

Throne Speech debate, that I wish to thank my wife Tami and 

our kids, Megan, Colter, and Faith. They are obviously a source 

of great and ongoing support, probably more than I deserve on 

certain days. And that has really been true since November 7, 

since the election campaign. And I just want to say for the 

record again thank you to Tami and Megan and Coulter and 

Faith for the stuff they have to put up with because their dad has 

this interest and now this new job. So thank you to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Estevan may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I want to 

introduce someone very special in my life. My husband Vic is 

in the west gallery and accompanied by my daughter-in-law 

Marnell. And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, Vic has been through 

many challenges this last while, and I just ask all members to 

welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just if I may as well welcome 

Vic to his Legislative Assembly, and Marnell. It’s a great 

pleasure to see him today. Certainly it always is a pleasure to 

see Vic. He and I often can share comments about what it’s like 

to put up with the member from Estevan. And we just welcome 

him here and it’s great to see Vic. 

 

[11:30] 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 

Ottenbreit.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re debating a Throne 

Speech that really has no surprises in it. There’s not a lot of 

surprises in this particular Speech from the Throne and you 

know there shouldn’t be, Mr. Speaker. There shouldn’t be very 

many surprises in it because we’ve just come through an 

election campaign in the province of Saskatchewan and 

political parties made their case to the electorate. And one 

particular case was more successful than the other. One 

particular platform did earn a majority government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And so it ought not to surprise anyone that 

a brand new government would like to get to work on that 

platform. It might surprise a few that this actually, this time 

period between the election day and the Throne Speech was the 

shortest in the history of the province of Saskatchewan — 

shortest period of time between an election of a government and 

a calling of the legislature to get to work. That might surprise 

people. 

 

But what ought not to surprise anyone is that this document, the 

Speech from the Throne, that was read from the — well 

ironically enough, coincidently enough — from the Throne, is 

full of the ideas that we campaigned on, Mr. Speaker. Because 

when we were campaigning in the election, and when we were 

proposing our ideas and making our commitments we weren’t 

just passing time, Mr. Speaker. We were making commitments 

that we intend to keep that we are already keeping in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the number of commitments 

that have already been kept — we went over a little bit in 

question period today — I think are a source of surprise. I think 

most people in the province of Saskatchewan, when they 

consider the list of commitments of promises already kept after 

only a month of a brand new government being sworn in, is 

clearly . . . would be a surprise to most. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, that on the first day right after the 

election, and it’s referenced in the Throne Speech, but right 

after the election we kept our first promise. And I remember the 

headline in the Leader-Post, it was a talk poll about 75 point 

font, and it said, “First promise kept.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And the promise that was kept, Mr. 

Speaker, of course was that we need set elections, fixed election 

dates in the province of Saskatchewan. For far too long, and 

usually, usually in the hands of the members opposite in their 

party, games would be played with the calling of an election. 

Maybe, maybe . . . I can remember the first election I ran in 

when the Leader of that NDP Party, the then premier, when the 

leader of that party tried to manipulate the date of the election 

because he knew rural Saskatchewan was upset. He knew rural 

Saskatchewan wanted no more of his government. 

 

So what did he do? He called an election during harvest, Mr. 

Speaker — right in the middle of harvest. He thought, he 

thought, Mr. Speaker, that it would be just a cute little trick to 

make sure that those folks in rural Saskatchewan couldn’t make 

their point, their case in the election campaign. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I remember that election 

campaign. And they shut down the combines. They took time 

early in the morning. They lined up at polling stations to send a 

message to that party that disrespect for rural Saskatchewan, the 

ignoring of rural Saskatchewan wasn’t on. 

 

The NDP didn’t get that message in ’99. They didn’t get it in 

2003. But I think they got it on November 7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So we have said no more games with 

election dates. And you know what? You give up some political 

capital, I guess — small “p” political capital. That’s why the 

NDP would never make this change. They’d talk about it but 

never make it. 

 

Because you know there would be those who advise a political 

party, perhaps all political parties, that if you give away the 

chance to manipulate or set the election or ramp-up spending or 

making a bunch of promises or ramping-up advertising prior to 

an election, if you give that up it’s just not politically smart. 

And so we ought not to give it up by going to fixed election 

dates, Mr. Speaker. That would be the advice that they got and 

that they obviously agreed with, because they never did it. 

 

I think all political parties have heard that same counsel before. 

But there are some political parties that would say, well that’s 

not good enough. Because this place isn’t about us. It’s not 

about the political apparatchik of members opposite or any 

other party. It’s about the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. They deserve to know the date — the date on 

which they can either rehire or fire the government. And that 

was the first promise kept, the Bill introduced in this session of 

the legislature already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We said, Mr. Speaker, that we would cut 

the used car tax, the NDP used car tax. Mr. Speaker, that has 

already been done. That promise has already been kept. And I 

think that PST used car tax became a bit of a metaphor for that 

election campaign. You know people were thinking about 

maybe buying a new car or new used car, perhaps some of 

them, when they heard about the promise. And I think they 

were probably looking out at their driveways. And some of 

them — myself included — would be looking at, well a used 

car that’s getting a little old and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — An old Dart. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes. An old . . . Well it’s a Scamp, actually. 

The hon. member for Cannington, it’s a Scamp. And I might be 

looking at that thing. Well it is getting a little old and a little 

worn out. Tired and old might be the definition for a car. 

Maybe, maybe we ought to trade up, they might say. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as it turned out, in the election campaign the 

people of the province looked at members opposite, looked at 

the NDP and said, they look pretty tired. They look pretty old. 

The emissions are far too high. Maybe it’s time to trade up, they 

said. And they did it on November 7. So we kept that promise. 

 

We also promised before the campaign to have a smaller 

cabinet. Promises kept. Promises kept, Mr. Speaker. We 

promised that we would undo, that we would not honour the 

last-ditch, political desperation that was really a trick on the 

people of Prince Albert — that Domtar deal that didn’t exist. 

$100 million of taxpayers money risked in the wake — in the 

wake, Mr. Speaker — of an $800 million taxpayer loss on a 

pulp mill in Meadow Lake that went bankrupt. In the wake of 

that, they made this desperate pitch to the people of Prince 

Albert who saw through it for what it was. 

 

And by the way, to members opposite and to the member for 

P.A. Northcote, they still are seeing through what was 

obviously a political desperation — a tactic and a trick by the 

NDP to try to win the next election. And we committed that we 

would not follow the folly of previous governments, that we 

wouldn’t put money into mature businesses in this province any 

more, we wouldn’t risk taxpayers’ money in that way. But 

rather, we would focus on the fundamentals. And with respect 

to the Domtar deal, Mr. Speaker, the promise was made and the 

promise was kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised, Mr. Speaker, tougher laws 

for drunk drivers. We promised to crack down on drunk drivers. 

We said, look if you are a three-peat offender, maybe you ought 

to lose your vehicle. Maybe we ought to give prosecutors the 

authority in this province, as one other jurisdiction has done, to 

seize that vehicle. We made that promise in the election, Mr. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

Speaker. We’ve kept that promise in the first month of our 

government. 

 

We promised in the election a new growth and financial 

security Act with four-year projections, unlike what we got 

from members opposite who sort of forgot to attach the 

four-year projection with their last budget, Mr. Speaker. Sort of 

forgot to attach the fact that the Finance officials — the same 

Finance officials now advising the Government House Leader 

and the Minster of Finance — were telling that government if 

you don’t get spending under control, you could face a $4 

billion cumulated deficit over four years, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what the officials were telling this government. That’s what 

they ignored. And that’s what they failed to tell the people of 

the province. 

 

Well we committed to disclosure and transparency in the 

election. We committed to a new financial security and growth 

Act. We made the promise in the campaign. We’ve kept the 

promise in the first month, Mr. Speaker. It’s been introduced in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we promised a brand new 

form of economic development in the province, where we 

would take the politics out of the economic development cycle. 

And politics has far too long played a role in the decision of 

how taxpayers’ money is spent and how we do economic 

development in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s not a partisan statement. It wasn’t just the NDP. It’s been 

literally every party before that. And we’ve seen how that’s 

worked for a province. With all the resources we have in 

Saskatchewan, the province hasn’t grown in population — is 

now, is now — but hasn’t grown, hasn’t grown since 1929. 

 

And so our economic plan, our Enterprise Saskatchewan plan 

asked a question: isn’t it time to try something new? Isn’t it 

time to let the private and the co-operative sector create the jobs 

in the province? Isn’t it time to listen to labour and 

post-secondary and the municipal sector and First Nations and 

business, and come together to deal with our economic 

challenges, come together to ensure this current boom is a 

lasting prosperity for all the people in the province? We think it 

is time. 

 

So we talked about Enterprise Saskatchewan during the election 

campaign and prior to that, Mr. Speaker. And words are not as 

important as actions. Members are right about that. So the 

Minister for Enterprise and Innovation introduced the Bill 

already this sitting of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would 

rebalance the labour laws of the province. For too long in 

Saskatchewan there has been an imbalance. Too long in 

Saskatchewan there has been an imbalance between the power 

of the union leadership in Saskatchewan, ceded to them by 

those NDP members opposite when they sat here, an imbalance 

between the power ceded to that union leadership and the 

people of the province whose services . . . the services of course 

are owed to them whose treasury it is. 

 

This province, the economy itself, the services we provide 

belong not to any member in this House — not to you, Mr. 

Speaker, not to Mr. Hubich, They belong to the people of the 

province. 

 

And so we committed in the campaign to make sure that there 

were essential services agreements in place. That’s what we 

said in the election campaign, that there would be, before a 

strike, essential services agreements in place. 

 

Now one way to do that is to rely on the voluntary agreement of 

the union leadership. That’s one way. We saw with the CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] strike that that doesn’t 

always work. Sometimes it does work. In the case of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, they have done a very good job 

of responsibly laying that out. But it doesn’t work in every case. 

 

So our commitment in the platform — remember that, Mr. 

Speaker — was to make sure that these essential services 

agreements were improved so the other option is to legislate it. 

The other option is to make it the law of the land. 

 

And I’ve noted with interest, I have noted with interest the 

verbal gymnastics of members opposite as they have 

mischaracterized comments made by myself prior to the 

election campaign. They’ve said well, they’ve said nobody ever 

mentioned essential services law before the campaign. And the 

member’s . . . well the member’s smiling. He’ll be interested in 

this. They said nobody ever mentioned essential services 

legislation or a law before the campaign. Well here we go. 

January 12, 2007 — earlier this year — here is a headline from 

a national newspaper. I think it was the The Globe and Mail. 

Here is the headline: “Sask opposition pushes for essential 

services law . . .” That was 11 months ago: “Sask opposition 

pushes for essential services law . . .” 

 

So I won’t hold my breath, Mr. Speaker. But I think if hon. 

ladies and gentlemen opposite were to do the right thing, each 

of them would stand in their place and apologize for 

misrepresenting what we have said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

You didn’t have to have access to the national paper. You 

didn’t have to read The Globe and Mail to know that because 

on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news, here’s 

what the reporter said earlier this year when SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 

was threatening to take snowplow operators off of the highways 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You remember that, Mr. Speaker? I do because this party, the 

Saskatchewan Party stood up and said, no way. No way should 

that be happening in the province of Saskatchewan. We did say 

to the government of the day, if one snowplow operator is not 

available to ensure that motorists in winter can travel on a safe 

highway, then we do need legislation to make sure they’re on 

the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And here’s what the report said. “The Sask 

Party is . . .” and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker from a CBC 

reporter, Colleen Underwood who said in the stand-up at the 

end of her story, “The Sask Party is proposing . . .” 

 

I’m going to slow down here, Mr. Speaker, for members 

opposite: “The Sask Party is proposing legislation that would 

force workers deemed essential to return to work.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have absolutely talked about the essential 

services requirement in this province. And you know members 

opposite are going to have to make a choice when this Bill is 

voted in the spring. How will they vote, Mr. Speaker, when this 

Bill comes forward? 

 

Remember what it prescribes. It simply says to unions and 

employers: look, you’ve got 90 days, and you have to hammer 

something out because public safety and health care is more 

important than any union, than any employer, than any strike. 

You’re going to have to hammer it out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now the political ally of the NDP, the SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] who give money to the 

NDP, who sit on all their boards, they don’t like this Bill. The 

head of the SFL was very angry about it out in the rotunda 

yesterday. They want this . . . They call the Bill draconian. 

That’s what the SFL has said. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So there’s the Labour critic member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

There are a number of members opposite; what will they do 

when the vote comes on this Bill? Whose side will they be on? 

Will they be on Mr. Hubich’s side, who represents union 

leadership? Or will they be on the side of those who might need 

cancer care, who will be facing a work interruption? Will they 

be on the side of motorists who deserve a safe highway? Will 

they be on the side of Saskatchewan residents who will need to 

know that there are safe streets or that there are protective 

services out there or that there ambulance services out there? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what. I’ll tell you what. This side of 

the House will come down firmly on the side of those who 

deserve to know that those essential services on health care and 

public safety are in place. We’re going to vote with the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan on that Bill. How will the 

members opposite vote, Mr. Speaker? That’s what . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because then all of the hot air about 

essential services we’ve heard for the last eight days, all of the 

hot air from members opposite is going to seem like pretty thin, 

pretty transparent if, in the spring, they finally come to their 

senses and say — you know what? — we’re going to have to 

vote with the people. We’re going to vote with the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan who deserve this essential services. 

And I encourage them to do that. I encourage them to get their 

priorities right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also . . . But we’ve committed certainly 

to do that prior to the election. We very specifically committed 

in the campaign platform document to amend the trade law, The 

Trade Union Act of the province of Saskatchewan. Here are 

some of the radical ideas that we have long thought should 

happen with respect to trade union law in the province. 

 

We believe that if there was a secret ballot to decertify a union, 

that maybe there should be a secret ballot to certify a union. We 

believe, we believe that in the course of the certification or a 

decertification, in a responsible manner, an employer, an 

employer who’s creating the jobs . . . And I’m sure employers 

in this province, and members would agree, are going to do 

whatever they can to make sure their workplaces are safe and 

their employees are maximizing their income and there is 

fulfilment from work. That our Bill would say something as 

radical as those employers, women and men, across this 

province should have the right to communicate with unions 

during certification and decertification processes. Not unfair 

labour practices, but the right to communicate, to provide some 

information — that was the second radical notion that the Act 

proposes. 

 

And here is another one, Mr. Speaker, that is that the NDP and 

Mr. Hubich called draconian. They say that this is draconian. 

That we would change the labour laws of the province, The 

Trade Union Act, to say that if a union and an employer 

negotiate an agreement longer than three years, if they in good 

faith and freely collective bargain agreement longer than three 

years, they ought not to have to come to this Legislative 

Assembly for permission because that’s the laws under that 

NDP government. 

 

They not only . . . They don’t trust employers in this province, 

the NDP. They don’t even trust union leadership, which is the 

group that gives them a lot of political donations because what 

they would say to the unions of IPSCO and IPSCO itself, the 

employer. When IPSCO negotiated some long term . . . wanted 

to compete for some long-term contracts, when those two 

groups freely and independently collectively bargained an 

agreement that would be for five years, in the interests of the 

company, in the interests of the employee, that government 

made them come hat in hand and ask for permission to do that. 

 

Well that’s the third radical change that the hon. minister has 

tabled in this Assembly. We’re saying if you . . . [inaudible] . . . 

an agreement for one year, two years, three years, or five years, 

we say, God bless you and go about your business. That’s what 

we say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We also promised them, Mr. Speaker, that 

we would have lower political costs than the outgoing 

government. I was shocked to see the Premier’s own personal 

staff budget when I got into this job. I couldn’t believe it — 

almost 300 grand a month in wages. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

overall political cost of the brand new government is going to 

be a lot less than it ever was under that tired, old government — 

now clearly a tired, old opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone beyond that. All 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

those items, by the way, is referenced either specifically or 

indirectly in the Throne Speech so that you will know that I’m 

certainly on . . . continue to be on point in the address in reply, 

Mr. Speaker. I would also want to point out though that we 

have not stopped at that, that there are some other issues that 

our ministers have been working on, left over by the NDP 

government. And I’ll share a few of them with you if I can. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, for example, has already been 

working on something we had long called our provincial 

government to do. We wanted the old, tired NDP government to 

show some leadership on CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 

stabilization], work towards some improvements, because that 

program needs a lot of improvements . . . negative margins, 

reference margins, some other issues that we had always raised. 

 

Well guess what, Mr. Speaker, guess what? Our new minister 

and the new Ministry of Agriculture, the deputy, the staff, our 

new chief of staff, have made it a priority. And they’re not 

obviously responsible for all the changes. But our government 

has already contributed to positive improvements to that 

program, Mr. Speaker, that we called for. That’s very positive 

for farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. That was 

something left undone by the previous government and the 

previous minister who’s been, I think, suitably and very 

adequately replaced by a brand new member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We were also left a bit of a mess with 

respect to the bus pass program for low-income residents in the 

province. The previous, the outgoing government had not done 

its homework, had frankly let down the city of Saskatoon, most 

municipalities — ignored them actually — and the new 

Minister of Social Services a month into the new government, it 

is already fixed to the pleasure and to the support of both 

mayors and councils in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

And finally the Minister of Finance has been busy because he 

did inherit those four-year projections that demonstrated that 

the NDP were not keeping a control on spending. And, Mr. 

Speaker, those controls will happen in a responsible way. We 

will get spending under control. This government’s hallmark 

with be about fiscal responsibility, fiscal probity, Mr. Speaker, 

as we continue to grow, as we continue to grow the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the last campaign was pretty 

informative about the choices, about the choices. Mr. Speaker, 

what we saw in the election campaign was a desperate NDP that 

was prepared to say absolutely anything to get elected. They 

were prepared to say absolutely anything to get elected, not just 

about what they were proposing, but also about the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And the fear tactics we saw, the fear tactics we saw in this 

election were absolutely ridiculous. I think it shocked the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. And the member from 

Dewdney is smiling from his seat. He always claims to be one 

of the . . . a member of the brain trust of his party. So the brain 

trust of his party decided, going into the last election, that their 

only hope, their own desperate hope to try to cling to power was 

to scare the people of the province of Saskatchewan — to scare 

seniors, to scare anyone they could find. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of the province saw through it; their own party 

supporters saw through it. 

 

I note with interest a letter to the editor in my own Swift 

Current paper by an individual that I know and respect, but who 

I don’t agree with politically, Ms. Barbara Campbell. She is a 

New Democratic supporter and has been for some time. And 

you know when Lamb Chop, the dog-faced sheep was produced 

by the NDP, that wolf in sheep’s clothing campaign — do you 

remember that, Mr. Speaker? — this individual wrote this letter 

to the editor. She said: 

 

I’m a member of the New Democratic Party, and I feel 

very strongly that members and voters deserve better than 

this. 

 

She says: 

 

The NDP had better start talking about itself, and its own 

record — both the accomplishments and the mistakes. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

. . . I am embarrassed at the way the NDP [have] received 

. . . drought-stricken farmers . . . I was there, and I saw 

their lukewarm reception . . . 

 

And her letter goes on, Mr. Speaker, very disappointed in the 

tactics. 

 

Not just the people of the province but their own supporters 

hung their heads in shame, in shame, when they saw the scare 

tactics that were attempted to be perpetrated by members 

opposite. We heard stories from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, that 

NDP campaigners were saying, if you vote for the Sask Party, 

you’re going to be kicked out of your seniors’ home; you’re 

going to lose your health benefits. That’s the kind of thing that 

was going on in the election campaign. 

 

We saw the nonsensical Monty Python ads with disembodied 

heads floating around. They said Enterprise Saskatchewan 

would actually be about privatizing assets in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It just didn’t end, Mr. Speaker. It just didn’t end. 

 

One thing, one thing though did end, Mr. Speaker. What ended 

was their opportunity to ever do that to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s what ended. People rejected the 

tactics. They rejected the fear tactics on the part of that party, 

and they chose something else. They chose a positive message. 

They chose women and men who campaigned very hard and 

now are working hard to implement the Speech from the 

Throne. They chose women and men who were campaigning 

hard on a positive message of growth for the province of 

Saskatchewan. They chose hope — that’s what they chose —in 

the last election. 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

And so what have we seen since the election, Mr. Speaker? 

Well there’s a new mood right across the province — rural and 

urban, north and south. People are pretty positive. They’re 

optimistic about the future. 

 

After the election we saw oil and gas sales break records in the 

first week of December. We saw the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan after the election announce $1.9 billion in new 

investment in Rocanville, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

seen trade numbers go up, Mr. Speaker. The population is over 

1 million. The Riders have won the Grey Cup. And as I said in 

question period, it would be tempting perhaps under those 

conditions to call an election because after that election we’d 

have more positive people and fewer negative people, Mr. 

Speaker. But . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But while the member from North 

Battleford chirps from his seat, he’s got something right. 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. We already called it. We kept the 

promise for set elections, like we will keep the promise in the 

Throne Speech that we have made, like we will keep the 

promises of the platform, like we will keep the promise of 

Saskatchewan. That’s why I’ll be voting in favour of the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Estevan, seconded by the 

member from Yorkton: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 11:57 until 12:09.] 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. Those in favour 

of the motion please rise. I call the members to order. Those in 

favour of the motion please rise. 

 

Yeas — 36 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross  

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask members to 

come to order and allow the vote to proceed, please. 

 

Reiter Bradshaw Harrison 

McMillan   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

Nays — 19 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Forbes Taylor Beatty 

Quennell Broten McCall 

Wotherspoon   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 36; those 

opposed . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 

 

Clerk: — Correction. The vote was 36, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Supplementary Estimates — December 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — We’re here to do supplementary estimates for 

the month of December, Executive Council. I recognize the 

Premier and I’ll ask him to introduce his officials. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair of 

committees. It’s a pleasure today. There are some, as you know, 

some supplementary estimates we have to take care of, some 

housekeeping. And to help us do that it’s a pleasure to introduce 

Garnet Garven, the new deputy minister to the Premier. Just by 

way of introduction to members, if I may, he comes to us from 

the University of Regina where he was the dean of business 

administration. And we’re going to look forward to his counsel 

and advice over the coming years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Chair: — The vote before us is central management and 

services in the amount of 258,000. Question. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — 

 

Be it resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 

12 months ending March 31, 2008, the following sum, 

258,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Vote 10 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — I thank the Premier and his officials for being 

here today. 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — The next item under committee, of estimates is 

resolutions. Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain changes in expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2008, the sum of $222,755,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Also I would ask the Minister of Finance while 

he’s on his feet to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

welcome to the Chamber the deputy minister of Finance, Mr. 

Doug Matthies. 

 

The Chair: — Do the members take the question as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Question. Agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain changes in expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2008, which is to extend that they may remain unexpended 

in the fiscal year, are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2009, the sum of $2,500,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — All those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — All those opposed? Carried. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

That the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — The minister has moved: 

 

That the committee rise and that the committee Chair 

report that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions 

and asks for leave to sit again. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Agreed. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions and has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later this 

day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, 

Government House Leader. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 4) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move that Bill No. 7, The Appropriation Act, 2007 

(No. 4) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 7, The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 4) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly and under rule 72(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 

No. 7, The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 4) be now read a 

second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to remind the members that His 

Honour is here for Royal Assent. Would the members please 

rise. 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 12:23 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 

took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 

following Bill.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 4) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept its benevolence, and assent to the Bill. 

 

[His Honour the Administrator retired from the Chamber at 

12:25.] 

 

The Speaker: — Pray be seated. Why is the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and, through you, to all 

members of the legislature George and Esther Haas who played 

a big part in my successful re-election again this time. And also 

Neil Mehrer — Mr. Speaker, Neil is the reeve of the RM [rural 

municipality] of Churchbridge, and George is a counsellor out 

there. And I’d ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Southeast 

on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

to you and, through you, to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, seated in the west gallery, Philipp Strenger who is a 

good friend, was a candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in the 

2003 election, and I’d like to ask all members to welcome him 

to his Assembly. 



December 20, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Rosetown-Elrose on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Request leave to bring Christmas greetings, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Christmas Greetings 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was thrilled to be 

asked by my colleagues on this side of the House to bring 

Christmas greetings. There’s certainly far more veteran 

members of the Assembly who are far more capable than I am 

of doing this, but they asked a rookie, which leads me to believe 

that probably none of the veterans wanted to do it. 

 

But in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured to bring 

greetings on behalf of this side. And Mr. Speaker, next week 

people around the world will be celebrating the Christmas 

season with their family and friends. The Christmas season 

brightens up the entire province. This can be seen not only in 

lights and decorations, but also in the attitude of people around 

the province. Winston Churchill said, “We make a living by 

what we get, but make a life by what we give.” 

 

The Christmas season is a time for giving, and the generosity of 

Saskatchewan people is beyond compare. This is shown 

through donations to food banks, the Salvation Army, and many 

other charities. What makes Saskatchewan people so 

exceptional is that spirit of giving does not end with the holiday 

season but rather carries on year-round. I feel confident that the 

Saskatchewan Party government and the constituents of this 

province share the same sentiments of hope and goodwill. 

 

[12:30] 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, it’s my honour 

and my privilege to wish my colleagues on both sides of the 

House — and indeed all the people of Saskatchewan — a very 

Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Battlefords on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — With leave to bring greetings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

happy today, on behalf of the official opposition, our leader, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and my caucus colleagues, 

to wish all in this Assembly — members, staff, Pages, and 

support staff — the best of the season and good wishes for the 

new years. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we are indeed very fortunate to live in 

one of the safest, the most livable places in the world. And I 

hope and trust that each and every one of us will take the time 

with our families and friends over this special time of year to 

take stock of our circumstances and think of those around the 

world and here at home whose quality of life could benefit from 

our collective and individual efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of an old saying about the turtle on 

the fence post. Mr. Speaker, you know the turtle on the fence 

post didn’t get there by himself. Mr. Speaker, it’s very 

important that we collectively and individually work to help 

each other, and this is the time of year to think about that more 

than ever. I wish all members of the House and those who are 

watching, on behalf of the official opposition, a Merry 

Christmas and a Happy New Year and the best of 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I ask leave of the 

members to make a statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. While this has been a short fall 

session due to the timing of the last provincial election, it has 

nevertheless been an interesting, informative, and lively 

session. It would appear members have adapted very well to 

their role in the Assembly. While most residents who tune into 

the Legislative Assembly channel observe the role and 

behaviour of members, there are many others involved in this 

magnificent building whose work and promptness in responding 

to concerns enables the roles of the members to move forwardly 

and efficiently. 

 

Our thanks are extended first to the Clerks at the Table, to the 

Sergeant At Arms, and the Legislative Pages. We would also 

like to express our gratitude and appreciation to the Legislative 

Assembly Services. These offices include the Office of the 

Clerk, journals, human resources and payroll services, 

communication and technology services, financial services, 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel, security, Hansard, the 

Legislative Library, and the Office of the Speaker. 

 

I would also like to thank each and every one of the members of 

this Assembly for their ongoing commitment to the citizens of 

our province and for the essential role they play in nurturing our 

system of parliamentary democracy. 

 

I close by acknowledging the time of year — the Christmas 

season. I trust it’ll give each one of the members an opportunity 

to pause and count their blessings, renew friendships, and 

rejoice in the miracle of Christ’s birth. Christmas is indeed a 

message of hope, love, and joy. Chief Joseph however 

reminded us as well that there are those amongst us who may 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 2007 

not have that same joy, may find it to be sad and lonely. I would 

ask that as members gather with family and friends to rejoice 

this Christmas season that you give some thought and time to 

think of those less fortunate. Merry Christmas and a happy and 

prosperous New Year. 

 

The motion before the Assembly is to adjourn. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until the call 

of the Chair. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:33.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 197 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 

  Bjornerud .......................................................................................................................................................................... 197, 218 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 197 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 197 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 218 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 198 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Yorkton Community Theatre Production 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 198 

 Saskatoon Firefighters’ Christmas Fundraiser 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 

 School Division Partners with First Nation 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 199 

 St. Walburg Wins International Award 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 199 

 60th Anniversary of the SaskTel Pioneers 

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 199 

 Report Card for Saskatchewan Party 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 

 Contemplating New Opportunities 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Agriculture 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 200 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 200 

 Housing Issues 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 201 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 202 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 202 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 203 

 Blackstrap Ski Hill 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 203 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 203 

 School Closures 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 203 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 203 

 Graduate Tax Rebate 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 204 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 204 

 Election Promises 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 204 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 204 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

 



 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 210 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 216 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund Supplementary Estimates — December 

 Executive Council Vote 10 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 217 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 217 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 217 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 7 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 4) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 218 

ROYAL ASSENT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 218 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Christmas Greetings 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 219 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 219 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 219 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


