




















































Hansard: December 18, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 6A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 129 

 December 18, 2007 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for 

me today to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Assembly His Excellency, William Fisher, the High 

Commissioner of Australia to Canada. We want to welcome 

him here to the Legislative Assembly today. He has had a 

number of meetings throughout today, including a meeting with 

myself where we were able to discuss a number of mutual 

interests between the province of Saskatchewan and Australia 

as a nation, including agriculture, including our interest in 

pursuing clean coal technology, shared by Australia and some 

specific states, in fact, there. 

 

As well as we were able to discuss for some time the fact that 

between our two countries, — and specifically Saskatchewan 

I’m thinking of in this regard — we supply 60 per cent of the 

world’s uranium. We talked a little bit about just the tonnage of 

greenhouse gases that might be displaced by that uranium from 

our respective areas of the world. So I wanted to say to the High 

Commissioner, we welcome him here. We are grateful for his 

return visit again to the province. We look forward to a 

continued relationship between the province of Saskatchewan, 

Canada, and Australia. And I ask all members to welcome him 

to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier and welcome the High Commissioner again to the 

province and to this legislature. It’s very good to see you back. 

In addition to the very long ties that we’ve had of course with 

the people of Australia through the British Commonwealth and 

the trading relationship that has developed between our two 

nations, we have seen in the last several years, Mr. Speaker, a 

renewed interest between the provinces of Canada and some of 

the states of Australia, developing new relationships that I think 

are going to be very, very profitable. And if I may say to the 

High Commissioner that Australia has profited also from the 

export, at least temporary export, of many of our young people 

who have chosen to spend a year or so in Australia. Being the 

father of one of those, I thank you on her behalf for the great 

Australian hospitality. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and through you to members of the legislature some 

guests seated in your gallery. On your far left, Mr. Speaker, is 

Ashley Rosom . And Ashley is my cousin and a resident of 

Regina and she attends the U of R [University of Regina] and 

studies kinesiology. Beside Ashley is Dave Rosom, her father, 

who is my uncle. And Dave has been kind enough to open his 

comfortable home to me during my early days here in Regina, 

so I thank them for that. 

 

Beside Dave is Chris Broten, my dad. Beside Chris is Stuart 

Noble, my brother-in-law, my sister Julianne Broten-Noble, and 

a childhood friend of my sister, Myfanwy Van Vliet. Julianne 

and Stuart live in Belfast, Northern Ireland, which is also 

Stuart’s home. They’re back for the holidays so it was a 

pleasant surprise that they were able to be here today. Julianne 

is no stranger to the legislature and the work of government. 

One year during university she worked in this legislature for the 

past member for Saskatoon Massey Place, and she currently 

works in Stormont, which is the Northern Ireland parliament 

buildings, as a civil servant. 

 

Her husband Stuart works for an NGO [non-government 

organization] called CARE [Christian Action Research and 

Education] that operates throughout Europe dealing with 

governments and politicians. So he too is no stranger to 

legislative buildings. I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you a number of individuals 

seated in the east gallery and two individuals seated on the floor 

of the legislature. These are members of the Regina Queen City 

Good Samaritans — the Good Sams. We’re joined today by 

president and first lady, Stan and Elaine Iles. If you could 

please give us a wave. There we go. And we’re also joined by 

past president and also past first lady, George and Gina Berar, 

seated on the floor here. They’re the advance guard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Good Sam club is a group of 

recreational vehicle owners that are active in camping 

throughout North America. They’re able to meet and camp with 

people from all walks of life, all ethnic groups, and all age 

groups. We thereby extend their knowledge of the world around 

us and other people’s opinions. 

 

They do a tremendous amount of volunteer work such as being 

camp hosts at campgrounds, working to clean campgrounds, 

preparing and painting camp buildings, doing highway cleanup, 

helping people that are having vehicle or other trouble on the 

road — being good Samaritans of course, Mr. Speaker — 

hosting meals at campgrounds for tour groups passing through, 

entertaining at seniors homes, helping out at Christmastime 

with gifts for charity groups, in general being a good Samaritan. 

 

I think they may, as well, Mr. Speaker, pass out the odd wheat 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

sheaf pin. Is that true? The wheat sheaf pin’s still very popular? 

Very good. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the 

Good Sams to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, if I could, 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

House two friends of mine, Jennifer Soloway and Lindsay 

Adams, who are in the gallery today. They’re great friends of 

mine and even better friends of the province. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Mayor Receives Order of Merit 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Thursday evening we honoured the lives of seven individuals 

with the province’s highest honour, the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit. 

 

I am proud to say one of those fine individuals, Mr. Jim 

Scarrow, is a constituent of mine. Mr. Scarrow is well deserving 

of this honour as he has shown both individual success as well 

as significant contribution to the province, particularly in his 

hometown of Prince Albert. 

 

After taking a look at the vast amount of Mr. Scarrow’s 

accomplishments, it is difficult for me to know where to begin. 

In his lifetime he has an incredible broadcasting career, but 

what he is best known for is his outstanding leadership and 

community service. For years Mr. Scarrow has been actively 

involved with the Kinsmen clubs locally, provincially, and 

nationally. He was a founding member of the Saskatchewan 

Kinsmen Foundation for the handicapped and he played a major 

role in the production of the Kinsmen Telemiracle telethons. 

 

Mr. Scarrow has also played a key role in the success of many 

other fundraising efforts in Prince Albert and surrounding 

communities, including the E. A. Rawlinson Centre for 

performing and visual arts, the Prince Albert Children’s Haven, 

and the Prince Albert Raiders hockey club. Most recently he has 

taken on the new role of mayor for the city of Prince Albert. 

And while this is not Mr. Scarrow’s first time being honoured 

or being recognized for his accomplishments and achievements, 

you can bet it will not be his last. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, as MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Prince Albert Carlton, I ask all members to join 

in with me in personally recognizing and thanking His Worship, 

Jim Scarrow, for the hard work, time, and effort he has 

dedicated to the people of Prince Albert and to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Business Owner Assists Runners in Need 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Saskatoon Nutana, my constituency office, is 

located in the unique Broadway business district which offers a 

variety of services and shops. 

 

One of those businesses is Brainsport, the running shoe, owned 

by Brian Michasiw. Brainsport supports customers’ footwear, 

provides clothing, supplies, and organized running groups. 

Brian Michasiw also serves needs well beyond his customers on 

Broadway. From donors he collects used running shoes for 

athletes who cannot afford proper footwear for their sport. 

Brian checks for the best used running shoes to distribute to 

runners in need, both here and abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brian and Jason Warick, a Saskatoon journalist 

and marathon runner getting ready for the Olympics, have taken 

eight hockey bags full of used shoes to a Kenyan training camp 

for high-level African middle-distance runners. The camp, 

sponsored by the IOC [International Olympic Committee], is 

situated on land owned by Kip Keano, the 1968 Olympic gold 

medal winner for the 1500 metres. 

 

Though the attending athletes are very high-level competitors, 

they do not have the means to purchase the high standard of 

shoes used by North American runners. To assist these runners 

in their training programs and to help protect them from injury, 

Brian fitted and distributed the best shoes to suit each runner. 

 

Also attending the training camp are junior athletes who show 

great potential as competitors. Brian provided running shoes to 

a young athlete who went on to win a world junior 

championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all legislators I want to congratulate 

Brian Michasiw of Brainsport for this inspiring program for 

athletes in need, both here at home and abroad. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Scientist Receives Order of Merit 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I rise 

here today to share with you and through you the 

accomplishments of one of our province’s great citizens. 

 

On December 13, Saskatoon Sutherland constituent, Dr. 

Reuben Mapletoft, a University of Saskatchewan professor, was 

awarded our highest honour, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Dr. Mapletoft was born in Paradise Hill in 1943. He grew up on 

a farm near Fort Pitt and attended a one-room schoolhouse for 

the first eight years of his education. He attended high school in 

Frenchman Butte and university in Ontario, South Africa, and 

Wisconsin. 

 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

Dr. Mapletoft and his wife, Janet, celebrated their 30th wedding 

anniversary the night he received this award. They have two 

sons, John and David. 

 

Dr. Mapletoft is known for his research in reproductive biology. 

He patented a substance that replaces serum in the 

cryopreservation of embryos and assisted in the development of 

a drug to induce super ovulation in cattle. This therefore 

increased embryo production. His embryo transfer protocols 

have become the de facto standard for clinical use worldwide. 

 

Dr. Mapletoft has given over 150 lectures in more than 30 

countries and has trained students from all over the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in congratulating 

Saskatchewan’s Dr. Reuben Mapletoft. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Volunteers Provide Community Christmas Dinner 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is a community of 

people who reach out to help one another and who are always 

willing to help those less fortunate. One fine example of this 

selflessness and sharing is the community Christmas dinner. 

The community Christmas dinner organizing committee is 

chaired by Sol Sanderson, who is assisted by his family 

including Andrea Sanderson and Dawn Robins from the 

Bernice Sayese Centre, by Isabelle Impey, as well as by Kateri 

House, which is a lay mission association committed to service 

the First Nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, five years ago this group of people saw a need to 

provide Christmas dinner to people in Prince Albert, and the 

event has grown each year. Their motto is, Christmas dinner is 

not Christmas dinner if it’s not on Christmas Day. Each year the 

organizers and volunteers sacrifice their own Christmas to serve 

between 800 and 1,000 meals at St. Mary High School. Some of 

these people they provide meals to include the homeless, 

families who cannot afford their own meals, truck drivers who 

are in Prince Albert on Christmas Day, and families from out of 

town who have a family member in the hospital. Additionally, 

Mr. Speaker, they deliver between 350 and 500 meals all over 

the city to people who cannot leave their homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 

in acknowledging the compassion and work of this group of 

people who give up their own Christmas to ensure that less 

fortunate people have a true Christmas dinner on Christmas 

Day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Business of the Year Award to Saskatchewan Indian 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to congratulate the Saskatchewan Indian 

Gaming Authority for being named the 2007 Business of the 

Year by Saskatchewan Business magazine. And if I’m not 

mistaken, with just 11 years in operation under its belt, SIGA 

[Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] is the youngest 

company to ever achieve this honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you may be aware, SIGA owns and operates 

five casinos in Saskatchewan, in Prince Albert, North 

Battleford, Yorkton, on the White Cap Dakota First Nation near 

Saskatoon, and in my own constituency of White Bear First 

Nation near Carlyle. 

 

To be named Business of the Year is an honour that few 

businesses ever enjoy. Like many new businesses, SIGA 

experienced challenges and growing pains in its infancy, but 

SIGA persevered and made it through those early days and 

never looked back. Not only is SIGA a model for other 

jurisdictions with First-Nations-run gaming entities, but also an 

organization that supports hundreds of groups and organizations 

throughout the province annually. Perhaps one of SIGA’s top 

achievements has been its commitment to providing 

employment opportunities for Aboriginal people in this 

province. More than 70 per cent of the 1,700 women and men 

working at the SIGA casinos in Saskatchewan as well as at its 

head office in Saskatoon are First Nations heritage. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to SIGA on being named 

the 2007 Business of the Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

First Nations Language Keepers Conference 

 

Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, three weeks ago I had the 

opportunity to attend the annual First Nations Language 

Keepers Conference in Saskatoon sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre. For First Nations people, 

nothing is more fundamental to the survival of our culture and 

identity than to be able to speak our first language. 

 

I thank Dorothy Miyo, the executive director of SICC 

[Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre], and her staff for hosting 

such an important conference. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, a quote from First Nations elders interviews 

conducted by SICC goes something like this, and I quote: 

 

Each time we hear our life long cultural teachings, we hear 

our ancestors voices, we envision our rightful place within 

our creation worldview. 

 

It is time we stand up in unity, to embrace it with a living 

understanding and be passed on, at every opportunity, to 

our communities, our people and our younger, future 

leaders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a report by UNESCO [United Nations 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization] in 1996 

stated that “Canada’s Aboriginal languages are among the most 

endangered in the world” because once they’re gone, they are 

gone forever. Unlike most Canadians, we Aboriginal people 

can’t return to a home country to reclaim the language. We are 

home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, December 10 marked the 61st anniversary of the 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights. But here in Canada 

and in Saskatchewan we still have a long way to go to ensure 

that all cultures, in particular the First Nations and the Métis 

people, have their fundamental rights such as our language 

respected and supported with adequate resources. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Citizens Support 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 

this opportunity to pay tribute to two individuals who live in my 

home constituency of Moose Jaw North. The first individual I 

would like to recognize is Colonel Doug Marr. 

 

Mr. Marr held the position as honorary colonel at 15 Wing 

Moose Jaw for an unprecedented 11 years. The role of honorary 

colonel is to serve as a public relations liaison between the 

community and the Wing to offer advice to the Wing 

commander. 

 

Colonel Marr recently stepped down from this role, which he 

performed with pride and with dignity, and has accepted an 

appointment as a special adviser to the Wing commander. I 

would like to wish him and his wife Cathy good health and 

happiness in this new endeavour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to pay tribute to Ms. Yvette 

Moore, who has accepted the appointment as the new honorary 

colonel for 15 Wing. This appointment requires someone who 

represents the best in the community, and Yvette Moore fills 

that description. Yvette is a well-known artist who lives in 

Moose Jaw and owns the Yvette Moore fine art gallery. In the 

year 2000, Yvette Moore was named as Moose Jaw’s Citizen of 

the Year and received the Saskatchewan Order of Merit medal. 

 

Please join me in paying special tribute to these renowned 

citizens of Moose Jaw, Doug Marr and Yvette Moore. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Salaries for Political Staff 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the very first orders in council that this 

Saskatchewan Party cabinet passed and approved was to 

substantially increase the wages paid to political staff in the 

minister’s offices. Chiefs of staff to a minister can now — 

during these, as the Premier calls them, stark financial times — 

earn double the salary that was previously paid for this position, 

a top range of over $10,000 a month. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question is a simple one for the Premier. 

When can all other employees of the Government of 

Saskatchewan expect their pay increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to take that question on from the 

member from Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, while we were looking 

at restructuring and creating a transition period of time where 

we would create a new structure that would help us build this 

province, we looked at the structure that was in place before. 

And there was a necessity to in fact have a level of support 

within minister’s offices that we have identified as chiefs of 

staff. 

 

That level of staff that’s necessary is there to ensure that we 

provide good government to people, that there is the ability for 

people to feel that their affairs have been looked after. The 

salaries reflect the kind of people that we are employing. There 

is a wide range. And above all, Mr. Speaker, the cost of 

government by the Saskatchewan Party government will be less 

than the cost of that former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the very first order of 

business for this Premier was to almost double the salary for 

Saskatchewan Party political staffers. That was his priority. So 

when we take this huge wage increase into account, Mr. 

Speaker, it explains why this Saskatchewan Party government is 

such a rush to jam through essential services legislation. 

 

How do you double the wages for government political staff 

and go into negotiations next spring with thousands, thousands 

of Saskatchewan government employees whose contracts are up 

for negotiations and expect them to settle for anything less than 

the ministers’ staff? Well, Mr. Speaker, this Premier has 

obviously decided essential services is how you settle for less. 

No comments about treating people fairly, no attempt at 

building good relationship — it’s pay increases for political 

staff and essential services for the rest. 

 

To the Premier: will the Premier and cabinet be approving a pay 

increase for themselves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve clearly 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

identified the reasons why the structure has changed. I’ve 

identified the kind of people that are now working for the 

Saskatchewan Party government in the ministers’ office, and 

I’ve clearly explained why there is a need for a level of chiefs 

of staff. That opposition, when they were in government, did 

not have a structure in place that would deal with those kinds of 

things when a minister was not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing. The member opposite, the 

member opposite makes the point, the member opposite makes 

the point that we suddenly have a large cost in the Premier’s 

office. Mr. Speaker, the cost when the former member, the 

current Leader of the Opposition, was in the office of Premier 

. . . the staff cost was in the area of $193,000 per month; that is 

the current salary of our members in the ministers’ office. Mr. 

Speaker, under the former premier, the cost was $285,000. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

didn’t even come close to the question, never mind giving me a 

straight answer. It was a simple yes or no. Is the Premier and 

the cabinet going to approve a pay raise for themselves? 

 

Where it’s been quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 

taking care of their political appointees, they’re very good at it. 

We’ve seen the massive salary hikes. Some political staffers, on 

top of having their salary doubled, are now entitled to six weeks 

paid holidays a year — six weeks holidays on day one. Mr. 

Speaker, a working person in this province would have to work 

at the same workplace for 18 to 20 years to receive that same 

benefit. Double the salary and six weeks of paid holidays on 

day one, double the salary and six weeks of holidays if you 

work for a minister; essential services for the rest. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: is this just another example of 

Saskatchewan Party government’s sense of entitlement, or will 

the minister commit, or will the minister commit to include 

changes when labour legislation is tabled to give all workers in 

Saskatchewan the same benefit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to explain again 

that the cost of government under that administration was in the 

area of $285,000 per month. Mr. Speaker, in the Premier’s 

office today the cost will be $193,000 — a significant 

reduction. Mr. Speaker We know that there were 20 cabinet 

ministers in the former government. Today there are 18. We are 

working with a smaller government. We are working with a 

more efficient government, and we are working at a government 

that is going to cost less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, essential services for government 

employees, unless you work in a minister’s office, and the 

Premier won’t even stand on this feet and tell this Assembly if 

he’s going to approve a salary increase for himself — for him 

and his cabinet ministers. No, he’s laughs about it, thinks it’s a 

big joke. But mark my words, it’s coming because that’s the 

way they operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at staff in 

ministers’ offices, they now make more than what a minister of 

the Crown does. So, Mr. Speaker, ministers earn less money 

than their chief of staff. And you name me one corporation 

across Canada or in North America the size of the Government 

of Saskatchewan where the person with the responsibility earns 

less than the staff that work for that person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is clear, for a Premier who calls 

himself accountable, are you going to approve a wage for 

yourself? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I find this 

line of questioning interesting that when that opposition was in 

government they clearly had salaries of deputy ministers that 

were far in excess of the ministers’ salaries, Mr. Speaker. That 

has been a practice that has been in place for years, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Wakabayashi report was accepted by 

this entire legislature. It explains what the salaries of an MLA 

will be. It also talks about the cost of living for MLAs which 

came into effect on April 1 of this year, Mr. Speaker. And now 

that, because the election has occurred, that new system is in 

place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just like to remind members 

that questions answered are to be placed through the Chair. I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Costs of Dismissal 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After giving 

their political backroom friends hefty raises, the Saskatchewan 

Party immediately fires a number of high-ranking civil servants 

without cause. Among the ranks of those senior civil servants 

could be found decades of experience in government, immense 

qualifications and skills, and countless hours of dedication to 

the cause of public service in this province. 

 

One of those replaced civil servants, Mr. John Wright, has 

served government for three decades in a variety of capacities 

including, most recently, as deputy minister of Health. The 

NDP has learned that John Wright may be receiving close to 

$800,000 in severance for being fired without cause. Can the 

Saskatchewan Party confirm that it has to pay out almost $1 

million to fire one of Saskatchewan’s most talented and 

qualified civil servants? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

at each time that there is a change in government there are 

officials who will be promoted. There are officials who will 

receive lateral movements, and there will be officials who, after 

consideration by a new government, do not fit within the 

objectives of that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That has been a long-standing tradition. That has been the 

policy when that group of individuals across were government. 

That has happened in every province, and it will continue to 

happen, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is an ongoing process that will continue as we assess the 

human resources that we currently have in all levels of 

government, Mr. Speaker, and there may be other changes that 

will occur in the future because this is a process that is ongoing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

good of them to confirm that there will be more firings. 

 

Mr. Wright was not the only deputy minister to have been fired 

without cause by the incoming government. There were many 

other top government employees that were dismissed by this 

new Sask Party cabinet without cause. The NDP has also 

learned that the total cost of severing deputy ministers in the 

first month of this government may be in excess of $4 million 

— $4 million. How can the government justify putting the 

taxpayers of this province with a $4 million bill? 

 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: what is the 

total bill for dismissing deputy ministers without cause? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, individual files on specific 

individuals, I will not make a comment on. But I can indicate to 

the House that the Leader of the Opposition, when the results of 

November 7 were known, the official opposition leader 

indicated that he would begin by releasing 150 individuals; I 

believe it was 151. So that process was begun by the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

And there are processes in place to do an assessment of human 

resources in all of our ministries, Mr. Speaker. And that will 

continue. That is a process that is going to enable a 

Saskatchewan Party government to build and put in place the 

kind of people that we want to serve a better government in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s good of 

the minister to confirm that they don’t want a professional civil 

service, one that only reacts to their political needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are already starting to see the cost of 

dismissing top civil servants without cause. This is costing the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan already, Mr. Speaker, and they have 

only dismissed nine employees. 

 

Could the Minister of the Public Service Commission tell this 

House and tell the taxpayers of Saskatchewan how many more 

civil servants are on the chopping block? How much is this 

going to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? To 

the minister: How many more civil servants are going to be 

dismissed without cause, and what will the total cost be to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I’ve already indicated, the process of assessments and 

evaluation of human resources will continue. The member has 

indicated that there have been changes made, and there will 

continue to be changes made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to point out that when the people who 

have left employment, they all had valuable contributions to the 

civil service in this province for the time that they delivered 

those services, Mr. Speaker. And that is why the Saskatchewan 

Party government is going to put in place other people who 

have the same kind of credentials and the same kind of 

responsibility to the Saskatchewan Party and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Staffing Strategy for the Crowns 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party is off to 

a slippery start, Mr. Speaker. First, it’s wasting money by 

changing departments to ministries. Second, it’s wasting money 

by firing career public servants without cause. Third, it’s 

wasting money by hiring political chiefs of staff at double the 

previous salaries. 

 

When will it end? Will the Crowns be attacked like the 

departments were? To the Crown Investments Corporation 

minister, please help Saskatchewan people decide who is 

smarter than a Canadian fifth grader. And it’s easy. Simply 

assure us career Crown employees will not be fired only to be 

replaced with overpaid Sask Party hacks. Will you give us that 

assurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. On November 7 Saskatchewan people spoke very 

clearly. They want for themselves what they want for their 

Crown corporations. They want growth and opportunity. They 

want security, and they want us to keep our promises. And 

that’s what we will do, Mr. Speaker. They voted for change, 

Mr. Speaker, and there will be change within the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. They voted very clearly, and that’s 

what we will do. We will ensure that we operate the Crown 

corporations — unlike the members opposite — we will run the 

Crown corporations in a businesslike fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Provide the service at the lowest 

possible cost. End of story, Mr. Speaker. And I know members 

opposite don’t like it because it means they will be in 

opposition for a long period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By the answer, the 

minister has made it official — Canadian fifth graders are 

smarter. How many people, whose hopes and dreams for their 

future rest with the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] minister, will be fired? 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

did not believe the scare tactics that the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] put forward during the election, and they do not believe 

the scare tactics that the NDP are attempting to put forward 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: you’ve 

already doubled the salaries of new political chiefs of staff. 

What is the budget for firing and replacing competent people in 

the Crowns with Sask Party hacks who don’t seem to be coming 

very cheaply? What will your firings cost Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell 

you what we will not do. We will not use Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations and their employees as political pawns in 

the electoral process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I only have to remind members 

opposite about things like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 

Utility Development Company] that have done irreparable 

damage to the good reputation of our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the hon. members . . . everyone in 

this House should know this. The new members may not have 

heard this, but on October 16, 2004, in the The StarPhoenix on 

SPUDCO it was said, and I quote, “To be sure, the scale of this 

affair — the mismanagement, lies, years of coverups and failure 

of governing politicians to take full responsibility — cry out for 

answers and accountability,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Public Service 

 

The Speaker: — . . . Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

just a word of advice for the members opposite, they should 

really read Bruce Johnstone, the business reporter for the 

Leader-Post, who advised the new government not to do 

anything to the Crowns because they were working quite nicely, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just have a couple of questions. In the last 

election campaign, the members opposite said that they — in 

their political election platform — that they were going to 

support the development of a professional public service. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, let’s review that. Barb MacLean, deputy minister 

of Culture, Youth and Recreation 28 years; John Wright, former 

deputy minister of Health, 31 years; Bonnie Durnford, 21 years; 

Lily Stonehouse with her regional college, SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

employment, and public service, 30 years; Paul Osborne, 22 

years — 132 years of professional public service to the people 

of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the members opposite explain to the 

public why at least $4 million in severance pay will be paid to 

nine public servants, five of whom have 132 years of public 

service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Party 

government goes through a renewal and a transferring of 

individuals and a reassigning of individuals and parting ways 

with certain individuals, we note that a number of individuals 

are looking at other opportunities. And I do want to identify one 

individual who has provided many, many years — I believe 

over 30 years of experience in the civil service — and that is 

Mr. Dan Perrins who is now looking at providing additional 

opportunities and looking at that opportunity with the business 

schools, the Shoyama Johnson business school. And he will 

continue to provide good advice. He will continue to be an 

employee of another organization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m sure that the competence of all of those individuals will 

ensure them that they will be providing that same type of 

competent work somewhere else, Mr. Speaker. 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we had a political party in the 

last provincial election campaign that became the government 

that promised . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The people of this province that they would 

have a professional public service, Mr. Speaker. They elected 

three members of the legislature in the city of Regina because 

they promised a professional public service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — They have dismissed five public servants that 

have 132 years of public service between them. Mr. Speaker, to 

the members opposite and to the Minister Responsible for the 

Public Service Commission: what message, what message does 

it send to every public servant that works for the Government of 

Saskatchewan when we just heard earlier the Deputy Premier 

tell them there’s more firings coming? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, I would like to know, is she suggesting that 

the people who have been hired in the various ministries are 

unprofessional, Mr. Speaker, because that is what she’s 

suggesting. She is suggesting that individuals who have been 

hired are unprofessional. And if that’s true, she should stand in 

this Assembly and say so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call the members to order. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, nice try, Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the members 

opposite, nice try, nice try. Mr. Speaker, in the last election 

campaign they promised the people of this province a 

professional public service. Five people, deputy ministers who 

have 132 years of public service between, them have been fired 

by the members opposite. The Deputy Premier, earlier in 

question period in response to a question said that more changes 

would be coming. Well changes means firings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the member opposite assure us that more career public 

servants will not be dismissed by the government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I have 

indicated the process of transition will continue. There will be 

transfers. There will be lateral movements. And there may be 

people that will leave the employ of a Saskatchewan Party 

government. I have said that time and time again. The member 

opposite seems to indicate that that is only going to mean 

dismissal. 

 

That is not true, Mr. Speaker. And there will be changes that 

will continue into the future because as I have said, there is a 

process of renewal. There is a process to ensure that we as a 

Saskatchewan Party government can move forward and build 

on a stronger, better, government in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, he says not 

so, Mr. Speaker, but there will be changes coming. It’s kind of 

like the wheat sheaf, the flip-flop. Not so, but there’s more 

changes coming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have five career public servants that have 132 years of 

public service between them. It’s a very simple question. It’s a 

very simple question, and I’d ask the Deputy Premier, who 

represents the Sask Party, to answer it. Are there more career 

public servants that are going to be sent down the yellow brick 

road because they don’t quite fit into their version of a public 

and professional civil service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the only 

people in the province that aren’t aware about the events of 

November 7 are those members opposite, Mr. Speaker. On 

November 7 the people of the province said that they saw 

through the nonsensical scare tactics of members opposite in 

that campaign. They saw through pulp fiction deals like we saw 

in that last-ditch attempt in Prince Albert to try to win votes of 

the seats there. They saw through that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve found since coming over to 

government though, Mr. Speaker, is that the government was 

trying some other things just prior to the election to try to 

burnish its image to get elected. $1.1 million — I’m announcing 

today, Mr. Speaker — we’ve discovered was spent, unbudgeted 

money forced on the Department of Health to spend on 

advertising, Mr. Speaker, on advertising meant to burnish their 

image — not on nurses, not on doctors, not on wait times, but 

on advertising meant to try to boost that government’s 

reputation in the province. 

 

The people of the province saw through that, Mr. Speaker. They 

saw through the tired old tactics and rejected them. Those 

members opposite, that tired old opposition, finally get the 

message, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a point 

of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I just remind the member that points of order 

will be considered on orders of the day, so if the member could 

just wait till we get to orders of the day. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Enhancements to Discount Bus Pass Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise today to inform the House about a very 

important and positive development for the people of 

Saskatoon. Last night Saskatoon City Council endorsed the 

discount bus pass program, based on an enhanced funding 

formula provided by the provincial government. As a result, 

discount bus passes will continue to be available to 

lower-income people in Saskatoon, providing them with access 

to affordable public transportation for work, school, and 

community life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program was developed in 2003 as a pilot 

project for the city of Regina and has since expanded to include 

the cities of Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Swift Current, 

and Saskatoon. The program provides bus passes at a reduced 

rate to people receiving assistance through provincial programs 

such as social assistance, the transitional employment 

allowance, the Saskatchewan employment supplement, and the 

provincial training allowance. In the last year more than 60,000 

bus passes have been sold at a reduced rate, helping 

lower-income Saskatchewan people enter and remain in the 

workforce and participate in community activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program was in some doubt in Saskatoon 

prior to council’s decision last night. During my first week as 

Minister of Social Services, I met with Mayor Atchison and the 

city officials in Saskatoon to discuss some options to continue 

this important program. As a result, we have adjusted the 

provincial subsidy paid to the city from $12 to $18 for every 

pass sold. This increase does not require additional resources 

from the provincial treasury; rather the ministry is able to 

provide the increase based on the savings that have resulted 

from social assistance expenditures related to transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that the enhanced funding 

will also be available to the city of Regina to ensure the future 

viability of the discount bus pass program for lower-income 

people in that city. 

 

Saskatchewan’s new provincial government recognizes the 

importance of affordable public transportation. It provides 

people with the ability to work and to go to school. It provides 

access to important goods and services such as health care, 

groceries, and public libraries. It gives people the freedom to 

take part in and contribute to all aspects of community life, 

making for stronger families and healthier communities. 

Securing a future for Saskatchewan and the people who live 

here is a top priority of this government. Continuing the 

discount bus pass initiative in Saskatoon and other cities across 

the province is just one example of that commitment. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

response to the statement made by the Minister of Social 

Services announcing the continuation of the discount pass 

program in Saskatoon. First, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

minister for the courtesy of providing me an advance copy of 

her statement. This is indeed good news and my thanks to the 

ministry and the minister for her attention to this issue. Many, 

many people in Saskatoon can now look forward to better 

access for public transportation in Saskatoon. 

 

I must say though that since my call for action on this on 

November 26, many people wondered what the provincial 

government was going to do. While the minister can take credit 

for meeting with the mayor, she did not meet with the citizens 

most affected by this to give them the assurances that this issue 

would in fact be resolved quickly before Christmas. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s been over three weeks since I wrote her asking for 

action. I appreciate the minister’s recognition that this program 

has been working in several cities for some time now, but I 

have some concerns. 

 

The first is really about the increased costs to the low-income 

people. While retaining the program is excellent, the increased 

cost of $5 is significant and many, many people are raising this 

concern. 

 

The second is: did the minister ask her officials to take an 

overall look at the issue of access to transportation in 

Saskatoon, or is this the end of the road? Does she know that 

last year over 10,000 trip denials happened for disabled folks 

using the paratransit system in Saskatoon? And the numbers are 

on track for this year as well. Now will some of the new-found 

funds go to help this issue? 

 

And the third is about the found money. The statement is very 

short on details and I look forward to hearing more about these 

savings and the redirection of funds. Mr. Speaker. This is good 

news for low-income folks before Christmas, but much more 

needs to be done for all forms of access for low-income people 

in our communities. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative 

et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election 

Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that first reading of Bill No. 4, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 2007 be read the first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 

COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the Economy: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report that it has considered certain estimates and 

to present its first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies has moved: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present the first report of 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

Justice, which I now lay on the table. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

. . . Order. 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a point 

of order, I realize that at the beginning of every session when 

there are new members in the House, it sometimes becomes 

necessary to clarify rules for all members. And I noted during 

statements by members, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Cannington, who just happens to be the Minister of Liquor and 

Gaming, made a statement specific to his area of responsibility, 

that is Liquor and Gaming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And although he mentioned a community within his 

constituency, the essence of his member’s statement was about 

the responsibilities that he carries as a minister, and not as a 

member, Mr. Speaker. So I think it is necessary today, Mr. 

Speaker, for members — whether they are new or have served 

in this legislature for some time, Mr. Speaker — I think it is 

necessary to clarify the rules of the House to ensure that new 

members like the member from Cannington have a full 

understanding of what it is to represent either your constituency 

or your role in cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly this House is now getting adjusted to the new 

rules of the Assembly, and that is a good and growing process. 

As I recall, the member’s statement by the minister didn’t have 

anything to do with policies related to his ministry. It was a 

congratulations type of thing, and I believe under the rules that 

that is indeed permissible. But I would certainly encourage the 

Speaker to review the rules and to help us identify a clear path 

and direction as to how this applies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member from Battlefords for his 

point of order and the response from the Government House 

Leader. And I will acknowledge that, yes, we are in a period of 

transition to the new rules. I will certainly take it under 

advisement, the point of order, and I will review the rules and 

come back with a response tomorrow. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 

Ottenbreit, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand here today and make remarks on the Speech from the 

Throne that was delivered on the opening of the first session of 

the twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by formally 

offering my congratulations to you on your acclamation to the 

position of Speaker of the Assembly. While I am new to this 

House and have not worked with you, I know you will do a fine 

job based on the positive comments I have heard from people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you actually received a ringing endorsement from 

one of my supporters. Following the election we held a 

supporter appreciation evening and I was having a conversation 

with a person that originally came from your constituency. 

When your name was suggested as a possible candidate for 

Speaker, she thought that this was a fine idea and went on to 

speak very highly of you. This sentiment was shared by fellow 

members of my caucus when we heard of your nomination. I 

wish you the very best as you increasingly become accustomed 

to your new role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the members on 

both sides of the House for winning their respective seats in the 

provincial election. Elections can be a gruelling and demanding 

endeavour and members should be pleased in their 

accomplishments. 

 

I would also like to echo the comments made yesterday by the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin concerning our electoral 

system. For some citizens it is easy to take our democracy for 

granted. And I’m sure from time to time other members have 

shared the experience of being confronted by voter apathy on 

the doorstep. While I agree that our democratic system is not 

perfect, I am thankful that we live in a society with free and fair 

elections. We, as members, have been entrusted with the 

responsibility of representing the interests of citizens in a 

specific geographic region, and we as members will be held 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

accountable by these voters. While some may view our electoral 

system as irrelevant and downright boring, I personally think it 

is a remarkable process and one that is rightly envied by many 

around the world. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the person charged with the responsibility of 

maintaining decorum in this House, you know all too well that 

our Westminster model of government is an adversarial system. 

From time to time, members of the government and members of 

the opposition may not see eye to eye on some issues. But I’m 

certain we can all agree that it is an honour and privilege to 

serve as a representative in the legislature, and a responsibility 

we ought to take very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few moments to thank some 

of the people that are near and dear to me. I would like to thank 

my wife Ruth, whose support and counsel I treasure most. I 

would also like to thank my immediate and extended family. As 

is the case for many members in the House, a life in politics is 

not a solo pursuit. Inevitably our families are drawn into the 

fray. And I for one am very thankful for the support and 

encouragement I have received from my family. 

 

On a more personal note, on the night of the swearing-in for my 

caucus, it was exciting to be able to flip through the pages of 

the book where we entered our signature following the taking of 

the oath. I know my family members appreciated the 

opportunity to scan through the pages through the 1960s to find 

the signature of my grandfather, Hans Broten. 

 

Beyond my family, Mr. Speaker, I owe a huge debt of gratitude 

to the volunteers and supporters that were involved in the 

campaign in Saskatoon Massy Place. The support and 

involvement of many of these people predates the recent 

election and goes back to the nomination process that was held 

for our party in the constituency. Whether it was work in the 

office, delivering flyers, donating money, making phone calls, 

or blanketing the constituency with signs, I sincerely want to 

thank these people for their help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the previous member for 

Massey Place, Mr. Eric Cline. As I canvassed the constituency 

over the summer and fall I was routinely told by constituents, 

you’ve got big shoes to fill, as they expressed genuine 

appreciation for the representation he provided. I would like to 

thank Eric for the help and guidance he has provided to me and 

for setting a high benchmark for service as the previous MLA 

for the constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Broten: — I would also like to thank my very capable 

constituency assistant, Ms. Donna Rederburg, who has already 

served the constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place for a number 

of years. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the staff of the 

Legislative Assembly and the staff of our caucus office. As a 

new member, I have found both groups of staff to be competent 

and professional. I thank them for the welcome they have 

provided to me. 

 

The final thank you I would like to make is to the constituents 

of Saskatoon Massey Place. I think this is perhaps the most 

important element of today’s speech, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to thank the people of my constituency for choosing me to be 

their representative in the legislature. As I’ve already said, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a role I do not take lightly. It is through the 

support of our constituents that we are elected and it is to them 

we are accountable. I look forward to working with my 

constituents over the next four years to defend and promote the 

interests of Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having heard the Throne Speech last week, it has 

provided me with some time to process the content of the 

speech and think about its implications for the constituents of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. Having just recently completed 

months of campaigning, my thoughts were taken to the people I 

met through knocking on doors and visiting coffee row. Voter 

contact is the means by which we, as elected representatives, 

stay plugged in to the issues that matter to everyday citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to pass on some of the exchanges I 

had while out on the campaign trail and share a little bit of 

information about my constituency. The knowledge gained 

through the people I have met has shaped my political views. 

Sharing this information will provide this House with some 

insight on the constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place and 

some background on why I hold certain viewpoints. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education was one topic that people often wanted 

to discuss on the doorstep. I remember on one of the more cold 

days of the campaign, a woman wanted to talk about how the 

community school in her neighbourhood had assisted her 

family. She valued the community school model and was very 

appreciative of its support. 

 

On another occasion I remember chatting with a mother who 

lived in Dundonald. She had two children currently studying at 

the University of Saskatchewan and she was concerned about 

accessibility to education for her kids if tuition increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity to meet with many 

students who attend SIAST. One man who lived in the 

neighbourhood of Westview had just completed his 

apprenticeship training and was looking forward to receiving 

the graduate tax exemption over the next five years. 

 

While out canvassing, I also met many small-business owners 

who spoke of their need for additional skilled workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good number of my neighbours are people 

struggling financially to make ends meet. Some of these people 

are on social assistance. I remember speaking to one woman 

who faced consecutive hurdles in her life, hurdles that I could 

not imagine having to overcome. This woman stands out in my 

mind as a person in our society who has no voice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other people in my constituency are able to work 

— and do — but earn incomes that only allow them to live 

month to month. An economic boom only matters to these 

people if they are able to share in its benefits. I’m not sure a 

PST [provincial sales tax] exemption on used cars is the most 

beneficial assistance the government could provide to these 

people. 

 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents also care about safe 

neighbourhoods. I know some are working to improve things 

through neighbourhood patrols and I’ve had the opportunity to 

go along on these walks. My constituents also understand that 

addressing crime begins long before citizens decide to patrol 

alleys and parks. Mr. Speaker, perhaps this ties into some of the 

earlier views that were expressed about initiatives like 

community schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another common discussion I had with voters was 

about housing. These conversations happened in 

neighbourhoods like Mayfair, Westmount, and Mount Royal, 

but they certainly were not limited to these three. Many 

residents have experienced unmanageable rent increases or have 

found themselves out on the street after their rental 

accommodation was flipped. 

 

My constituents are looking for long-term solutions on this 

issue. Some want to keep on renting but simply want to pay a 

reasonable amount of rent. Others, Mr. Speaker, want to get 

into home ownership. I found it alarming that the Throne 

Speech was silent on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the environment is another topic that is at the fore 

of my constituents’ concerns. I remember meeting one young 

man in my home neighbourhood of Caswell Hill who ranked 

this issue as his top priority. I know he and I will be watching to 

see what concrete and substantive steps are taken by this new 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is also home to many First 

Nations and Métis people. I remember being asked by a young 

First Nations family in the neighbourhood of Massey Place 

about my views on treaties. I also remember meeting many 

young Aboriginals who are currently studying at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], SIAST, SIIT [Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies]. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, I also 

remember being confronted by the ugly face of racism and I 

wish I could say this wasn’t a common occurrence. There’s 

much work for our province to do in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also many workers in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. I recall speaking with a woman in the 

new neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And this woman 

belonged to a trade union. She expressed concern over some of 

the Sask Party plans she heard about during the election. She 

and I will be paying close attention to the activities of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and what exactly is meant by 

competitive balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also a good number of seniors living in 

my constituency. Some of these men and women live on fixed 

incomes and many of their concerns are shared by younger 

people in the constituency. I have learned a great deal through 

my conversations with the seniors of Saskatoon Massey Place 

and I look forward to their ongoing advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the area of health care was another common topic 

of discussion. Families interact with the health care system on 

many different levels and through many different stages of life. 

While we often look at the challenges surrounding the health 

care system, I think it is also important to remember the many 

daily successes and remember the hard . . . people working in 

the health care sector. 

 

I remember visiting with a husband and wife, again in the 

neighbourhood of Dundonald. They told me that over the past 

year they had five significant points of contact with the health 

care system, involving different members of their family. In 

each visit, the couple felt the timeliness and quality of care they 

received was excellent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting that there are not some very 

real challenges facing the health care system. What I am saying 

is that my constituents have extremely high expectations around 

health care. I know they will closely watch how any efficiency 

reviews are conducted and how recruitment progress is being 

realized. They will also be watching to ensure the government 

follows its commitment to a publicly funded and publicly 

delivered health care system. 

 

While on the topic of health care, Mr. Speaker, many residents 

and staff of Oliver Lodge in Hudson Bay Park are looking 

forward to the expansion of their long-term care facility. This is 

a much needed project for my constituents and many other 

residents of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, my constituency is diverse in its 

makeup and views. I truly enjoy the people I’ve met over the 

months of campaigning, and I look forward to continuing these 

relationships and fostering new ones. 

 

Having had time to reflect on the government’s Speech from 

the Throne, I’m of the opinion that it does not serve the best 

interests of my constituents. There are simply too many 

deviations from the concerns my constituents have raised with 

me. And there simply is not enough detail in the government’s 

Throne Speech to put my constituents’ stated worries at ease. 

As such, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment to 

the Throne Speech. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would once again like to thank the 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place for their support and 

I’m looking forward to working with them in the coming years. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — I rise today for my first speech in this 

Chamber as an MLA. Of course, this would not be possible 

without the support of the people of the constituency of 

Meadow Lake which I’m privileged to represent in this 

Assembly. 

 

But I’d actually like to make light of my colleague’s comment 

yesterday, from Rosetown, about not knowing quite how much 

of a privilege it is sitting beside the member for Carrot River 

Valley. All kidding aside, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a reflection 

of the growing popularity of the member for Carrot River 

Valley that his colleagues see fit to give him a rough time. 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Before I get into the main part of my remarks, I’d like to pay 

tribute to those who have preceded me as a representative for 

Meadow Lake. As hon. members know, my immediate 

predecessor, Mr. Maynard Sonntag, was a popular and 

long-serving member of this Assembly, sitting for 16 years as 

an MLA, and serving honourably in cabinet for many of those 

years in many positions, most recently as Minister of Industry 

and Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations. I’ve known 

Maynard for many years. As an indication of his length of 

service, I think I actually met him when I was in grade 8, when 

he came in to speak to my class. He served Meadow Lake with 

dignity and diligence, and I sincerely wish him and his family 

the best in whatever their future holds. 

 

I would also like to pay tribute to another gentleman who 

served as the MLA for Meadow Lake, the member from 1978 

to 1991, Mr. George McLeod. George served in cabinet from 

1981 to 1991 and was the deputy premier of this province by 

the end of his tenure. George was one of my teachers in high 

school, and indeed ignited some of the passion for politics that 

I’ve carried with me over the course of many years and many 

elections. George has long been a source of wisdom and 

guidance, and I know he is remembered with a great deal of 

fondness and respect by the people he served for so many years 

in Meadow Lake. 

 

The last four years have been a political whirlwind for me and 

my family. I’ve been nominated as a candidate for federal or 

provincial office five times for three different parties. I’ve been 

a candidate for federal or provincial office during three general 

election campaigns. I’ve had the honour of serving the people 

of northern Saskatchewan in the House of Commons during the 

thirty-eighth parliament as their MP [Member of Parliament]. 

And now I have the honour of representing the people of the 

Meadow Lake constituency, and of my beloved hometown of 

Meadow Lake, in this Assembly. 

 

And through it all, my wife Alaina has put up with it. Through 

nearly a dozen moves in three provinces, through all the ups 

and downs, the slings and arrows, the highs and lows, she 

supported me, and for that I’m grateful. 

 

I’d also like to pay tribute to the rest of my family, who have 

encouraged me and supported me, and in some cases become 

political operatives of the first order. My mother Lorna, who 

was my deputy campaign manager in the last election who, 

despite having a near coronary every time somebody said 

something mean about her little boy, has over the course of the 

last decade of my political journey become one of my most 

trusted and capable advisers and operators. 

 

My wife Alaina who, despite her oft-expressed indignation with 

the political process, is a true political professional without 

whom I wouldn’t be here today. My father, Tom, who truly is 

one of the finest political minds of anybody I’ve ever met and 

who frequently tempers my more aggressive political instincts 

to the benefit of all. My sister, Jennifer, who’s been a great 

supporter and source of advice over the years, and who was 

utterly mortified to find herself in a picture in The StarPhoenix 

with me during the last campaign. My brother, Jordan, who has 

been a great supporter and who has built numerous websites 

and even built a short-lived blog that I ran when I was a 

Member of Parliament. 

[14:45] 

 

Over the course of five nominations and three general election 

campaigns, we’ve been privileged to be surrounded by an 

outstanding political team in Meadow Lake: Denise Dodds, 

who served as my riding president for many years and managed 

my most recent campaign; Gary Vidal, who is the current riding 

president and was my business manager during the most recent 

election; Doris Young, who was our volunteer co-ordinator and 

deputy E-Day Chair; Brent Rathgeber, who managed the 

election day operation; Sharlene Beaulieu, who was my office 

manager; and Chief Guy Lariviere, who was our campaign 

Chair. There were countless others as well. On election day we 

had nearly 200 volunteers working across the riding. 

 

Also I would like to acknowledge my grandfathers, who I’m 

sure are both watching, who have become legislative channel 

junkies, and before that CPAC [Cable Public Affairs Channel] 

junkies who have been a great source of inspiration and support 

for me as well. 

 

I would like to acknowledge some friends of mine who also 

worked on the campaign: Robin Speer, who’s a close friend of 

mine who came out from Ottawa to actually work; Ross 

Clements, my law partner, who has offered great advice and 

been a great friend to me; Michael Cooper, who has one of the 

sharpest political minds in the country — remember that name 

because you’ll be hearing more of it. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge a couple of my former colleagues. 

I’ve been privileged to have some true mentors, some great 

advisors, over the course of my political career. One of whom 

I’d like to acknowledge, Mr. Jim Prentice, who is the Minister 

of Industry in the federal government, who is a great friend to 

me, who I served with on the Indian Affairs committee in 

Ottawa, and who I also worked for after the last federal 

election. 

 

Also I’d like to acknowledge the importance in my political 

career of a man that I had the privilege of working for and with 

for nearly five years, named, Stephen Harper. I worked on 

Stephen’s first leadership campaign while still in law school, 

and later worked closely with him while a member of the 

national council of the Canadian Alliance, watching from the 

front row as he adroitly managed the reintegration of the 

Alliance and subsequent merger of the Alliance with the former 

PC [Progressive Conservative] Party. At his urging I later ran 

for and won my first nomination in my Churchill River seat. I 

subsequently worked on his successful leadership campaign for 

the Conservative Party, served under his leadership as an MP 

and shadow critic, and later worked for Prime Minister Stephen 

Harper as a staff member in his government. Stephen’s been a 

fantastic Prime Minister for our great country, and I know he’ll 

continue to be for a long time to come. 

 

As I’ve already mentioned, Mr. Speaker, my hometown is the 

community of Meadow Lake — the place where I grew up and 

the place that will always be home. Mr. Speaker, there are 

people all over the country that don’t want to hear another word 

from me about Meadow Lake, but I don’t really care. Meadow 

Lake’s a wonderful, vibrant community, with great people, a 

proud past, and bright future. Ideally placed to become a centre 

of the developing oil and gas industry in the North as well as 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

other value-added applications of the rich natural resources 

present in our great province. 

 

Meadow Lake is also a centre of the forestry industry. As 

members know the forestry industry is going through a difficult 

time in our province. Many citizens in Meadow Lake have been 

hard hit but they’re confident that our new government will do 

whatever we can to make things better. 

 

I would now like to turn my attention to more partisan matters, 

particularly letting members know how proud I am to be a part 

of the first non-socialist government in this province in the past 

16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Our party ran on a platform of hope and 

opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. As we know the 

socialist party opposite ran on a platform of fear and smear. 

Indeed they put out a province-wide press release the day before 

the election alleging that there were mass voter challenges in 

Meadow Lake and insinuating that the challenges were made on 

the basis of race. 

 

The press release was completely made up. It was a pure lie on 

the part of the socialist party. There were no challenges made at 

the advance polls — not one. A fact which they were later 

forced to acknowledge, though the people of Meadow Lake 

have yet to hear an apology from them. If they have any class at 

all, the Leader of the Opposition will issue that apology to the 

people of Meadow Lake today and I’m asking that he do so or 

explain why he will not. 

 

I would also like to let hon. members know how proud I am to 

be a part of a government composed of such excellent people 

under the inspiring leadership of the member for Swift Current. 

The Premier is a fantastic leader who ran an outstanding 

campaign and in whom the people of Saskatchewan have 

justifiably put their faith. I know that both he and our new 

government will live up to that faith. 

 

Also I’ll maybe tell a little story about the first time I met the 

Premier was in about 2000. The Premier was a newly elected 

member from Swift Current and was speaking at a youth 

convention of which I was attending. And at that time, Mr. 

Speaker . . . I’ve never said this publicly but I used to on the 

odd occasion chew tobacco. And I had a tin of chewing tobacco 

and the Premier came up and said, maybe I’ll have a little bit of 

that. He says it’s not true. Maybe my memory is foggy, Mr. 

Speaker. I thought, though, if the Premier ever becomes leader 

of this party I’m going to run for him because the people in 

Meadow Lake will absolutely, will absolutely love him. 

 

What we are actually debating here today though is the 

amendment by the socialist party to the motion made by the 

member for Estevan and seconded by the member from 

Yorkton. This amendment tells people pretty much everything 

they need to know about the current state of the socialists 

opposite. All they’ve got left is negativity and fearmongering. 

The amendment actually talks of a hidden agenda, probably the 

most ridiculous phrase that the left have come up with in the 

last while. 

 

And while we’re talking about hidden agendas, how about the 

positions that have been taken by the leader of the socialist 

party, the member for Toronto-Danforth? What are his stands? 

More billions for the gun registry, confiscation of all firearms, 

doubling of gas prices. I guess this stuff plays well to the nut 

roots of the party opposite but they’re clearly not supported by 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Throne Speech lays the groundwork for a new era in 

Saskatchewan that will secure the future of our province, keep 

young people at home, and provide for increased opportunities 

for business. I’d like to tell a story about just one example of 

how already our government is securing the future. During the 

campaign, my cousin Kailey had to make a decision of whether 

to take a job offer in Alberta or to stay here in Saskatchewan. 

The offers were roughly equivalent. As she’s just graduating 

from university, the commitment made by our party with 

respect to tax changes for recent graduates was very attractive. 

 

Indeed, her decision was based entirely upon the chances of the 

Saskatchewan Party forming government. She was sufficiently 

confident that the people of Saskatchewan would pick hope 

over fear, and she accepted the job right here in Saskatchewan. 

And just like that, Mr. Speaker, we have one more talented and 

intelligent young person staying here in our province. 

 

As some members know I’ve been practising law for the last 

year. One of the areas I practise in is residential real estate. 

During the campaign I heard from colleagues of a number of 

occurrences where real estate purchase agreements were 

actually made contingent on our party forming government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty sure there were no purchase 

agreements made contingent on the socialists retaining power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude I would also like to thank the 

Premier for the honour of being named the Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Energy and Resources, northern 

resources and oil sands development. The potential of northern 

Saskatchewan is truly awe inspiring. I recently had the pleasure 

of attending with the Premier, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, and the member from Lloydminster a talk by an 

expert on the global oil industry, Mr. Paul Michael Wihbey. 

The message that Mr. Wihbey conveyed was both fascinating 

and exciting. 

 

In simple terms, the world, particularly the great republic to our 

south, is looking to northern Saskatchewan and northern 

Alberta as a most important new source of stable and accessible 

energy on the planet. The reserves present in our northern oil 

sands are truly mind boggling, rivalling those that exist in any 

country in the world. Prime Minister Harper has talked about 

how Canada is an emerging energy superpower, which is very 

true. And the heart of the future of the energy industry is going 

to be right here in Saskatchewan. Our government’s committed 

to developing these resources in a sustainable way that will 

ensure jobs and benefits accrue to all people in our province. 

 

But it’s not just oil that presents great opportunities for northern 

Saskatchewan. Other resources like uranium, diamonds, and 

rare metals provide tremendous potential. I can’t tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, how many business leaders and citizens I’ve run into 

over the course of the last month that have expressed their 

absolute relief that the socialists have lost power. Many have 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

been waiting for this occurrence before investing or expanding 

operations in Saskatchewan. Well we’re proud to say, 

Saskatchewan is open for business. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the people of 

Meadow Lake for their support. I’d like to indicate that I will be 

supporting the main motion and opposing the ridiculous 

amendment. And I thank hon. members for their attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

starting I’d like to congratulate you on your election. I must tell 

you that I believe I spoke with your nephew. We discussed your 

earlier Swift Current comment with a chuckle but he added that 

your sense of humour often extends to times in church. I didn’t 

follow up on that but perhaps we could discuss that on a future 

date, Mr. Speaker. So again congratulations and I look forward 

to your steady hand in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Fairview is made up of hard-working 

Saskatchewan families. In our constituency, we have some of 

the most vibrant community associations in the city of 

Saskatoon. I have attended many of their community events 

and, Mr. Speaker, they have wrapped a snake around my neck. 

I’ve had pies thrown at me, and I’ve witnessed multicultural 

events that were on par with the city of Saskatoon’s own 

Folkfest. Mr. Speaker, this is what makes Saskatoon Fairview, 

the city of Saskatoon, and our province the best place in all of 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province take a back 

seat to no one. 

 

The constituents of Saskatoon Fairview have again granted me 

the privilege of serving and representing their interests in this 

legislature. Mr. Speaker, I accept their decision and will 

represent their interests to the best of my abilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members, we are here to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan but we cannot forget that we got here through a 

lot of hard work of our supporters before and during the 

election. I want to thank all those who worked on my campaign 

especially the constituents of Saskatoon Fairview and the 

Saskatoon Fairview NDP executive. Thank you for your long 

hours and your dedication to a belief in making things better for 

all in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spent a major portion of my working life — 

nearly 22 years — working for the Canadian Union of Public 

Employees, negotiating, and working with the people of 

Saskatchewan from Sturgis to Ile-a-la-Crosse to Weyburn to 

Kindersley and everywhere else in between. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to especially thank all those union members who took 

time out to assist me in my campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the strains and stress our families 

endure while we tend here at our business and especially during 

campaign time when the stresses surely become multiplied. And 

I want to acknowledge my family and thank them for their 

incredible patience and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all embrace our past and that past, our 

heritage, gives us strength. It’s like the story I tell my daughters 

of walking to school two miles and both ways were uphill, Mr. 

Speaker. My daughters have grown weary of that particular 

story but I want to share another small piece of my heritage. 

Mr. Speaker, my grandmother came to this country as a very 

young girl and she would tell us of her one vivid memory of 

hiding under a table every time it rained because the mud from 

the lean-to sod shelter would fall on her. Mr. Speaker, 

visualizing that scene allows me to understand the 

determination of Saskatchewan people and what makes this 

province lead in ways that others can only imagine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all come to this legislature to work with the 

people of this province and to do our best. The people of this 

province have chosen the Saskatchewan Party to be the new 

government, and I accept their decision. Mr. Speaker, having 

chosen the Saskatchewan Party, they have in their wisdom also 

saw fit to support 20 New Democrats to keep the Saskatchewan 

Party government accountable. 

 

Before going further, I just want to list a fraction of what New 

Democrats accomplished during my first term as MLA. There 

are now 506,000 people working in Saskatchewan. We left $2 

billion in money for the new government. We had 14 balanced 

budgets in a row and 16 credit upgrades. We paid down the debt 

by 1.2 billion during the period 2004 to 2007. We implemented 

a new prescription drug plan for seniors; a new statutory 

holiday, Family Day, in February. We have the lowest auto 

insurance rates in the country, with a rebate in the spring of 

2007. We introduced the lowest-cost utility bundle in Canada 

and reduced the PST from 7 to 5 per cent — second lowest in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, grain prices are up. Oil is booming. Potash 

production is on a roll like never other time before. Uranium is 

expanding. In Saskatoon we have an expanding manufacturing 

and business sector. The retail and real estate sector is seeing 

unprecedented growth. We need more workers, and that is 

always a good sign, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that the diligent and hard work of 

the NDP governments under Premier Romanow and Calvert has 

made us what we are today. Mr. Speaker, never before was a 

new government left with so much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government is obviously 

only days old, so most people would allow for the odd glitch 

and miscue, but most would also say, you can tell a lot about 

first impressions. Actions speak louder than words, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the Saskatchewan Party platform, under more accountable 

government, page 40 of this platform, I quote. It says, 

“Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest [Mr. Speaker] and accountable.” The platform goes on to 

say how they, the Saskatchewan Party, will be more 

accountable than any previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now direct my comments to the 

legislation of essential services as most recently announced by 

the Sask Party. Mr. Speaker, perhaps this is an odd glitch, or 

perhaps is it a bit more, when on October 1, 2007, the Health 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

critic from Indian Head-Milestone had this to say on essential 

services legislation when asked by a reporter very directly, 

would you legislate essential services? The member from 

Indian Head-Milestone, now the Sask Party Health minister, 

had this to say: 

 

No. It needs to be negotiated. It needs to be put in the 

contract, negotiated into the contract. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The reporter goes on to ask, what’s the reason for not going the 

legislative route? The member from Indian Head-Milestone 

replies, quote: 

 

Well I’m quite confident that it can be negotiated. I don’t 

think we need to get to legislation. I don’t think we need to 

go there at all. You know, you look back regarding 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses have had essential service 

agreements in place. The government then legislated them 

back, and it really hasn’t been very successful in any of the 

relationships going forward. I think that there is lots of 

things we can do through the negotiation process to ensure 

the needs of the people of Saskatchewan are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me read again from the Saskatchewan Party 

platform, this time page 19: 

 

A Fair and Balanced Labour Environment for Workers and 

Employers . . . Protecting public safety by working 

together with the province’s public sector unions [working 

together, Mr. Speaker] to ensure essential services are in 

place in the event of a strike or labour action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the Sask Party government is telling the 

people of Saskatchewan that they are bringing in essential 

services legislation. They will not tell us who is covered by the 

legislation. They’ll not tell us who they talk to. In fact the 

Labour minister’s most favourite line speaking to reporters is, I 

will get back to you. 

 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record some 

comments made by the Labour minister on essential services 

legislation. On December 5, 2007, he had this to say to 

reporters when asked the question, what work have you done to 

study that in advance of legislation? The minister: 

 

What we’ve seen is the legislation under consideration. 

Seven other jurisdictions in Canada have very similar 

jurisdictions and so, you know, I wouldn’t want to be 

alarmist. It’s as far as those kind of remarks. We’ve given 

it quite thorough study. It’s based on some best practices, 

so I appreciate the insight but we studied this pretty 

thoroughly. 

 

Question: 

 

You say you’ve studied it very thoroughly, but have you 

actually consulted any labour groups or gone outside of 

government with any sort of consultations? 

 

I’ll get back to you on that. 

 

Next question: 

 

The messaging from Mr. McMorris and Mr. Hermanson 

was that legislation will not be required to get these 

agreements. What’s changed? 

 

Oh, in essence what we’re doing is just becoming 

consistent with the Canadian norm. 

 

Next question: “Then why did the party say that they wouldn’t 

be required for six months?” Minister: “Yeah, in essence we 

just want to make sure that our services are covered.” 

 

Question: 

 

But then why didn’t someone say that six months ago? 

Rather, two Saskatchewan Party members said that they 

didn’t think legislation would be required. Do you know 

what the change was? 

 

Oh no. I’ll have to get back to you on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a pattern developing. Mr. 

Speaker you are allowed not to know the odd detail. But when 

you don’t know if you spoke to anyone about the legislation 

you have been studying for a year, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, is 

this an odd glitch? Or is this the Sask Party saying one thing 

before the election and doing something else when elected? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say I have heard some creative 

interpretations regarding consultations and working together, 

but this is definitely a creative whopper and, Mr. Speaker, and 

not — I don’t think — the kind that they serve at Burger King. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the new reply to everything: I will get back 

to you. To me, Mr. Speaker, this is not rocket science or trying 

to get used to a new BlackBerry. You either talk to people or 

you didn’t — yes or no. Mr. Speaker, say one thing before the 

election and do another after you’re elected. Quite the first 

impression, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we have it, the member from Swift Current, Mr. 

Hermanson, and the newly minted Health minister all made it 

clear that legislation was not the preferred route. The Labour 

minister says they studied essential services thoroughly for over 

a year. The member knows for certain, Mr. Speaker, but this 

member does not know, on an important issue such as this, 

whether the Sask Party spoke with anyone. Mr. Speaker, the 

Labour minister’s “I’ll get back to you” just doesn’t cut it. This 

is absolutely not what Saskatchewan people expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on issue after issue, the Sask Party members say 

they were given a mandate to govern, and that’s all the 

consultation people need. Mr. Speaker, what I know is that this 

type of consultation is going to make a lot of people very 

nervous. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party said one thing 

immediately before the election and did something else when 

elected. They say one thing and do another. Actions certainly 

speak louder than words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party did not even have the courage to 

put their position of legislating essential services in the Throne 

Speech — nothing, not a single word, not even I’ll get back to 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

you later or I’ll give it my best shot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is going on here? Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party talks about rebalancing labour legislation to make us 

competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, 

everyone can see that Sask Party rebalancing equals workers’ 

rights being stripped away. Saskatchewan has taken pride in 

leading labour legislation in Canada, and now this has somehow 

become shameful. It is all now unimportant. I think what is 

shameful, Mr. Speaker, is the approach the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast used when speaking of secret ballots on 

union certification, informed communication, and supervised 

balloting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I expected more from that member who I thought 

understood better the intricacies of the workplace. I had listened 

to his personal stories of involvement in strikes and collective 

bargaining which he spoke of here in the legislature. Mr. 

Speaker, that member went on in his speech here the other day 

of how he wanted to see the NDP support Sask Party 

legislation. Or how he could hardly wait and how he would tell 

the whole world if the NDP didn’t support the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where in the Throne Speech and the Sask Party 

agenda is the mention of the vigilance necessary for safe 

workplace and environments? Where is the concern for the 

working families and their struggles? Where is the concern for 

workers injured on the job? And where is the concern for the 

families of workers killed on the job? Where is the compassion, 

Mr. Speaker, for the working people of this province? That 

member from Saskatoon Southeast can only think of himself, 

and now he wants the NDP to vote in favour of Sask Party 

motions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of people in this province contribute to our 

economy and a lot of those people work very hard, working 

families who believe in fairness. And where is their fairness, 

Mr. Speaker? Not a mention anywhere of safety in the 

workplace. This is what is shameful, and this is what we should 

talk about to the people of our constituencies and our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying that it’s becoming 

disappointing at the number of times that the Sask Party is 

saying one thing before the election, and now doing another 

right afterwards. Their actions are truly speaking louder than 

their words. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the many working people 

and families of this province, all my constituents, and our leader 

for this opportunity I’m offered today. And I humbly accept the 

challenge before us. Mr. Speaker, for these reasons, I’ll be 

supporting the amendment and voting against the Throne 

Speech. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pride and a humble heart that I stand here today. I understand 

the full weight and honour to have this opportunity. It is my 

foremost goal that I never forget why I’m here nor who I 

represent. And I thank the people of Lloydminster for their 

confidence and this opportunity. 

 

I’m particularly pleased to be able to acknowledge some of the 

people who have contributed so much to my success and the 

success of the Saskatchewan Party over the last two years. 

Firstly, my predecessor, Milt Wakefield. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, as you well know, Mr. 

Wakefield handled himself with class and dignity throughout 

his political career. He, throughout his political career, served 

this Assembly and, more importantly, the people of 

Lloydminster so well. He has been and continues to be a voice 

of wisdom I seek out. 

 

And in fact that reminds me of a story that as a cattle rancher 

I’m fond of. It’s a story of when the farmer turns his two bulls 

out in the spring. The young bull turns to the old bull and says, 

let’s run down the hill and do some work. The old bull, he looks 

back, and he says, let’s walk down the hill and do all the work. 

Though he chose not to run again in this election, his influence 

and legacy will long be felt in Saskatchewan through his work 

with Enterprise Saskatchewan and in our home constituency. 

 

We’re all familiar with the sacrifices of running for political 

office and know how many of our friends, family, and 

unknowing volunteers that get drug down that path with us. 

Building a team to fight a late fall-early winter election, I often 

thought of a quote from Ernest Shackleton’s adventure where 

he was trying to find sailors to sail to the South Pole. His ad in 

the London newspaper in 1906 read: 

 

Men wanted for hazardous journey. Small wages. Bitter 

cold. Long months of complete darkness. Constant danger. 

Safe return doubtful. Honour and recognition in case of 

success. 

 

It’s hard to believe he found anyone to sign up for his journey 

— or ours. Luckily I gathered a keen group of young men and 

women willing to jump with both feet into uncharted waters. 

James Thorsteinson, Colleen Young, Aaron Buckingham, Cory 

Rideout, Tara Streleski, Ethan Walker, Karen Webber, and 

Marilyn and Tom Hougham, and many more — all went above 

and beyond in the march towards E-Day. I want to extend a 

heartfelt thanks to them, to my parents, and especially my wife. 

 

Recently, in the first day of orientation, the Legislative Library 

people handed out a pamphlet to new MLAs with some advice. 

And something that really stuck with me is political careers last 

on average six years. The advice was, don’t neglect those at 

home. At the end of your political career, who’s standing beside 

you will be your family. And I plan not to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — It’s my beautiful wife, Ali, and two little 

girls, Reilly, two and a half, and Grace, born just last Saturday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — They constantly remind me of the task 

before us as elected members. It is for their future that we must 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

work hard and make this province the first choice for the next 

generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will next take this opportunity to inform the 

Chamber of the most exciting region in the province and 

possibly Western Canada. 

 

My riding stretches from Meadow Lake Provincial Park in the 

north to Lloydminster, the border city, in the south. 

Geographically we maybe long and narrow, but productively 

our base is broad. We excel at fishing, forestry, outfitting, 

farming, ranching, tourism, natural gas, trucking, 

manufacturing. Our area’s a leader in the world of heavy oil 

production. Technical advances and exporting that technology 

around the world is something that we’ve done a lot of and have 

become very good at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the last two years since my nomination, 

my family has travelled extensively in the riding. We’ve 

enjoyed the yearly fish fry in Pierceland, parades in historic 

Frenchman Butte, 4-H days, community picnics, rodeos, even 

bareback horse wrestling at Onion Lake’s Canada Day 

celebrations. 

 

My riding is full of hard-working and welcoming people who 

wanted to have their say on November 7, to give rural 

Saskatchewan a voice, and to vote in a Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

As our new Saskatchewan starts to deal with the challenges of a 

growing economy, with labour shortages, housing shortages, 

and rising costs, my corner of the province has been dealing 

with these issues for some time already. When the members 

opposite were government, they failed to see or at least failed to 

address these problems. In fact all we heard from the NDP 

propaganda machine was pumping out anti-Alberta rhetoric. In 

their haste to warn the rest of the province that we don’t want to 

be successful, at least not successful like Alberta, Mr. Speaker, 

they missed a valuable opportunity to learn about managing 

growth and success. 

 

Our riding has been successful in spite of this. I’ll tell those 

members: we share a city with Alberta. They’re not to be 

feared. In fact they’ve been a partner and a good neighbour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — The city of Lloydminster touts itself as 

Canada’s only border city. As well as being a seamless 

community under The Lloydminster Charter, we have a 

provincial divide that runs down the centre. I’ve already 

extended an invitation to the Minister of Municipal Affairs to 

come for a visit as I think Lloydminster will be one of the more 

complex jurisdictions that he gets to look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have often thought that if a social scientist were 

to conduct an experiment on political ideologies and how it 

functionally affects economies and social structures in a 

community, they might place a microscope on Lloydminster. 

Simply put opposing ideologies, political ideologies, on each 

side of a border and sit back and wait 50 years, with similar 

land, people, opportunities, challenges. 

 

Let’s take a look. Investment by individuals and business have 

told the tale, Mr. Speaker. There are now three Tim Hortons in 

Lloydminster, all of which have located themselves on the 

Alberta side, one just feet from the border. In the last 10 years, 

the west side of Lloydminster has seen subdivision after 

subdivision built on the Alberta side, with massive investment 

in the industrial parks, with just modest growth on the eastern 

side. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I love my double-doubles. I love coffee. But 

as a coffee drinker I can’t see how the water on the Alberta side 

makes better coffee than in Saskatchewan, nor the air. I think it 

has to firmly rest with the policies of the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — But this will turn around with the current 

government, Mr. Speaker. But I want them to recognize that it 

isn’t about where I have to go for a cup of coffee that’s 

important. It’s that this is lost revenue that could have been 

used to make life better for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is with my home community in mind that I evaluate the 

Throne Speech. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

the most inspired and visionary Throne Speech in a generation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Our Premier had the task to pick up the 

pieces after a desperate spending spree from a tired, old NDP 

government, and mould them into a vision with a positive future 

for everyone. He had to shift government’s focus from 

rewarding special interest groups to change that benefits 

everyone. 

 

Yes, the Premier has set a positive course, but he has had some 

help. He has a talented caucus and staff. He has assembled a 

lean and productive cabinet, all working for the betterment of 

Saskatchewan. Our Premier has the support of working people, 

business, from young and old, in the North and in the South. 

Mr. Speaker, he has support from both rural and the cities. 

Through the campaign he spread a positive message to this 

province and that has carried through this Throne Speech. There 

is hope and there is optimism and there will be a bright future 

for my constituency and this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to speak to 

the amendment put forward by the opposition. Rarely in my 

adult years have I had the opportunity to hear such drivel. Mr. 

Speaker, if this is the level of contribution that we are to expect 

from the members opposite, we are all worse off. I hope they 

understand that their role in this legislature is an important one, 

and though not as glorious as their role in the past, the people of 

Saskatchewan expect them to perform it and to perform it well. 

 

The downfall of their party seems to have gone in vain, Mr. 

Speaker, for they have failed to grasp even the simplest of 

lessons: hope beats fear. In the election, in the Throne Speech, 

today, and into the future — I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker — 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

hope beats fear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last election I feel our province has turned a 

corner and thankfully gotten back on track. The Throne Speech 

may have been penned by the Premier, but I am certain he has 

just given voice to what lies deep in the hearts of the men and 

women he represents. He has given voice to those who compete 

to win. He has given voice to those who work hard to get ahead; 

to those who want a hand up, not a handout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca spoke in the 

legislature several days ago. He stated 13 times in his speech 

that his former government . . . He stated 13 times in his speech 

that this government does not care about, and I quote, “poor 

people,” and that his former party and his former government 

did. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government does care about 

poor people. 

 

I will also concede that his party did care about poor people. In 

fact he cared about them so much he tried to make everyone 

poor. I sometimes felt, I sometimes felt that that former 

government would not rest until every member of 

Saskatchewan was living in a cardboard box. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a different view. Our 

government has a slightly different approach. Instead of pulling 

the many down, we want to lift everyone up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, for too long we have handled 

ourselves as less than we are. We were satisfied with less than 

we deserve. In the last eight weeks people have noticeably 

bigger smiles and a spring in their step. Mr. Speaker, with 

conviction and love of this province, I am compelled to inform 

the Assembly I will not be supporting the amendment, for it 

represents all that we have worked so hard to leave behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to inform the Assembly that 

I will be supporting the Throne Speech, as I support all that is 

good in Saskatchewan and in its people. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to 

speak on this very important occasion, the reply to the Throne 

Speech 2007. 

 

First some very important notes of recognition. To you, sir, on 

your election as Speaker. Your position is, of course, of utmost 

importance in our legislature and indeed in parliamentary 

democracy. It is clear that you have the confidence of the House 

and I congratulate you. 

 

As well my congratulations and best wishes go to the member 

from Arm River on his new role of Deputy Speaker. Again a 

very good choice. 

 

I want to also acknowledge our Clerk and staff and thank them 

for their good work in preparing for this session and their 

ongoing diligence to ensure that our legislature works. 

 

My congratulations and best wishes goes to those first elected 

in this House. It is pretty special to have the confidence of your 

neighbours to represent them in this legislature. Your duties are 

important and I wish you all the best as you begin your new 

journey as an MLA in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

And I want to say to those re-elected, good to see you again. I 

know that elections are hard fought and we all have fought the 

good battles. But when I do reflect on the good work done in 

this legislature in the past, it’s often done through the common 

value of doing what is best for all of Saskatchewan’s citizens. It 

is my hope that we can keep that core value alive and well in 

our legislature. 

 

I also want to congratulate the new Premier and the new 

members of Executive Council on their new roles. It is an 

awesome responsibility, one that requires much attention and 

hard work. It is truly a commitment to serve all of 

Saskatchewan and it is of course our hope you all discharge 

your duties faithfully and in the best interests of our province. 

 

Now our leader has spoken about our new roles as members of 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, and the Saskatchewan people 

have given us an important and a very essential responsibility 

that makes our legislature and in fact our province work. We 

will hold the government accountable as we listen to the people 

of Saskatchewan about their hopes and fears about our great 

province of Saskatchewan. And I am indeed looking forward, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to my new role as critic for Social 

Services, disabilities, community-based organizations, and the 

voluntary sector. 

 

Finally and most importantly I must thank the good folks 

who’ve given me this precious opportunity to serve. I speak of 

course about my constituents of Saskatoon Centre. Saskatoon 

Centre is perhaps one of the most urban of all constituencies in 

Saskatchewan. I believe it is also the most beautiful and scenic 

along the banks of the South Saskatchewan River, home to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, and now home to the brand new, 

beautiful Persephone Theatre. But we don’t stop there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We have the Mendel, AKA, Troupe du Jour, 

and of course the Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company. And 

did I mention the great restaurants downtown? 

 

Now education is a very important part of Saskatoon Centre. It 

has three major high schools, perhaps with more high school 

students than any other riding in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I want to take a moment to recognize Princess 

Alexandra School on a very special occasion. On December 8 it 

celebrated its 100th birthday. It was the first school built in 

Saskatoon west of the tracks in the booming town that was, in 

1907, a city just a year old and two years old in this province of 

Saskatchewan. The population of Saskatoon at the time was 

3,000 people. 

 

Special recognition goes to Roland Dumont, a local community 

member who attended Princess Alex. His family was 

instrumental in ensuring a wonderful collection of old artifacts 

from the school’s history. Thank you, Roland. 

 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

Now Princess Alex is indeed a very special school in our core 

community as it reflects the ever-changing nature of our 

communities, especially that rich heritage of immigration of 

Chinese, Ukrainians, and the Vietnamese, and many others, and 

of course, our First Nations and Métis people. And here’s a 

school that’s giving our children hope through learning — some 

100 years of learning. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some of the most affluent 

people living in Centre but also some who are the most 

vulnerable. Unfortunately this is highlighted last year in the 

report entitled Health Disparity by Neighbourhood Income, a 

report that we must keep in mind in this legislature as we go 

forward, and a report that I hope the Minister of Health has on 

his reading list. And of course . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, I do. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Good stuff. And of course, a big thank you to 

my team — Leslie Bernett, Francine, David, Val, Ryan, and my 

own family — Dawn, Cam, Alison, and Reilly. They were 

always there for me. Thank you so much. 

 

Questions and answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but more 

questions than answers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the prime purpose 

I see for a good Throne Speech is to provide answers, a sense of 

direction, a road map of how the province will proceed in first 

meeting the basic responsibilities of good government. That is a 

basic obligation of the provincial government, ensuring that 

laws and regulations are going to be met and enforced, and how 

you are going to support those in our society who find 

themselves in troubled times, and of course the responsibilities 

of health and education and maintaining highways and so forth. 

Then the government can lay out a plan for ensuring further 

growth of the economy. 

 

I worry about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I worry about the 

Throne Speech. I think my colleague from Regina Lakeview 

described it best in his speech, using the chilling metaphor of 

driving past a snow truck clearing the road. There are many, 

many who are deeply concerned, deeply worried about this new 

government and the lack of signals and the kind of signals they 

are sending the people of Saskatchewan in their early days. 

 

I know many have spoken on this side already, but I want to 

highlight four areas I would argue are of grave concern. This 

speech gives no mention about supporting those with 

disabilities. I’ve had phone calls, conversations with many 

people in this area, wondering if this is a priority for the new 

Saskatchewan Party government. Not a word during the 

campaign, and the silence continues. I give credit to the 

minister for her December 3 press release marking the 

International Day of Disabled Persons, but that was it. As she 

remarked, the theme was decent work for persons with 

disabilities, but no plan. There’s no signal that this was a 

priority at all. Clearly, a disappointment. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the stats are startling. Over 50 per 

cent, and some say 70 per cent, of the social assistance and 

transitional employment assistance cases have one or more 

disabilities. But what are the minister’s plans? Saskatchewan 

has the dubious record of having the second highest rate of 

disabilities in Canada of 14.5 per cent. Again, what are the 

Saskatchewan Party government plans? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said already in the House 

today, it was brought to my attention that last year 10,000 trips 

were denied in the city of Saskatoon for those using paratransit 

services. Those are missed appointments, missed work 

opportunities, learning opportunities. Is this a concern for this 

government? Apparently not even on the radar. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my second concern is in regard to 

housing, a basic need for any measure of quality of living. 

Again, not a mention in the Sask Party platform and absolutely 

no mention in the Throne Speech. We read headlines about 

extremely tight rental markets in our communities, with both 

the lack of available spaces and the skyrocketing costs, but this 

doesn’t seem any concern at all for the Sask Party government. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this causes a lot of concern about us 

on this side. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my past work in the voluntary 

sector I’ve come to appreciate very much the good work that 

community-based organizations do. They are an invaluable 

resource that quickly respond to the needs of the communities 

they serve. I look forward very much to the summit that will be 

held in the near future regarding a new direction in social 

policy. But again, much work has already been done in this 

sector. My question, will this be recognized or thrown out the 

window much like our beloved wheat sheaf was almost? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I find . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, like my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview, I worry 

about workplace safety. I must say I grew to appreciate the 

excellent work many partners in government, in business, and 

in labour had done to meet the challenges of improving our 

safety record. Saskatchewan, while making great strides, still 

has a long way to go, and I was deeply disappointed in the 

Minister of Labour’s lack of words in this area. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the toughest things a minister 

of Labour does in this House is the reading of the names of 

those who were killed in the workplace during the past year. I 

can tell you — and I can tell you that many others feel the same 

way — the names stay with you and you do make a 

commitment to do better. And I would urge the new Minister of 

Labour to take some time to do all he can to ensure 

occupational health and safety is not lost in his new reorg of his 

department. It is just a basic, decent expectation that working 

men and women have of the Department of Labour. Again, I 

must say, a grave concern. 

 

Now I can go on, especially about education and the 

environment, but we will have more time in the spring budget. 

 

Well actions, and words and actions, are speaking louder than 

words. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the actions of the Sask Party 

are very troubling. In the short weeks since the election, 

numerous examples of backtracking, changing, spinning, 

ministers misspeaking, have all come to the fore. Just yesterday 

workers from Prince Albert came here to voice their anger over 

the ripping up of the MOU [memorandum of understanding] 

with Domtar. Clearly no consultations, no discussion before this 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

travesty. And where was the local cabinet minister? 

 

And I want to say again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the disabilities 

community very concerned over the lack of action, any 

meaningful action, on the part of Social Services. 

 

And what about this so-called growth and security Bill that was 

supposed to herald in a new era of accountability? Well not 

quite. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the essential services 

Bill that’s been promised among some very confusing messages 

— and I’m being kind here — that I think we’ll see late 

Thursday. 

 

Pre-election and post-election seem like worlds apart, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Say anything to get elected and then start 

backing away. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say shame, shame. 

 

Well in conclusion, in this legislature — the 26th since our 

province was formed — we do have a lot of work ahead of us. 

Unfortunately this job-jar approach is just not up to par. It just 

demonstrates the shallowness of this government. It’s a 

watered-down version of a bad platform. It’s just a bad way to 

start government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and 

not the main motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

want to congratulate you on being selected as the Deputy 

Speaker. And I want to thank the residents of the constituency 

of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for their support on November 7 

by electing me to represent them here in the Legislative 

Assembly. And I must say that no matter where I go, I get more 

absolutely incredible hugs from every farmer I meet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — I was very fortunate to have a wonderful 

campaign team. We had the perfect mix of dedicated 

volunteers, some well seasoned in campaigning and others who 

had never worked on a campaign before. And I also wanted to 

thank my husband, Terry, who is my greatest champion . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Twenty-six years. Thank you very 

much to my family and my friends. It’s 37, 36 — 36 years. 

Sorry. Thank you, all of you, who have worked so hard. You 

are simply the best. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the course of the election I had the 

opportunity to meet hundreds of people. I’ve listened to their 

hopes for the future, and the message I heard loud and clear is 

that we can’t move forward as a province if we continue to be 

weighted down by a tired, old government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why people of 

Saskatchewan made a choice on November 7. They made a 

choice for positive change. This government, led by the 

Saskatchewan Party, is listening to the residents of 

Saskatchewan. The caucus members from the Saskatchewan 

Party have met and talked to residents from across this 

province. And this government, led by the member of Swift 

Current, have developed a plan. 

 

Now two things that I consider to be crucially important to 

building a better future for Saskatchewan are experience and 

vision — the vision to dream and the experience to build. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan needs a government whose 

vision for the future is broad in scope and dedicated to 

improving the lives of each and every citizen. 

 

Now this Throne Speech contains a new vision for 

Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech contained three recurring 

themes — growth and opportunity, security and compassion, 

and keeping our word. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is our new vision for the economy. It 

is a plan for lasting and permanent economic growth in 

Saskatchewan. Enterprise Saskatchewan will be a unique and 

innovative partnership that will return the direction of the 

economy to the hands of the people who create the jobs, invest 

the dollars, and build the labour force for the future. Above all, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will have specific goals and targets for 

the economy. Economic growth and new opportunities are a 

good first step. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we want is to improve the safety and 

security of all Saskatchewan people. Growth and added 

opportunities will help pay for these improvements. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will address health care by hiring more 

nurses and front-line health care professionals. 

 

We will have patient-first review of the entire health care 

system and a prescription drug plan covering most seniors and 

children. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was knocking on the doors and 

talking to the residents of my constituency of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, they told me they wanted a fiscal 

responsible government that would keep an eye on spending 

and pay down the debt. And one of the most important new 

Bills highlighted in the Speech from the Throne and in the most 

recent election platform is Saskatchewan growth and financial 

security Act. 

 

Now this Act shows a government that is dedicated to the 

growth and stability of this province by having a balanced 

budget each and every year. There will be a specific formula for 

allocating budgetary surpluses that will see Saskatchewan 

paying down the debt and investing in our future. The Act also 

states that the public service will not grow at a rate faster than 

the population it serves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the residents of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley told me, over and over again, they were 

concerned about education and how upset they were that we pay 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

some of the highest property taxes in Canada. And in terms of 

education, we will increase the operating grants to our schools 

and have an education property tax relief. We will set aside 

more money for school lunch and anti-hunger programs. We 

will invest in child care, early learning, and other development 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a government that gets it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — This government, led by the member of Swift 

Current, has the experience working with business, labour, and 

community groups. Saskatchewan voted for a new government 

with a new plan — a plan that will empower our communities 

and create a vibrant economy; a plan that will strengthen our 

social programs and create opportunity for our children. The 

Throne Speech contains that plan. 

 

And as a community and business leader, I meet people from all 

walks of life. And the people who impress me the most are 

those who believe in themselves, those who believe they can 

accomplish anything if given the opportunity. This can-do 

attitude is deeply ingrained in Saskatchewan people and now 

we have a can-do government. 

 

Our new government is committed to retaining our young 

people through several initiatives. Now our son Jon, is one of 

those kids helping to grow Alberta. And I know that each and 

every one of you have children or grandchildren who have left 

the province because they couldn’t build their future here. Now 

this new government has a plan for our young people. There 

will be tuition rebates for students choosing to stay in 

Saskatchewan, as well as tax incentives for young 

entrepreneurs. These incentives are set out in our campaign 

platform and are reaffirmed in the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I got into politics because I couldn’t stand 

by and watch the downsizing of our province. I was tired of 

watching business opportunities choose other provinces. I was 

disappointed in a government that had lowered the bar of 

performance so low they were tripping over it. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to raise the bar and build a better Saskatchewan 

— a Saskatchewan that boasts the most open and accountable 

government in Canada, a Saskatchewan dedicated to excellence. 

 

As my work as a businesswoman, I have built a successful 

practice because I value my clients and I respect them. I have 

spent the last two decades of my life working to build a 

growing, a caring, and a prosperous Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the Saskatchewan Party shares 

these values. The people of Saskatchewan deserve a 

government that treats them with respect. The Saskatchewan 

government, under the leadership of the member of Swift 

Current, has the vision to dream and the experience to build. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northwest. 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate to debate on the 

Throne Speech, the first session of the twenty-sixth legislature 

here in Saskatchewan. Truly a honour. And I want to take this 

opportunity at the outset to thank the good folks in Regina 

Northeast for allowing me the privilege to continue to represent 

them in this great Assembly. Having been given that privilege 

in 1999 and 2003 and again in 2007, it is truly an honour, and 

that’s probably the best word that I can come up with in a short 

order here to describe how I feel about having the privilege of 

representing the fine folks of Regina Northeast. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, you would agree with me that no matter 

where we travel in Saskatchewan we meet nothing but good, 

fine people, whether it be the East or West or North or South. 

But I can assure you there are no finer people in this province 

than the good folks in Regina Northeast. It’s a constituency 

that’s made up muchly of working people, seniors, 

small-business people. And I’ve had the opportunity to meet 

many of them over the years of having the privilege of 

representing them, as I’ve always made it a personal goal of 

mine to door knock and go door to door and campaign, I guess 

you would say, at 14 polls every summer in my constituency. 

 

By doing 14 polls each summer I am able to get through the 

constituency once between elections in three years. And I find it 

interesting to do so because it is a relaxing opportunity — not 

under the pressure of an election, but in between elections — 

and you get the chance to talk to people at their doorstep and 

find out what their concerns are, what their thoughts are. And 

on many occasions, year after year, you’ll meet up with the 

same people and you can even see how they’ve grown and how 

they’ve changed, and how the world’s affected them. So it’s 

really something I’ve always enjoyed doing. I find it very 

rewarding myself. 

 

To the Speaker, I want to congratulate him for his election to 

this Assembly. I think it was a wise choice. I think all the 

members would agree that he will make us a very fine Speaker. 

He brings to the role a lot of honour, integrity, and fairness. 

And I believe that he will not only do his job well here in the 

Assembly, the Speaker will represent us well throughout the 

province and internationally on those occasions. I also want to 

congratulate you upon your election as the Deputy Speaker. It’s 

a role that we know you will fill and fill with honour and 

dignity, and also you’ll bring fairness to the rulings when called 

upon to make them. We know that. So we appreciate that, sir. 

 

I want to congratulate all the members upon their election to 

this great Assembly. It is truly an honour. I want to say a special 

welcome to all the new members from both sides of the House 

who find themselves representing the good folks of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

One of the members yesterday indicated a number, and I 

believe he’s probably quite accurate. Somewhere between 6 and 

700 people have had the privilege of serving as MLAs in 

Saskatchewan here since the province became a province. And 

when you look at the whole scheme of things, that’s really a 

small number of people representing this great province over 

the century, or a little beyond the century. And it’s truly an 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

honour for each one of us to have the privilege of representing 

people in the constituency. 

 

And when you think what this really means, it means that you 

go out at election time and we ask folks there to put their trust 

in us to be able to convey on their behalf their wants, their 

needs, their concerns, their thoughts. And when we do so — 

and regardless of political stripes — when we do so, we are 

really participating in the democratic process, and we are really 

honouring that entire process and honouring our province. And 

for that, I welcome all the new members. I welcome everyone 

back here, and I do know that we will all work to the best of our 

abilities to fulfill our roles as MLAs. 

 

I also want to congratulate the member from Swift Current, not 

only for his personal re-election, but for his election as the 

Premier and leading his party to the government in 

Saskatchewan here, truly an honour for him to do so. I think 

that I want to wish him well because, on a personal note, a lot 

of water’s been under the bridge — and the Premier will 

appreciate this — a lot of water’s gone under the bridge, a lot of 

time’s gone by since he and I shared a limo ride in Washington, 

DC [District of Columbia] a few years back and had quite a 

conversation during that period of time. And things have 

progressed quite rapidly since then. I want to wish him well in 

his new role as the Premier, and I hope he enjoys his time at the 

so-called top because I’m afraid that time will be rather short. In 

the whole scheme of things, I think he will soon be betrayed by 

the policies of his own party. And that will quite soon start to 

unfold; in fact we’re starting to see some of it happen already. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to take this opportunity to touch on a 

few high points of the Throne Speech, or more accurately I 

should say low points for Saskatchewan people. The role of 

government, Mr. Speaker, is to make things better for the 

people it governs. That should be the ultimate goal for any 

government of any political stripe. Well let’s just see how this 

Throne Speech stands up to measurement. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. What is Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

Well we have a brief, brief glance at what it is the party is 

proposing, the government is proposing as far as Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is concerned. But really when you boil it down, 

what it is, is a hand-picked group of men and women who will 

be making very important decisions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people, very important decisions on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

economy. And these are folks that are not elected and are not 

accountable but yet will have great influence on the future of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what it really is will be a board that is controlled, 

a board of hand-picked Sask Party hacks that is controlled by 

the Sask Party and the individual who’d be more interested in 

increasing their profits than they are in providing opportunities 

for all Saskatchewan people to share in the wealth of our 

province. 

 

Health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has for the 

longest time said that they had all of the answers to the health 

care problems facing our province and our health care system. 

Well let’s take a look at that. 

 

First, they want to make sure that three out of four people in our 

province don’t have access to the essential drugs if and when 

they need them. In some cases, those folks will have to make a 

choice between filling a prescription or buying groceries. That’s 

their plan. Secondly, the Sask Party said that they would be 

establishing more training seats and residency positions. Yet 

with that promise goes no numbers or any time frame in which 

to achieve this. Thirdly, the Sask Party has said that they would 

hire all the nurses we needed. In fact during the election 

campaign, they made it sound like there would be a nurse in 

everybody’s backyard. Well I get up every morning, and I look 

in my backyard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t see a nurse 

back there yet, nor will I in the very near future. When — 

comes the big question — when is the Sask Party government 

going to fill its commitment on 800 new nurses? When? 

 

Labour. Mr. Speaker, it is on the labour front that we start to see 

the hidden agenda. When in opposition, the Sask Party said that 

if they were government, they would go to war with labour. 

Well, well unfortunately it looks like that’s one of the promises 

they’re going to keep. This Sask Party government is talking 

about the need to rebalance labour laws in our province. 

Rebalance labour laws. What does that mean? This is simply 

code language for stripping away the rights of working men and 

women. 

 

Now this Sask Party government is talking about introducing 

essential services legislation. It’s something they never 

mentioned during the election campaign, something they don’t 

have in their platform document. Interestingly enough the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone, when asked about this 

prior to the election, said, oh no, no. No, no. We don’t need any 

legislation. No, no. We can do this through negotiation. It can 

be done quite well. Then he got called into his leader’s office, 

and he got his knuckles rapped. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

you look quickly at his knuckles, you’ll see that they’re still red 

from the rapping. And he, to his defence, in his defence, he 

didn’t actively misspeak I’m sure. 

 

Even the member from Cannington, who gave us an insight as 

to what the Sask Party’s intentions are as far as the Crown 

corporations and the dealings with SecurTek are, he got called 

in and got his knuckles rapped too. And that’s all before the 

election. 

 

Now that the election has taken place, I wonder, is it by 

accident that those same two members now end up sitting 

together in the corner of the caucus here? Is it by accident that 

that’s the case? Or perhaps the Premier put them together so he 

can make it easier for him to keep an eye on them. I think that 

might be what it is. 

 

Well what’s next, Mr. Speaker? What’s next? What’s next from 

this group over here as far as labour is concerned? I believe, I 

believe that we will see from this government over there in next 

spring’s budget, I believe we will see them introduce legislation 

that will introduce to this province, for the first time ever, a 

two-tier minimum wage. I believe that. I’m predicting that now, 

that in their budget next spring they will bring in a two-tier 

minimum wage. 

 

Why? I’ll tell you why. They didn’t say anything about it 

during the election campaign. They didn’t say anything about it 

in their election information. They don’t have anything in their 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

pamphlet. They don’t even have it in the Throne Speech, so that 

tells me that they’re going to do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is why? Why does this government pick on the 

working people of our province? Why is it that this government 

is bent on reducing the quality of life for the families of 

working people in Saskatchewan? Why is it this government is 

dedicated to the reducing the disposable income of working 

people when it is those same working people that drives the 

economy of this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time of unprecedented prosperity, at a time 

when government should be sharing all its prosperity with 

Saskatchewan people, this government has decided to pick 

winners and losers. Well the first big losers in our province are 

the working people, Mr. Speaker. I guess it’s safe to say that the 

working people of our province are among the first to find out 

that the sheep across the way aren’t really sheep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been given the critic areas of SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] and STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company] and Highways and Infrastructure. I 

look forward to following this government’s moves on all of 

those fronts. My fear is that this Sask Party’s government’s 

strong desire to privatize the Crowns and their already stated 

position of selling off STC, that both SGI and STC files are 

going to be very busy ones. When it comes to Highways and 

Infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the minister and I 

will have many things to talk about this spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fall 2007 Throne Speech certainly misses the 

mark of making life better for all Saskatchewan people. That is 

why I have been instructed by the majority of people in Regina 

Northeast to vote for the amendment and against the main 

motion, and that’s what I’ll be doing. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

honoured to have the opportunity to address this Assembly on 

the occasion of the beginning of this, the first session of the 

twenty-sixth sitting of the legislature. Four short years ago, I 

had my first opportunity to address this Assembly. And at that 

time I said I am, however, not a man of many words. The 

constituents of the new riding of Cut Knife-Turtleford, my 

community, and my family know that, and I thank them for 

understanding that and accepting that I might serve them in 

other ways. With that as an introduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

can almost guarantee that my address will fall within the time 

constraints that have been agreed upon by our House leaders. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Speaker on his appointment and 

agree with my colleagues on both sides of this House that we 

are confident in his ability, based on his distinguished history in 

this House, to not only be a fair and judicious official but to 

represent our province in this country, throughout the world, in 

a distinguished fashion. I also congratulate our colleague from 

Arm River-Watrous for his appointment as Deputy Speaker. A 

role . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — A role I’m certain he will also occupy with 

fairness and honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been very impressed with the quality of the 

addresses that have occurred to date in response to the Throne 

Speech of Monday, December 10. I’ve been particularly 

impressed with the quality of the presentations of the newly 

elected members of this legislature on both sides of this House. 

And I certainly am pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the fact 

that there are so many more new members on this side of the 

House than on the other side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — These new members will have a major role 

in shaping the future of this province. 

 

This address allows us the opportunity to say thank you to our 

constituents, our volunteers, and our families for their part in 

sending us here and allowing us to represent them in this 

Assembly. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 

constituents of Cut Knife-Turtleford for returning me here for 

them and in doing so with a conclusive majority. It not only 

confirms for me that what I have been doing for the past four 

years has been appreciated, but also that there are many more 

constituents that want me to continue on this path and do even 

more. 

 

I was heartened by the number of volunteers that came forward 

with minimal coercion to assist in numerous ways to not only 

help me get elected but to see that we had a change in 

government. There were many new faces that came forward and 

to them and the faithful old faces I thank them all very much 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Older faces — yes. 

 

For me, as well I am sure for all members, our families are what 

drive us to be here. Without their support and encouragement, 

we would simply not have the initiative nor the drive to firstly 

seek office and secondly to honour the commitment of this 

office. During this term I lost my mentor and my hero when on 

May 6, 2004, my father passed away. We were not only father 

and son; we were business partners for nearly 30 years. 

 

Actually my dad was probably the least impressed of my family 

when I decided to pursue this endeavour. He was a pretty astute 

business person and well respected in our community. He didn’t 

quite understand why his son would be interested in taking a 

pay cut and entering into a profession that is just slightly less 

respected than that of an arms dealer. However after the 2003 

election I was never as proud as on that day in late 2003 that he 

and my mom were able to join Heather and I in this House for 

the swearing-in ceremony. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank God for cameras. That moment can 

and will be with myself and my family forever. 

 

I thank my mom for her continuing support and encouragement 

in our family’s lives. Some 70 years ago, as a young graduate 

teacher here in Regina, she travelled by train to Ottawa as a 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

delegate to select a new federal leader who would go on to 

become a distinguished prime minister. I never forget the story 

of the adventure and excitement of that experience for her. 

Perhaps that is where the spark was ignited that has led me here. 

 

Heather and my three sons, Ian, Bradley, and Stephan, have 

always been there for me. With their interesting array of 

backgrounds and experiences, they have all contributed and 

supported me on the journey that has brought me to this place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is about three significant 

themes: growth and opportunity, security and compassion, and 

keeping your promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Over the past 15 years or so, as my sons 

completed their education and prepared to enter the workforce, 

the opportunities they sought were quite simply not here in this 

province. As a result we find ourselves bidding farewell, see 

you soon, as they make their way back to the provinces to the 

west where they contribute to those provincial jurisdictions and 

those provincial economies. We would have — and do to this 

day — much preferred to be saying welcome home; we are so 

pleased you have chosen to contribute to this province. These 

are young men of promise, typical of those young people that 

this province was not able to retain as a result of a regime that 

did not focus on growth and opportunity. 

 

Our eldest son, Ian, was a Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the 

Year and a representative of this province at the United World 

College of America in Montezuma, New Mexico, where he 

completed his International Baccalaureate program. An 

entrance scholarship took him to the University of Alberta. 

Upon graduation he spent two years in New York with the 

American Management Association and then five years on the 

Isle of Skye in Scotland as the CEO [chief executive officer] of 

a management and leadership academy of international stature. 

At this point he was 32 years of age. Ian and his wife, 

Anne-Marie, now operate their own consulting company in 

Victoria, BC [British Columbia], specializing in leadership 

training and management consulting. However, Heather and I 

realized that their most important role in life is to take good 

care of our grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, if there are any 

colleagues in the opposition that have leadership aspirations and 

if they would like me to provide further information, I would 

welcome them to please contact me. 

 

Our second son, Bradley, followed his brother’s exploits. 

Bradley was also honoured to be chosen as Saskatchewan 

Junior Citizen of the Year. He was subsequently selected to 

represent our province and country at the United World College 

of the Americas. Upon completion of his baccalaureate, he 

studied economics at McGill and graduated from the University 

of Calgary law school. 

 

Upon graduation our youngest son was chosen to be part of the 

Canada World Youth program, and at the age of 17 found 

himself in Poland. He then studied broadcasting and is presently 

the morning man on the Goat radio station in Bonnyville, 

Alberta. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’re ever in that area I would 

encourage you to tune in. 

 

My point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not to bore this Assembly 

with my family situation. My point . . . As my family’s sons 

entered the workforce, the opportunities and jobs that they 

sought were simply not available in this province. I couldn’t in 

all honesty encourage them to return to the farm where things 

were relatively bleak. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they weren’t 

interested in pursuing the accounting profession like their dull, 

old dad. And so, Mr. Speaker, this province lost to our 

neighbouring provinces another three bright, young men. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that this Throne Speech does in fact 

address this situation head on. This government will be 

providing meaningful tuition rebates for graduates choosing to 

stay in Saskatchewan and providing tax incentives for young 

entrepreneurs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this past campaign we were subject to two 

very different themes in the campaign. On the one hand, we saw 

the fear campaign of the NDP. We don’t want to be another 

Alberta was an example of this. We on this side of the House 

realize that Alberta is experiencing some growing pains that are 

inevitable in a rapidly growing economy. 

 

These growing pains, Mr. Speaker, we as a government 

welcome as a challenge because with them also come the 

beneficial effects of a rapid-growing economy. There will be 

increasing financial capacity within the economy for the 

communities and within government to plan for and address 

these challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Alberta situation, I see and ask 

myself what is so evil and so wrong with lower tax rates, both 

individual and corporate. What is inherently, what is inherently 

wrong with no debt in contrast with our situation whereby 

millions of dollars each and every year from our General 

Revenue Fund are required just to service debt? What is wrong 

with not requiring a provincial sales tax as part of the general 

revenue funding for the province? What is wrong, what is 

wrong with substantial less waiting times in health care? And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is wrong with increasing property 

values? Why should our homes and farms be the cheapest in all 

of North America? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the member from The Battleford’s 

address to the Speech from the Throne, he made the statement 

that a home in North Battleford three years ago was worth 

$70,000, is now $200,000. This was cited as a problem, a 

negative. I would maintain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is a 

positive turn of events, not a negative turn of events. It’s like 

what we’ve sat back as a province and not benefitted from as 

they have over the past number of years in places such as, 

places like — heaven forbid — Alberta. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our government has addressed the increasing 

demand within this province for additional housing 

requirements head on, not for only urban centres but also for 

rural communities. Funds will be made available whereby both 

rural and urban municipalities will be able to proceed with 

much needed expansion of available developed lots on an 

interest-free basis so the increasing demands can be addressed, 

without the funds having to come from the operating budgets of 

these jurisdictions. In effect, Mr. Speaker, instead of the 

existing property owners having to bear the cost of these new 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

developments, the new property owners will be bearing these 

costs on the acquisition of these properties. This new program 

represents the forward thinking of this new government. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I would maintain that this government is poised 

for growth, and we say, bring it on. It’s our turn. 

 

On the one hand, Mr. Speaker, during the past campaign there 

was a choice — a choice between fear and the consequences of 

change. And on the other hand a promise of hope, a promise of 

growth. The people chose overwhelmingly in my constituency 

for the latter, for hope and for growth. We realize, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are not promoting growth for and of itself. We realize, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the growth we envisage will result in 

positive benefits to the entire province and all the residents. We, 

as government, will be in a position to offer better government 

in those areas where government should and will take a leading 

role in the providing of better and more efficient health care; in 

the providing of increasing support to our educational system; 

in providing additional funding for our infrastructure, our roads, 

our bridges, and our municipal partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I consider the decision that I am charged 

with here — to support this Speech from the Throne or to 

support the amendment as put forward by the opposition — it 

becomes pretty clear. This Speech from the Throne presents a 

program that supports a growth agenda for both rural and urban 

Saskatchewan, a security agenda for all the constituents of this 

province, and a promise agenda, Mr. Deputy Speaker — a 

promise to keep the promises that this new government has 

made. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we have an amendment that 

reads in part, “That this government no longer enjoys the 

confidence of this Assembly because it has a hidden agenda that 

picks winners and losers.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are the 

government that will not be picking winners and losers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — There will not be another SPUDCO or 

Navigata or the like. And exactly when, and exactly when, Mr. 

Speaker, did the government no longer enjoy the confidence of 

this Assembly? This Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is representative, 

by its very nature, of the voice and choice of the electorate, and 

they have very recently expressed their confidence in this new 

government and this new government’s vision for this province. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I thank this Assembly for this 

opportunity. And I will be supporting the Speech from the 

Throne and opposing the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s a privilege and honour for me to stand here 

today and represent my constituents, the constituents of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. I want to thank all of them for putting 

their trust in me in having me represent them here in Regina in 

the legislature. 

 

I also want to take this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

congratulate you as the Deputy Speaker. I know you’ve served 

this Assembly for eight years. And I know your wealth of 

knowledge and hard working that you have, you deserve to be 

Deputy Speaker, and I know you will do a fine job. 

 

I also want to take this time to say congratulations to the 

Speaker, the member from Moosomin, and congratulate him on 

his appointment as the Speaker. That member, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, has served in this legislature for 21 years and he has 

done an awesome job. And everybody I know in this Assembly 

will feel like I do, that it’s well-deserving of him to serve as the 

Speaker of this Assembly. He also will do a great job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank or 

say congratulations to all the members in the Assembly, on their 

re-election for the old members. And for all the new members 

on both sides of the House, whether it’s the NDP or the Sask 

Party on this side, congratulate each and every one of them on 

being elected to the Assembly in the November 7 election. 

 

One thing I’ve heard over the past few days, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the quality of speeches given by the new members, 

both members on both sides of the House. And I can say as a 

veteran of eight years, that I guess I’ve got something to learn 

from these members. They’ve done a wonderful job in bringing 

forth their first speech to the throne. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to say some thank yous. I 

know that I’m going to probably forget some, but I do want to 

start off with thanking first and foremost my wife, Sheila, for all 

the support she has given me through the eight years as elected 

member. You know, one thing, I think all of us as members in 

the Assembly realize that when it comes to doing this job and 

putting a wholehearted effort into it, the ones that suffer the 

most are usually the family members — presumably the spouse. 

They’re the ones that suffer the most. They have to put up with 

what we got to do and sometimes they are neglected. Well I can 

guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my wife has done that. And 

we’ve talked about that, but she still sees fit to allow me to 

pursue my goal to be an elected official. And after November 7, 

I’m sitting on the government side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 

a great feeling. What a great feeling. And I’m also glad to see 

that there’s only 20 members on the other side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — And the reason for that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is because the province of Saskatchewan saw fit on 

November 7 to choose a new government, a new direction, and 

a new mandate. And we are going to pursue that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I also want to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my sons — my 

youngest, Micky, and his girlfriend, Meagen; my second son, 

Deny; and my oldest son, Newton, his wife Tanya, and my two 

granddaughters, Courtney and Shayln. 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everybody knows what a great feeling it is 

to have granddaughters. That is the reason why I’m here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s because of the granddaughters. They’re the 

reason why I stand here, take office, and pursue the goal of this 

province to change it so that it’s a better place for them to raise 

their families and stay in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — I also want to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

my mom. My mom, who is 78 years old, still lives on the farm, 

won’t move, still pursues the goal of farming because that’s the 

backbone of Saskatchewan — has been for many, many years. 

We’ve tried many times to move her into Spiritwood so she 

could pursue family members and friends, but she still wants to 

stay on the farm. My other brother Robert, the oldest one, lives 

there with her and they pursue the farming aspect of it. I also 

have, out of my seven brothers and one sister, five brothers on 

the farm. 

 

So when farming is tough, I hear about it every day. The 

members, the members opposite are saying that’s good. Well 

farming has been relatively tough over the past few years and 

this year was no different. But I know under the government 

that we have today, with members from rural Saskatchewan, we 

will definitely look at helping our family farmer friends to make 

sure they secure a better life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank 

two people in my office that, not only during the election but 

during the last four years, have . . . undergo lots of hours of 

extra work because of the amount of work that sometimes 

opposition members have to do in fulfilling their needs and 

their goals and representing their constituency. And these two 

fine ladies did a great job for me, and that is Jody Henderson 

and Patty Heisler. Both of them are my full-time secretary and 

my part-time secretary, and worked diligently over the last four 

years to pursue my goal, and also in the November 7 election 

went on to be my campaign manager and my fundraising 

campaign manager, and did an awesome job to secure my 

position here in the legislature representing 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the election which happened on 

November 7. I was fortunate enough, I was fortunate enough to 

win by 58 per cent of the vote. I had an increase of over 1,600 

votes, which I want to thank the members from the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency for doing that, putting their 

trust in me. And I know that there’s other members, many 

members on this side of the House that also increased their 

numbers and their votes and their popularity. And that is why 

we have 37, pardon me — well 38 plus the Speaker — 38 

members sitting on this side of the House to form government 

for the first time in a long, long time. And I can guarantee you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be here for a long, long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few issues that came 

out of the election was first and foremost a passion to me and 

that is health care. And I can well say to all the members in the 

House that health care, wherever you are, is a passion to your 

community and the area you represent. 

 

Well it’s no different in my hometown of Spiritwood and it’s no 

different in my constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. As you 

know in the last, well year anyway, we’ve had some problems 

with recruitment and retention of doctors. I know at one point in 

time in the springtime, my area between the Rosthern, or the 

Shellbrook area, the Big River area, and the Spiritwood area, 

we were down to literally a handful of doctors. As it sits right 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Spiritwood there’s still only two 

doctors. We don’t have enough doctors to have after-hour 

emergency care 24 hours a day. In Big River, they don’t have 

any doctors as we speak right now. Also in Shellbrook, we do 

now have a full slate of six doctors. At one period of time, there 

was only three. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I like the plan and the 

platform of the Sask Party and that’s why we formed 

government, is because we are going to spend the utmost in 

recruitment and retention of doctors and nurses in this province. 

 

That is an essential need. But it is a must for not only rural 

Saskatchewan but also the bigger centres, the cities, and I know 

the Health minister will do an awesome job in redoing what we 

have to do to get Saskatchewan up and going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — And I hope he’s listening. And we need 

some doctors, yes. Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the last year I 

raised issues about the doctors. And the pressure that was put 

on the Shellbrook Hospital, which then transferred to the P.A. 

hospital, is because we don’t have enough doctors. We need to 

spend more time recruiting doctors. And I can guarantee you I 

heard many times the former minister of Health, the member 

from North Battleford, continuously say, we have the problem 

solved. Well it’s not solved. It got worse. 

 

But that is typical of the NDP. What they say is not what 

they’re doing. They continually say everything is great; 

everything is running great. Well have a look at rural 

Saskatchewan and see where our doctors are. Many centres all 

over the province of Saskatchewan are short doctors. They’re 

short doctors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And health care, as a passion to each community, we know 

what’s got to be done. And no thanks to the former minister of 

Health, we are going to change that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

are. 

 

Another problem that I heard on the streets of the constituents 

in my constituency during the election period was the fact that 

the recruitment or the retaining of young people in our 

province. The young people are all going to Alberta. I have two 

there right now. They’ve often said, Dad, if you ever form 

government and change some things in this province, phone me 

and I’ll come back. And we will do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

Mr. Allchurch: — And this is the same for many members, 

even on the opposition side. They have members also, family 

members in Alberta, and I guarantee those young people are 

wishing that we need changes in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and they will come back also, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, also in my election run this year . . . In 

2003 it was a tough time for farmers as we had a lot of rain. It 

was wet. Farmers couldn’t get their crop off. In fact going to 

visit the farmers, they were in the fields, and they were taking 

tough grain off. And they were frustrated. They weren’t 

frustrated at the election or the government that may come in, 

but they were definitely frustrated with the government that we 

had. And that’s why I believe the vote that I got — because of 

my rural constituency — was so high because of a lot of 

farmers were tired of the plans that the NDP did not implement. 

 

Farming in this province has been a mainstay for years and 

years. It is changing somewhat now. But we have the most 

arable land in the province. We have a lot of farmers, but the 

farmers are getting big. But we need something in place to 

sustain a living for these farmers, and I know that we have 

come up with plans in this platform that will do that. And that is 

what the people of Saskatchewan wanted in the election, and 

that’s what they’re going to get. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have heard from many members 

on the other side of the House about our fiscal plan. And this 

has bothered me for some time. And I spent a couple of days 

looking through the books to find out what our surplus and 

deficit is. And the reason I say this is because every member on 

that side of the House has stated over and over and over, we 

have had 16 balanced budgets. We’ve all heard that, right? 

Sixteen balanced budgets. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reading from the report from the 

Provincial Auditor in 2005. And there’s a graph and the graph 

shows, the graph shows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is a . . . 

Well let’s break it down this way. In 1991 there was a deficit. It 

says right here. In 1992 there was a deficit. In 1993 there was a 

deficit. In fact, in 1994 there was a deficit. In 2002 there was a 

deficit. In 2004 there was a deficit. 2005 there was a deficit. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you add the deficit budgets 

according to this graph — and this is from the Provincial 

Auditor — we have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven deficit 

budgets. So why do the members opposite continually say we 

have balanced budget each and every year? That is not true. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who do we believe in? Do we believe 

in the Provincial Auditor, or do we believe from the words from 

the members over on that side of the House? I would have to 

say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll put our trust in the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — But I can guarantee to the members 

opposite, it won’t happen again. We will have balanced 

budgets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — I also want to speak a little bit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’m not going to run down any member in the 

House, especially from the opposition, especially new 

members. But I did say that I heard some really good speeches. 

And I want to say to the member from Regina Rosemont, he 

gave a great speech. That was an awesome speech. In his 

speech, and I want to quote, he states . . . and I’m not sure 

where he got his facts from — whether he wrote it himself or 

got somebody to write it — but whatever, the facts are not quite 

true. In his reply, and, I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan is booming as a province, has a pile of 

money in the bank, and expectations should be high. 

 

Well that is all true. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I just had it 

here somewhere where it says we have a pile of money in the 

bank and expectations are high. That is so true. 

 

But I’m also going to read from the state of the province’s 

finances, November 2007, and on the front page it states that, 

2007-2008, there is a $527 million surplus. Well that is great. 

That’s why there’s a pile of money in the bank. But let’s go 

forward for the next four years and see what’s going to happen. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you look at the 2008-2009, the forecast, 

there will be a $740.2 million deficit. More deficit comes into 

play again. Then in 2009-2010, there’ll be a $1,038.4 billion 

deficit. In 2010-2011, there’ll be a $1,203.5 billion deficit. In 

2011-2004, there’ll be $1,141.4 billion deficit. Mr. Speaker, at 

the end of the four-year term we will have a $1,141 billion 

deficit. If they were still in power, they would still probably 

say, we have a balanced budget and a surplus. That is what the 

NDP have been saying for years and years and years. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on November 7 of this last year, the 

election year, the people said, enough. Enough of the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . by the members from the government, the NDP. 

It’s time for a change. It is time for the Saskatchewan Party to 

come forward and do the books the proper way of balancing 

books, and balancing this proper debt and assets. And we will 

do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech is 

about growth and opportunity. It’s about security and 

compassion and it’s also about keeping your word. I spoke 

about keeping your word because we, the province of 

Saskatchewan, will do that. And I can guarantee you that each 

and every member that’s sitting on this side of the House, our 

constituents back home will make sure we are accountable; that 

they will make sure that we’re keeping our word, because we 

believe in honest government. That’s what we’re going to do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the election, on the streets when I 

was campaigning, many people said to me that they are tired of 

the fear that the NDP candidates were putting in the minds of 

people, especially the seniors. I had seniors in my constituency 

tell me, when you form government, the Sask Party 

government, what do you expect us as seniors to live on? And I 

said, what do you live on now? And they told me that they live 

on old age security. And I said, so what’s going to change? And 

they said, well the NDP said you guys are going to take that 

away. 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

[16:30] 

 

That’s no different than when I visited the First Nation reserves. 

Members of the First Nation reserves said we’re going to take 

away the treaties. We’re going to take away everything in this 

province. It’s no wonder that there’s doom and gloom in the 

province. It doesn’t come from this side of the House; it’s 

always from that side of the House. The fear complex that they 

put into people, it is . . . had enough and that’s why in the 

election we won. 

 

There’s an old saying that our Premier used over and over 

again: hope beats fear. And I said that to every member I talked 

to on the street. Hope beats fear. And I guarantee you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this time around hope won. And hope beats 

fear. Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hope beats fear. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Yes, we’ll say it one more time. Hope beats 

fear, every time. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the amendment put 

forth by the past premier of the province, he said that we have a 

hidden agenda. Well if we have a hidden agenda, it is that we 

are going to work to change the province around, so it’s better 

for my grandkids and everybody else’s grandkids in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That is our mandate. That is our 

hidden agenda. And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 

supporting the speech, but I will not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is indeed a pleasure to enter into the debate on the Speech from 

the Throne. I want to begin by certainly congratulating you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, on your position. I think you’re well-suited to 

the job. I know that you’re fair, and you’re diligent, and you’ve 

gained much wisdom over the years, and I think you’ll do an 

excellent job as Deputy Speaker. 

 

It is indeed an honour to be back in the Legislative Assembly, 

back to do what we’ve been elected to do. It is indeed an 

honour. And I remember back in 2003 when I was first elected, 

I considered it an honour to be here, and I do that today. 

 

I have spoken to a couple of members that I’ve run into in a 

couple of receptions and they — that weren’t successful in the 

last election — and they’ve said that they already miss their 

time in this House. And I think that we will take their advice 

and treasure each and every day that we’re here. That’s indeed 

what I intend to do. 

 

I want to congratulate all members from both sides of the House 

on their election and re-election. You have worked hard to get 

here. You have come here to make a difference, and I know that 

each and every one of us, that that will be our prime motivation. 

I look forward to getting to know some of the new members in 

the House and strengthening friendships with some of the 

veteran members. 

 

As far as the new members go, I can see already that there’s a 

couple of troublemakers on the other side. But I look forward to 

getting to know them a little bit better. They should know who 

they are because they’re all nodding. 

 

But it goes without saying that there’s a few characters on this 

side of the House as well. My seatmate, the member from P.A. 

Carlton, it’s good to see him here, and it’s good to see many, 

many new members on this side of the House. I won’t touch the 

member from Carrot River or Rosetown-Elrose; I hear that 

there’s some sharp wit over there, and I just wouldn’t want to 

go there in this delivery. 

 

But also it’s a pleasure to see members joining the government 

side of the House from my city, from my home, from Saskatoon 

— the members from Saskatoon Northwest and Saskatoon 

Greystone and my neighbouring constituency, Saskatoon 

Sutherland. It is indeed a pleasure to join with them in 

representing Saskatoon, that great city, in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

To the new members, I know that members will extend to you 

the same courtesy as I was extended four years ago in learning 

the rules of the House and becoming a contributing member to 

this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the people of Saskatoon Silver 

Springs. They have sent me to this legislature for the second 

time. I’m humbled. And I thank each and every resident, and I 

thank each and every voter. It is indeed a humbling experience 

to be here, to earn their confidence. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I want to thank the opponents 

that ran against me. Gord Bedient for the New Democratic 

Party was a formidable opponent, and Karen Parhar from the 

Liberal Party. They both ran a clean campaign. They focused on 

the issues. They participated in the forums. And, Mr. Speaker, 

today I want to congratulate each of them for their contribution 

to the democratic process. 

 

As many members will know, Saskatoon Silver Springs has the 

largest number of voters of any constituency in the province. 

It’s a constituency that has been truly growing. And I know that 

the member from Indian Head-Milestone, that’s a fact that he 

likes to remind me of all the time. He talks about it quite often, 

and I’m quite happy to talk to him about the facts of one of the 

best constituencies in Saskatchewan. The fact is that it is a fast 

growing area of Saskatchewan. It’s an area that is benefiting 

from some immigration. It’s benefiting from those that are 

returning from Alberta, some young people that are coming 

back, and also those that have chosen — mostly young people 

— to make their home in Saskatoon and to make their home in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November 7, I’m proud to say that we made 

history with our campaign. I’m proud to say that our team 

garnered nearly 7,000 votes, the most by any team in the history 

of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And I do say team because it was 

mostly because of the people around me who helped me. It was 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

very large, very large, and the numbers again, in case the 

members didn’t hear, were close to 7,000. I have so many 

people to thank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by thanking my family. Indeed my 

wife Trish has been there for me each and every day. For that I 

say thank you. I joke and I say that every family needs at least 

one responsible parent. And make no mistake about it; in our 

family it’s Trish who is the responsible parent — there every 

day for our wonderful children. I’m blessed with two wonderful 

children, Carter and Paige. They have been through a lot over 

the last few months. Carter’s ten years old and in grade 5. Paige 

is in grade 2 and is seven years old. And both children attend 

Cardinal Leger School, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As most of you who know me well and are aware, our family is 

facing some health challenges at this time, and I want to take a 

moment to thank members from both sides of the House for 

their wonderful support and well wishes. Cards and letters and 

flowers have been arriving almost on a daily basis. Your 

kindness is overwhelming. Trish is doing well in her cancer 

journey. She is just one week away from her final 

chemotherapy treatment, and Mr. Speaker, that will be a proud 

moment for us all. So once again, thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I also want to extend my love and 

my appreciation for my mother, who is out in Blaine Lake, 

Saskatchewan. I’m sure she’s watching television today, as 

most parents do. 

 

As elected representatives we owe a great deal of gratitude to 

our constituency assistants. They are the first point of contact 

when constituents want to reach their MLA, and I am truly 

blessed to have one of the best. Beth Epp has been with me for 

four years, each and every day putting up with my new ideas, 

putting up with my voice mail messages at midnight and the 

odd email message at 2 o’clock in the morning. Beth, you have 

been a tremendous constituency assistant. I know that you have 

been of help and advice to many of the new constituency 

assistants across the province, and for that I want to say, thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Being an election year, I need to 

say thank you to my election team. They’ve been known 

affectionately as Team Chevy and led by one of the most 

formidable political couples in Saskatchewan, Ken and Merle 

Sawatsky. Terrific people. Merle . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

That’s right they come from Last Mountain-Touchwood, Merle 

does. Merle as campaign manager and Ken as fundraiser — 

morning, noon, and night they give new definition to 24-7-365. 

They’re there working to make sure that I’m able to do my job 

and to make sure that I was able to be re-elected to this 

wonderful, wonderful Assembly. 

 

They were there, but they led a team, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

300 volunteers who were unstoppable — people that gave of 

their time. They worked countless hours. They took time away 

from their families to make sure that the democratic process 

worked, to make sure that I was able to touch as many of my 

constituents as I was able to do. And for that I say from the 

bottom of my heart, thank you to each and every one of them. I 

know that the only way that I’ll suitably say thank you is to 

represent the people of Saskatoon Silver Springs to the best of 

my ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a couple of minutes talking about 

the great constituency that I do represent. Silver Springs is 

comprised of seven neighbourhoods: Erindale, Arbor Creek, 

Forest Grove, part of Sutherland, University Heights, 

Silverspring, and the growing area of Willowgrove. All are 

vibrant and growing parts of Saskatoon and of the province. 

 

It’s indeed a pleasure to learn more about . . . And I know all 

members in this House would feel this way. It’s a pleasure to 

know more about your constituency by door knocking, by going 

to people’s doors and asking their opinions and learning more 

about your neighbours and your neighbourhoods, and more than 

that — asking for their trust and their support, being able to put 

forward your policies, your platform. 

 

And I know members on this side of the House know that we 

had just a tremendous platform that we were able to talk to 

people about. It was such a pleasure to be able to bring that 

booklet along to talk to people about the many, many things 

that the Saskatchewan Party government would do — many 

changes that were long overdue, Mr. Speaker. And I would add 

that we’re not wasting any time in implementing those changes 

as well. 

 

I want to also talk about the great collegiates that we have in 

Saskatoon Silver Springs: St. Joseph who’s been there for quite 

some time and a contributing member to the community in 

Saskatoon Silver Springs; and a brand new collegiate of 

Saskatoon, the Centennial Collegiate in Saskatoon Silver 

Springs. I want to thank the staff, the parents, and the students 

of these educational institutions for what they bring to the 

community. They bring tremendous amount of heart and spirit, 

and they have done a tremendous job in contributing to the 

community. 

 

I also want to thank . . . Since my constituency is a brand new 

area, we’ve lacked for many things for a long period of time, 

but it’s nice to see the business community coming forward. 

The business owners are risking their hard-earned money 

starting new businesses in the constituency and providing 

services that are long overdue. And for that I want to say thank 

you to each and every one of those business owners, not only 

for contributing to the provincial economy, providing job 

opportunities, but also for the services that they bring to 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve said that I have really treasured my 

time in this Legislative Assembly the first four years, and it 

makes you work harder to make sure that you get back here. I 

enjoyed representing my constituents, but I’ve also enjoyed my 

critic responsibilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My legislative 

career began by being appointed Post-Secondary Education 

critic, something that I very much enjoyed. I enjoyed learning 

about the concerns of students across the province, but also to 

learn more about the great post-secondary institutions that we 

have like the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan, SIAST, the Saskatchewan Institute of Indian 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2007 

Technologies, and First Nations University, as well as the many 

regional colleges. That’s an area that I didn’t know a lot about, 

but I was able to gain that experience in my critic area. 

 

My second responsibility was being the Finance critic, and I 

must say that that was a great challenge and responsibility, 

learning a little bit about every area, the financial implications. I 

enjoyed that. One of the pleasures doing that is budget day 

when you get to challenge the Finance minister, critique his 

budget, but also offer some suggestions for how things could 

have been done differently. I must say that I’ve enjoyed asking 

the questions, and I must say that I enjoyed asking the questions 

in the House. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I enjoy even more coming 

over to this side of the House and finally . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, getting some 

of those answers that we have been requesting for such a long 

time. It wasn’t because members over there gave those answers 

freely. It’s because we found them when we became 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I asked the former Finance minister, Mr. 

Thomson to release the fiscal projections for the next four 

years, what did he do, Mr. Speaker? He refused. He said he 

didn’t know. He said he couldn’t. He said he shouldn’t. And he 

knows for political reasons that he wouldn’t. Because you know 

why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because it was an embarrassment to 

the members on that side, an embarrassing legacy for the NDP, 

NDP government. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, his successor was no different, the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. What did she have to say about the fiscal 

projections of the province? Well not much. There was no 

interest there. What was her policy? Dodge, deflect, digress, but 

never answer the question. Now we know why, Mr. Speaker. 

Now we know why. 

 

When we finally saw the numbers — the same numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, that members over there have seen for six months — 

what did they say? What did we see from these projections? 

Well we saw a good year in 2007 and 2008. You know there’s 

some cash there due to some one-time equalization money and 

some windfall oil revenue. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, however, Mr. Speaker, what else did we 

find? We found projections for 2008-2009 through 2011-2012. 

They were awash in red ink, Mr. Speaker. It’s surprising to 

members of this House because we didn’t hear anything about 

that from members opposite while they were in government. 

And I would suggest that’s part of the reason why they are no 

longer here and they are sitting over there, and they will be 

sitting there for a long, long period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I’d be remiss if I didn’t go over the 

numbers, Mr. Speaker. And I know members opposite are 

clamouring, and they want to, they want to hear the numbers. 

What is the projection for 2008-2009, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 

projection is a deficit of $740 million in that one year alone. 

 

Now what did members opposite say when they saw those 

numbers? Did they challenge the Finance minister? Did they 

challenge the Premier? Did they challenge cabinet ministers? 

Did they say that this is unacceptable? I think not, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re looking for that information. We can’t find anyone who 

challenged this information. 

 

In 2009 and 2010, Mr. Speaker, it is even worse, even worse. A 

projected deficit — and get this — of $1.038 billion. This, Mr. 

Speaker, was evidenced, was brought forward to members 

opposite, to ministers and I’m sure to the government caucus at 

the time as well, the NDP government caucus, and not one word 

to the public. Not one word about it. In fact even worse than 

that, when asked, they said nothing. It was zip. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is not acceptable. And members opposite are 

saying shame, and I agree with them. 

 

2010-2011, a projected deficit of $1.203 billion, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and members are asking already for the total, but I’m not 

even finished yet because we have to talk about 2011-2012. As 

members opposite know, responsible governments give 

four-year projections; irresponsible ones don’t. And I’ll leave it 

to Saskatchewan voters to make the decision for themselves. In 

2011-2012, a projected deficit of $1.141 billion — $1.141 

billion. 

 

And I know members opposite, I know you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and members opposite are waiting for a total. It’s kind 

of like Telemiracle, but it’s not as much fun. It’s certainly not 

positive. 

 

Given the forecast assumptions with a total deficit from 

2008-2009, because of the policies of this NDP opposition 

while they were in government, the total was $4.123 billion — 

$4.123 billion. That, Mr. Speaker, that is the NDP legacy for 

this province. That’s the legacy of 16, 17 years of NDP 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. That’s where we’re at. 

 

The words are coming forward: incompetence, 

mismanagement. It’s all appropriate at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ve said before; it’s something that will keep members 

opposite in opposition for a long, long time because you can bet 

that we will remind you of this each and every time that we 

have the opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thankfully there is reason for optimism in 

Saskatchewan. With the election of the member from Swift 

Current as Premier of this province, Saskatchewan residents 

know that our best days are ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 

Throne delivered one week ago, December 10, gives every 

Saskatchewan resident hope. It outlines growth. It outlines 

opportunity. It outlines security, and it outlines how the 

Saskatchewan Party government will keep its promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would love to go through the Speech from the 



December 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

Throne page by page, line by line, word by word, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s that good, Mr. Speaker. However I’ll just highlight 

some of the areas that I’m responsible for, and then leave my 

many, many colleagues on this side of the House to be able to 

expound on other areas. 

 

As Minister of Crown Corporations, I am pleased that the 

Throne Speech outlines how this government will keep 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations working for Saskatchewan 

people. They are an important part of this government’s plan for 

securing the future. The government will ensure Crown 

corporations provide Saskatchewan people with the highest 

quality utilities at the lowest possible costs while directing, Mr. 

Speaker, directing the Crown dividends towards priorities like 

health care, highways, and education. 

 

As outlined in the Speech from the Throne, our government will 

strengthen sound investment in communities, in post-secondary 

institutions, to build an innovative economy that will help 

Saskatchewan through initiatives like — like at SaskPower and 

Sask Energy — providing loans of up to $25,000 to encourage 

geothermal, solar, and wind energy. The Minister of the 

Environment says what a great idea and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

must agree with her there. Also SGI will be providing 20 per 

cent rebates on the insurance costs of newer, hybrid vehicles, 

Mr. Speaker. This is an innovative plan that people across 

Saskatchewan have been asking for, and our government is 

proud to deliver. 

 

This Speech from the Throne will help Saskatchewan people 

make sure residents have growth and opportunity. It will make 

sure that they have security, and it will make sure that they have 

a Saskatchewan Party government for a long, long time to 

come, Mr. Speaker. For these reasons and many more, I would 

like to inform this House that I will be supporting the Speech 

from the Throne and voting against the amendment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker, and I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Assembly now stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:54.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 129 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 129 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 130 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Prince Albert Mayor Receives Order of Merit 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

 Business Owner Assists Runners in Need 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

 Saskatoon Scientist Receives Order of Merit 

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 130 

 Volunteers Provide Community Christmas Dinner 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 131 

 Business of the Year Award to Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 131 

 First Nations Language Keepers Conference 

   Beatty ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 131 

 Citizens Support 15 Wing Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Salaries for Political Staff 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

 Costs of Dismissal 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 134 

 Staffing Strategy for the Crowns 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 134 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 135 

 The Public Service 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 135 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 135 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 136 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Enhancements to Discount Bus Pass Program 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 137 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 137 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 

 Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 138 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 138 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 139 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 139 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 139 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 139 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 



 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 144 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 148 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 150 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 151 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 153 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................... 155 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 158 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


