


















































Hansard: May 08, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 58A  TUESDAY, MAY 8, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1535 
 May 8, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a number 
of communities across the province faced a dark cloud 
yesterday afternoon as school boards across this province 
decided to perform the cowardly act of closing schools. And I 
read a petition from a number of people in regards to school 
closures. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Neville, Admiral, 
Climax, Tompkins, Piapot, and Richmound schools 
remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the folks 
from the communities of Swift Current, Eastend, Gull Lake, 
Tompkins, Maple Creek, Oxbow, Yellow Grass, and Weyburn. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As indicated by my 
colleague, several communities and individuals have been 
traumatized by the announcement that their schools would be 
closed. I have a petition in that regard. I’d like to read the 
prayer which follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Neville, Admiral, 
Climax, Tompkins, Piapot, and Richmound schools 
remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is not just signed by individuals 
from the school division of Chinook; it’s signed by individuals 
from communities around the province including Tompkins, 
Shaunavon, Ponteix, Swift Current, Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of people from my constituency and 
elsewhere who are very concerned about the discontinuation of 
basic education classes at the Estevan campus of the Southeast 
Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Torquay, North Portal, Bienfait, Macoun, Frobisher, Carnduff, 
Beaubier, and Lampman. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar who are upset 
about the closure of their rural service centre and environment 
office. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are extremely concerned the withdrawal of lab services at the 
Lafleche and District Health Centre would cause undue 
hardships to residents, particularly seniors. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Gravelbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of central Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the health care system and the 
potentially dangerous situation that’s happening in my 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition are from Leask, 
Shellbrook, Prince Albert, and other towns from my 
constituency. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today on behalf of 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the undue hardships that’ll be placed upon young students 
should their schools be closed. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Simpson, Lockwood, and 
Nokomis. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition about citizens that are very concerned with the 
closures that are happening of their schools. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Nokomis 
and Semans. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions here 
with citizens that are very upset with the underfunding of the 
education system: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These particular petitions are signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis, Saskatoon, Govan, and Drake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 
to present a petition requesting an allocation of funding for an 
elementary school in the Stonebridge neighbourhood of 
Saskatoon, in my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. The 
prayer for relief states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Stonebridge. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Gordon 
Road in the Stonebridge area of Saskatoon Southeast. I’m 
pleased to present this on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition by people asking the government to maintain 
full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, 
they are concerned that the banks cannot accept payment if the 
customer doesn’t have documentation, a service which the 
office supplies. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the fine 
community of Rosetown. And I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 8, The 
Paramedics Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 8 be read a third time? Or 
when shall it be considered in Committee of the Whole? The 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 8 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Then when shall this 
Bill be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 8 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 61, The Vital 
Statistics Act, 2007 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 61 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 61. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read a first time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time. The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the minister that Bill No. 61 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 62, The Vital 
Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 62 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 62. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill 62 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 64, The 
Graduate Tax Exemption Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 64 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for the Public Service 
Commission has requested leave to waive consideration of Bill 
64 in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of the Public Service 
Commission. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Public 
Service Commission that Bill 64 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report that it has considered certain estimates and 
to present its ninth report. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
13, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 13 be referred to the 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy has 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole of Bill 13. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been properly moved by the Minister of 
SaskEnergy that Bill No. 13 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
59, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 
2007 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 59 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister Responsible for Gaming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister responsible has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Bill 59 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
 The Chair recognizes the Minister of Gaming. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Gaming 
that Bill No. 59 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: is the 
main access road to the town of Hanley the responsibility 
of the Department of Highways? If so, when is this road 
scheduled to be repaired? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
real privilege for me to introduce today a group of 36 students 
from the community of Gull Lake, the Gull Lake School. 
We’ve got 19 grade 10 students and 17 grade 4 students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was first advised of this visit, I just saw the 
name of one teacher associated with this particular excursion 
today, and I thought what a brave soul she must be. But I see 
she’s brought reinforcements. With 36 students, one teacher 
would probably be badly outnumbered. 
 
And we have today with Adele Kirwan, we’ve got Neal Boutin, 
Bev Dutton, Cheryl Thoreson, and Pam Hassard. And we’ve 
got some chaperones as well: Darren Fiddler, Candice 
Mortensen, Brady Olsen, and Arlene Clendening have joined 
the group today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome this group and ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

and through you to all members of the Assembly two people 
that are in your gallery, if they would wave briefly. 
 
I have today as guests, Philipp Moeller, a 17-year-old exchange 
student from Essen, Germany. He has been living in Regina and 
is hosted by the Courchene family here in Regina. He’s been 
here since August of 2006. He is a grade 11 student at LeBoldus 
High School and is involved in school and club volleyball, 
curling, rugby, track and field. He will be in Regina until 
mid-July. He is maintaining an approximately 90 per cent 
average. He is a guest today of Elaine Courchene who is a sister 
of my consistency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett. 
 
And I’m told that he is fitting in well in with the family, well 
enough that he has had the nerve to ask for the family 
automobile, and they feel comfortable in saying no on most 
occasions. So I would ask all members to welcome him to the 
Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature 43 grade 10 social class from Melville. As many of 
the members in here will recognize the name of Mr. Perry 
Ostapowich who has been here a number of years with classes 
from Melville, and we all I think appreciate that. Mr. Speaker, 
also in attendance is Vice-principal Garth Shoemaker. And the 
member from Moosomin says hello to Garth; he knows him 
well. And also, Bob Simpson, I believe is a retired teacher but 
also doing double duty as the bus driver today. 
 
So one thing I might mention, Mr. Speaker, I noted when I had 
my meeting with them a number of the young gentlemen up 
there are wearing suits and ties. And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Opposition also saw that up there, but we look at it in two 
different ways. I am somewhat concerned that one of them is 
looking at my job. He’s somewhat optimistic that the future of 
the Melville-Saltcoats constituency is in good hands. So would 
we all welcome them here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with my 
colleague, the member from Melville, in extending a welcome 
to the students and most specifically to Garth Shoemaker who 
happened to graduate from Kennedy Langbank High, and 
unfortunately there will be no more graduations following this 
year. 
 
But I would also like to mention that his dad is one gentleman 
who also always keeps me on top of things. In fact he was the 
first phone call I received after the announcement of school 
closures yesterday. So Garth, your dad is keeping on top of the 
political spectrum in this province. Welcome Garth. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

100th Anniversary of the Appointment of the First 
Legislative Librarian 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A hundred years 
ago, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan appointed John 
Hawkes its first Legislative Librarian. He was responsible for 
the collection for the five years it was housed in the territorial 
government building on Dewdney Avenue here in Regina and 
oversaw the move to the new legislative buildings in 1912. 
Since the library came to the Legislative Building , it has been 
presided over by several passionate, committed, and 
knowledgeable legislative librarians including our present day 
Melissa Bennett. 
 
In the earliest days, Mr. Speaker, librarian was a title that was 
used only as a convenience. John Hawkes had spent his career 
in the newspaper business prior to his appointment in 1907. 
Nevertheless he was determined to make Saskatchewan’s 
Legislative Library one of the best organized and functional of 
all legislatures in Canada and to set it on a solid foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, subsequent librarians have not only continued in 
Hawkes’ tradition but also contributed to recording the history 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and the library 
itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating the legislative librarians of Saskatchewan for 
making our library such a success for the past 100 years. I 
would also like to thank them for their invaluable service to this 
province and to this legislature. As much as we all dread 
receiving their reminders for late returns, it is because of our 
legislative librarians that we can enjoy the information, the 
updated reading material, and the library that we do today. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

School Closures 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I said it 
was a sad and devastating day after learning that the Prairie 
Valley School Division near Regina would be closing eight out 
of eleven schools that were up for review. I can report today 
that after talking to members of the community overnight that 
they are indeed devastated by this news. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, in all eight schools will be closing their 
doors. They are Earl Grey, Francis, Glenavon, Gray, Lang, 
Wilcox, Odessa, and the Saar School in Kronau. It should also 
be noted that there are also two schools — Sedley and Kennedy 
Langbank — will be closing their high school programs. Only 
one out of eleven schools up for review was spared from 
closure or losing any of its grades, and that was the school in 
McLean. 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

Mr. Speaker, 500 students will be affected by yesterday’s 
announcement. Mr. Speaker, what’s been extremely 
disappointing in this entire process is that the NDP government 
has failed to provide any leadership on this issue, and it has 
failed to provide school boards with all the tools they need to 
consider this emotional decision of school closure. As a result, 
our rural school divisions have been backed into a corner. It is 
absolutely shameful that this NDP government has failed to 
provide the tools for school divisions, and as a result school 
divisions’ only option was closure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 6 to 
12 is North American Occupational Safety and Health Week or 
NAOSH Week. NAOSH Week is all about the promotion of 
injury and illness prevention at work, at home, and in our 
communities. This year’s NAOSH theme, Start Today, reminds 
us of just how important it is to encourage responsible practices 
to prevent injuries and illnesses. 
 
Last year more than 13,000 Saskatchewan workers became ill 
or were injured or killed on the job. Workplace injuries and 
illnesses represent a significant financial burden on individual 
workers, businesses, and the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while these numbers are much higher than we 
would like, progress is being made to address this very serious 
issue. This NDP [New Democratic Party] government remains 
committed to worker safety, and we have reduced the time-loss 
injury rate by more than 18 per cent since 2002. That’s one of 
the highest reduction rates in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s only the beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to support NAOSH 
activities taking place in communities throughout the province. 
Strong protections for workers enshrined in labour legislation 
are just another example of why Saskatchewan is truly the best 
place to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

School Closures 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday several communities in 
southwest Saskatchewan learned that the Chinook School 
Division will be losing the three schools in Admiral, Neville, 
and Piapot at the end of August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that while other schools in the 
area have been spared closure this year, they were also affected 
by yesterday’s announcement. Mr. Speaker, Richmound School 
will be closing next year. Meanwhile, Tompkins and Climax 
schools will see grades 6 to 9 discontinued this year, with 
Climax closing for good next year. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been told by successive ministers of 
Education that good things were going to come out of forced 
amalgamation, including cost savings, improved service 
delivery, reduced administration, and other efficiencies. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, not all those good things have been realized in the 
Chinook School Division. What we’ve seen is underfunding of 
education by this NDP government that has essentially pitted 
community against community, forced school divisions into 
difficult and emotional decisions, and produced the devastation 
of school closure on too many communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that on one hand the Premier is 
concerned that the federal government is unfairly penalizing 
Saskatchewan when it comes to our oil and gas revenues, and 
yet on the other hand his government has done the exact same 
thing to several communities in southwest Saskatchewan. How 
can the Premier justify this incongruent position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Fire in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure all 
members of the Assembly are aware of the devastating fire that 
occurred in Meadow Lake last week. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to extend my deepest sympathies to the business 
owners and tenants who have been dispossessed as a result of 
the fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill and Stella Haw have been the owners and 
operators of the very successful Lumber House Restaurant for 
over 30 years. I say parenthetically it was listed as one of 
Canada’s top restaurants a number of years ago. Overcoming 
their loss will be a challenge, and I know our entire community 
will support the Haws through this ordeal. 
 
I’d also like to acknowledge Connie Rowland, manager of the 
Thrift Mission, whose facility was also destroyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without the rapid response of all involved, 
including the tenants living in the suites above the Lumber 
House who detected the fire and alerted the fire department, and 
especially the Meadow Lake Fire Department, the devastation 
and loss could have been even worse. And I’d like to thank the 
fire department, the business owners and of course the 
community itself. Mr. Speaker, in all the confusion, CJNS 
Radio in Meadow Lake and especially broadcaster Ken Shiller 
provided excellent coverage, timely updates, and public 
broadcast announcements throughout the entire day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the community and its residents will 
continue to pull together to assist those who have experienced 
loss as a result of the fire, and I would like to acknowledge and 
thank our community for demonstrating strength and goodwill. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

100th Anniversary of the Appointment of the First 
Legislative Librarian 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 2007 
marks the 100th anniversary of the appointment of Mr. John 
Hawkes, the first Legislative Librarian at the Legislative 
Library in Saskatchewan. In her history of the library, former 
Legislative Librarian Christine Macdonald notes that Mr. 
Hawkes had no training as a librarian, and that during his tenure 
the library moved three times, it was underfunded, and there 
was the disaster of the 1912 Regina Cyclone. 
 
In 1911 Mr. Hawkes went on a trip to a number of legislative 
and state libraries in Eastern Canada and the United States to 
get a better understanding of their collections. He also had a 
keen eye on the physical plans for the library and asked several 
firms to submit their ideas for the physical space at the 
legislature. It opened on the first day of the 1913 fall session. 
 
Mr. Hawkes was quite a stickler for decorum and had certain 
ideas about the appropriate atmosphere for the library. He once 
wrote that the library was not, quote, “for the entertainment of 
people who want to pass away an idle hour over some book 
which happens to stimulate their curiosity.” 
 
The Legislative Library has undergone incredible changes since 
the first Legislative Librarian was appointed a century ago, and 
it is now the third largest research library in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of our new Legislative 
Librarian, Melissa Bennett, I know there are more changes in 
store. Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Library is a place for all the 
people of Saskatchewan and one that we should all take pride 
in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Focusing on Policy 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, despite Saskatchewan Party 
doom and gloom predictions over the last number of years, 
Saskatchewan is experiencing almost unprecedented economic 
growth. Job numbers are up. Population numbers are up. And 
Saskatchewan is once again in a financial position to put in 
place the kinds of legislation that make this province a great 
place to live, work, and build a future — initiatives like the 
seniors’ drug plan that will help lighten the load for 
Saskatchewan seniors when it comes to the cost of prescription 
drugs or the tax credit plan for post-secondary graduates as an 
incentive for graduates to take advantage of the many 
opportunities for young people here in the province. 
 
It’s no surprise that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t want to talk 
about jobs, population, or the economy because they have 
nothing constructive to offer. And because the opposition has 
nothing constructive to offer, they’re reduced to muckraking 
and smear campaigns rather than focusing on policy and recent 
political debate. 
 
For our part, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to govern in a 

manner that has taken this province from bankruptcy to boom 
times and focus our efforts on making life better for families, 
young people, and the working men and women of this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Protection of Children 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again all roads lead to the Minister of Community Resources. 
This morning the people of Saskatchewan heard the Children’s 
Advocate express his grave concerns with Four Directions 
group home — inappropriate use of restraints, danger of 
suffocation, unprofessional treatment by staff members, lack of 
trained staff, limited access to educational programming, 
limited access to recreational programming. 
 
Some children were removed from this facility on March 10, 
2006. Other children stayed on until the minister shut the 
facility down on April 26, 2007, over one year later. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister knew all these children were in danger. 
Why did he wait for over a year before removing all children 
from harm’s way? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I’ll point out that as a government, we intended to — 
from day one — and we’ll continue to work with the First 
Nations people when it comes to First Nations children. I’ve 
always asserted that as a minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ll point out to the people of Saskatchewan, it is only 
right, it is only fair that every First Nations in this province 
believe that they have a role to play when it comes to the 
well-being of their First Nations children. We’ll continue to 
embrace that particular aspect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would point out that we also hear from the Children’s 
Advocate, whose office we also respect, Mr. Speaker. We will 
work with both the First Nations group and the Children’s 
Advocate and the federal government who has a responsibility 
that they have to own up to as well, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
complex issue. First Nations people are asking for services. 
They’re asking for their involvement, and they’re asking for 
resources to do a good job when it comes to First Nations 
children in care, Mr. Speaker. We will continue looking at that 
partnership and taking the best advice from those people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll remind the 
minister that he has the care of every child in this province 
under his jurisdiction, not somebody else’s. The Children’s 
Advocate has made his position clear. He said that children 
were “. . . leaving Four Directions in worse shape than they 
came in.” Children referred by First Nations stayed in the group 
home more than a year after serious concerns about their safety 
were raised with the minister. Other children were removed 
immediately. Mr. Bernstein said it’s unacceptable to have two 
sets of standards. All children need to be protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister fail to protect all children as 
soon as he heard about the risk? Why did he fail to protect all 
children who are under his ultimate responsibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that I 
accept the responsibility for every child in care in 
Saskatchewan. The member’s absolutely right. As the minister, 
there’s no question that that responsibility lies with me. It lies 
with me on-reserve and off-reserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have an interesting battle, Mr. Speaker, talking about 
jurisdictions. Many First Nations people say that through treaty 
they never, ever gave up the right to help develop a future for 
their First Nations children. We have to incorporate some of the 
challenges that they present to us, as a minister as well, so 
we’re able to maximize the opportunity in the outcome for First 
Nations children in care. It is only fair. It is only the right thing 
to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ll remind that member, Mr. Speaker, the last place 
that we’ll seek advice, Mr. Speaker, the last place when it 
comes to First Nations people is that party opposite and that 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, because all they’ve been doing 
is using this issue for politics. And once again, what’s good 
politically for the Sask Party is what they’re after, not what’s 
good for the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Once again the minister wants to deflect the 
issue. He had responsibility for these children for over a year 
and delayed taking action and put these children in danger. The 
Children’s Advocate has been raising concerns about this group 
home for over five years. The Children’s Advocate has received 
over 80 complaints about Four Directions and for five years the 
Children’s Advocate said there was little improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what Mr. Bernstein said in an interview at 
noon hour. He said, some of the children were “. . . leaving 
Four . . . [Seasons] in worse shape than they came in.” Yet the 
minister did nothing until faced with the prospect that these 
concerns would be made public. Then, Mr. Speaker, does he 
take some action. 
 

Why does the safety of children always take a back seat to the 
political reputation of that minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the name of the facility is 
Four Directions, not four winds. Would the member opposite 
get at least the name of the facility correct if he wants to make 
all these allegations. 
 
I’ll point out to that member, Mr. Speaker, and to the entire 
Saskatchewan Party caucus that it is incumbent upon any 
government to show leadership on this issue, is to involve the 
First Nations people when it comes to First Nations children, 
and we will continue doing. Many people in the First Nations 
community said they had made tremendous improvements to 
the facility. That’s what they assert. 
 
Certainly the advocate is saying well, they haven’t made 
enough progress. Mr. Speaker, as a minister, we’re going to 
listen to both camps to make sure that we’re able to strike a 
balance, a balance that will ultimately lead to a better system of 
helping with First Nations children. 
 
And again I’d point out to the Saskatchewan Party, I would say 
this to you guys, maybe it’s time that you should park your 
politics . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The minister is reminded 
to direct his comments through the Chair. And I invite him to 
finish his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
point out that the opposition, Mr. Speaker, they should park 
their politics and stop their crocodile tears and get out of the 
way. We will fix the problems alongside the First Nations 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, same answers as Oyate — 
exact same answers. He says he’s going to take responsibility; 
they’re making progress. And yet when it was going to become 
public, then he closed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time of this is very interesting. The Children’s 
Advocate says there was a meeting about concerns with Four 
Directions on May 6, 2006. Four days later, the department 
removed all children under their care from Four Directions. 
Four days after that discussion, on March 2006, I was standing 
in this House asking questions about Oyate and the minister 
was telling me good progress was being made at Oyate. When 
we eventually asked if there were any problems or concerns 
with other facility, the member opposite accused us of a witch 
hunt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister was aware at that time of the 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

problems with Four Directions. The minister was aware that 
children were being placed at risk. The minister was being 
questioned about the safety of children within days of being 
confronted with the situation in Four Directions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will he truly do his job and look after the 
children of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for 
Community Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my department worked 
with Four Directions for the last couple of years. Initially we 
became involved because there was some concerns around the 
facility itself, Mr. Speaker. And as we became more and more 
involved, we found out that there were other issues such as a 
recreational program that was lacking, the educational program 
needed a lot of work, and yes, there was the concern about 
restraints, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not talking about, as the Sask 
Party might suggest, the handcuffs and chains and the whole 
bit. Actually the staff were physically restraining the children to 
stop them from doing harm to themselves or to others, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We felt that these were issues that needed to be addressed and 
my department worked a full two years on trying to resolve 
those issues. They’ve identified the issues. They’ve done a 
review of the facility. There’s agreed-to time frames in which 
we would resolve these problems. Mr. Speaker, things were not 
moving as quickly as we would like and that’s when, as the 
minister, I made the decision to close the door down. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s also important is we done this 
independent of the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Government’s Support for Education 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, the number of school 
closures is 15 and still counting. Some of these closures are in 
my constituency. The Chinook School Division says that this 
government’s changes to the way it calculates school grants 
shifted an additional 2.77 million off the province to the local 
ratepayer. The school division also says that the NDP 
government’s changes to small-school funding factor cost them 
another 1.16 million. That’s over $4 million in one division — 
not including all of the other off-loading from that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this NDP government say it’s supporting 
rural schools when it directly took well over $4 million out of 
the hands of the Chinook School Division? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll repeat again that over the last 10 years this NDP 
government has increased the funding to the foundation 
operating grant by over 200 million — increased by over 200 
million which is a 52 per cent increase. And during that time we 
have seen a 15 per cent decrease in enrolment and also 
correspondingly that creeping up of the mill rate right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many believe that there needed to be something 
done; hence the tabling of the Boughen report and the progress 
that has been made to date. 
 
The member opposite, one thing that I am pleased that he at 
least acknowledged the small-school factor that’s been in place. 
And this year . . . Well the isolated schools. I apologize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This year the small-school factor and the geographic factor 
directed at rural schools will inject another over $20 million 
into the rural schools in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, because of this 
government’s off-loading the cost of education, the Chinook 
School Division has announced a mill rate increase of 7 per cent 
— some creep — a 7 per cent increase in mill rate the same 
year the division has to close down several schools. 
 
So that government’s so-called support of rural schools means 
nothing more but school closures and higher taxes for property 
tax owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could this government possibly claim to 
support rural schools when it has done nothing but continue to 
off-load the cost of education on to the backs of property tax 
payers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there are many ways that 
we support rural education and education right across the 
province. You can look at the small-school factor. You can look 
at the geographic factor dedicated to rural schools in this 
province, diversity factor, technology factor, joint-use facilities, 
community schools, KidsFirst, pre-K [pre-kindergarten], and it 
goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current is beaking 
from his seat, and that’s fine because he stands up in front of a 
crowd in my home community and says, well we’d keep these 
schools open. But do you know what? He never says how. He 
says, don’t raise the taxes; don’t make any increases; keep all 
the schools open; parents and communities should all be 
involved. But yet the other members will say, let the school 
boards make the decision. He owes the people of the province 
an explanation when all his policies point in different 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

directions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that sounds great 
from the minister of school closures. Mr. Speaker, 
amalgamation, according to the Finance minister, was supposed 
to decrease mill rates, improve services to students, and provide 
more funding to school divisions. But these things haven’t 
happened. That NDP government has left school divisions with 
no choice but to close schools and raise property taxes. Another 
school division says, and I quote: 
 

The provincial government’s inability to appropriately 
address the funding of education in the province has 
contributed to a loss of over $4 million in grant revenue 
compared to the combined grant totals received prior to 
amalgamation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s in one school division. The provincial 
government’s inability to appropriately address the funding of 
education is causing these closures. Mr. Speaker, that’s pure 
and simple. Mr. Speaker, why has this government failed rural 
schools so miserably? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition gets 
up quite often and criticizes us for what we’ve put in place. But 
this NDP government believes that building a strong foundation 
for education right across the province, with equity for 
opportunity for education for all of students, is an important 
basis to build the system. Mr. Speaker, we can look at a number 
of comments from members of the opposition. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says, “There is, at some point, too 
few students to justify a school. It doesn’t matter who the 
government is and we understand that.” But then he turns 
around, and he says on the other hand, oh, I’d keep these 
schools open. He doesn’t say how, and he doesn’t put that in 
line with his policy which says they would streamline the 
education system and get rid of costly duplication. What exactly 
does that mean, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I asked how much severance Jim Fodey is receiving, 
and why is he getting severance at all if he resigned. Five times 
in a row the minister flat out refused to answer that question. 

And then the NDP caucus Chair went out into the rotunda and 
refused to answer that question again. 
 
So I will ask again, but this time to the Premier. How much 
severance is Jim Fodey receiving, and why is he getting 
severance at all if he resigned? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I wish to advise the Assembly 
that the question is out of order. A response will be accepted if 
it’s voluntary. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Earlier this afternoon we learned that the Saskatchewan Party 
has had the illegally obtained police reports and documents in 
their possession for well over a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recall on April 26 the Deputy Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party indicating to the press, and therefore all 
to the public, that they just came into possession of those 
documents during this sitting of the spring session, Mr. 
Speaker. It took them 13 days to correct the public record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our House Leader gave misinformation in this 
House, and he was able to correct it at the next day of the sitting 
of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, that member has called for his 
resignation. Mr. Speaker, has that member offered his 
resignation to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know this NDP government refuses to take any responsibility 
for its own actions. Yesterday, yesterday the NDP caucus Chair 
told reporters to go and talk to the payroll office of the 
Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will allow the 
question to be put. Order. Member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not up to them to decide 
how much severance Jim Fodey gets. I would like to quote 
again from the Board of Internal Economy directive passed on 
December 14, 2006. And I quote: 
 

An employee’s entitlement to severance is based on the 
advice of the respective Caucus Chair. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not up to the Legislative Assembly to decide if 
Jim Fodey gets severance. It’s up to caucus. And the Premier is 
the leader of that caucus. When is he going to start acting like 
that leader? Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how much severance 
is Jim Fodey receiving? And why is he getting severance at all 
if he resigned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Deputy Leader of the Saskatchewan Party has 
called on the Premier to fire the Government House Leader 
because he gave incorrect information in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, but what’s good for the goose is not good for the 
gander. Do what I say, not what I do. 
 
Now the leader, the deputy leader, gave incorrect information to 
the press. And the Justice critic did as well. And I ask, have 
they offered their resignation? And has the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party accepted their resignation? Or why hasn’t 
he fired them if they haven’t offered their resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the NDP caucus Chair told reporters, it’s not up to me 
to say how much Jim’s severance, how much severance Jim 
Fodey gets; go ask the Legislative Assembly staff. Mr. Speaker, 
what a statement to make. What a terrible thing to do to the 
Legislative Assembly staff. It’s not up to them to decide if Jim 
Fodey gets severance. 
 
The severance policy clearly states, and I quote: 
 

An employee’s entitlement to severance is based on the 
advice of the Caucus Chair. The notice that severance 
shall be paid to a caucus employee shall be made in 
writing under the signature of the Caucus Chair . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how much severance is Jim Fodey 
receiving? And why is he getting severance at all if he 
resigned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you 
know, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party operatives — 
they’re a small group of Sask Party staff that spin around the 
scrums; I think there’s about four of them — they knew for 13 
days that that member had given misinformation to the reporter 
out in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen days they did not 
correct that information until all of a sudden one of their 
operatives phoned up the press to say they made a mistake. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my question is this: what have they done to 
discipline that staff member that did not give them correct 
information? Have they done anything? Mr. Speaker, why did it 
take 13 days? Is it because the police have come calling and 
asked for them to give them, the police, information about how 
long they had these documents, Mr. Speaker? How long did 
they have these illegally obtained documents? What day in the 
spring of 2006 did you obtain those documents, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP government 
takes responsibility for nothing, Mr. Speaker. Schools are 
closing. They say, go see the school board trustee. They write a 
cheque to Murdoch Carriere, an employee of the government 
who was fired for harassment, a cheque for $275,000. And they 
say, it’s not our fault; we got that advice from the lawyers. Then 
the Government House Leader, Mr. Speaker, gets caught with 
the truth that he didn’t fully disclose an NDP caucus fraud over 
a number of years ago. He says, it’s not my fault; it’s the chief 
of staff’s fault. Now the NDP is going to pay severance to that 
former chief of staff who resigned, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not 
their fault either; that’s the fault of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
To the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan: when is he 
going to be accountable? When will he take responsibility for 
the mismanagement and the cover-ups of this government, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have said a very small group of people knew about them having 
that document, the illegally obtained document for over a year. 
Was it the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party? Did he know? 
 
Mr. Speaker, did they decide to come clean today because they 
have a police investigation? Has the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party been interviewed? Who in their caucus has 
been interviewed? And why — if that Leader of the Opposition 
who wants to become the next premier — why hasn’t he 
reprimanded his staff? And why hasn’t he reprimanded his 
caucus critic for giving misinformation to this legislature? 
When did he know? Is he in the concealed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP government, 
we know, based on evidence that’s been presented to this 
Assembly, has put children at risk. They have put women at 
risk, Mr. Speaker, with their handling of the Carriere affair. 
They have covered up fraud in their own caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
What’s the solution they have to all of these issues? They write 
a cheque to someone. They try to write a big cheque and make 
it go away, Mr. Speaker. They don’t come clean. One of the 
columnists in the Regina Leader-Post is even calling the 
Premier, and I quote, “Cheque Book Lorne.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are getting sick and tired of 
this NDP government using their money to try to make the 
messes that they’ve created go away. Is that how the Premier 
handles the messes, the mismanagement, and the cover-ups of 
his government — using taxpayers’ dollars to try to make it go 
away, Mr. Speaker? 



May 8, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the 
opposition deputy leader say on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] at 1 o’clock that they needed a year to verify this 
information, a year to verify that they really had information 
that was correct. Well, my question is, who verified it? Who did 
they get to verify that these were illegally obtained police 
reports? 
 
Now the member opposite; I know what he’s after, Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. He is covering 
himself. You know why? Because the police are investigating 
the fact that they had, for over one year, an illegally obtained 
document, Mr. Speaker. They placed people’s private, personal 
information on the website, and I think the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Sask Party leader, needs to start taking 
responsibility. Or is it, in terms of where he comes from, deny, 
deny, deny? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty telling what the 
government opposite, who are clearly obsessed with police 
investigations . . . And they ought to be, Mr. Speaker, because 
the scandals that the province has been exposed to, created by 
this NDP government, are pretty clear. And they’re a matter of 
the public record. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that this NDP government is 
such a complete wreck? Look at the front bench over there. The 
minister that covered up SPUDCO for six years is still in the 
cabinet. The minister that paid off Murdoch Carriere is still in 
the cabinet. Mr. Speaker, the minister that has put children at 
risk now twice is still in the cabinet, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
responsible for covering up an NDP caucus fraud, still in the 
cabinet. The only minister that ever got fired was the one that 
had the gall to disagree, to criticize the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The only one. 
 
My question is to the Premier of Saskatchewan: will he stand up 
and explain his priorities? Will he explain to the people of the 
province how he has lost his way, how this government has lost 
their way? And they’re now, Mr. Speaker, involved in 
mismanagement and cover-ups every day in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, if they can’t get it 
straight that they’ve had this document in their possession for 
well over a year — an illegally obtained document, a stolen 

document. They have said to the public that it came in a brown 
paper envelope and it just some sort mysteriously got into their 
office. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I believe that. I’m not sure I 
believe that. And I want to know from the members opposite, 
are they going to tell the truth to the police and tell them where 
they really got that document? Are they going to tell the police 
how they really verified the information contained in that 
document as they sat on it for one year? And they need to 
explain to the police why it is that they put personal, private, 
confidential information on the website. I think these men and 
women have something to account for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,317 through 
1,479 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 1,317 through to 1,479 
have been submitted. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the Standing Committees on the Economy as well 
as Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1535 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1536 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1536 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1536 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1537 
 Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1537 
 Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 
 Loi de 2007 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
 Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1538 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
 Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1537 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1539 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1540 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1540 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 100th Anniversary of the Appointment of the First Legislative Librarian 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1540 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
 School Closures 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1540 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1541 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1541 
 Fire in Meadow Lake 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1541 
 Focusing on Policy 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Protection of Children 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1542 
  



 

 Government’s Support for Education 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1544 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1544 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1545 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1546 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


