


















































Hansard: April 25, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 51A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1385 
 April 25, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again today to present another petition in regards to a 
dialysis unit in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of Broadview and Grenfell. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand again today 
with citizens that are concerned about safety when driving on 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Colonsay, Rose 
Valley, Humboldt, Kelvington, Quill Lake, and Viscount I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens of Wilkie who are concerned 
about their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years of age in the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency 
regarding a much needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek 
and Willowgrove areas of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today come from northeast Saskatoon, Wright 
Terrace, Wright Crescent, Sears Cove, and Eastman Cove. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of southern Saskatchewan that 
are very concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at the 
Lafleche and District Health Centre would cause undue 
hardship to residents, especially senior citizens. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche and 
Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition from people of Saskatchewan who are deeply 
concerned about the presence of sexual predators that threaten 
their communities. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, signed entirely by the good people of 
Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway No. 5, a highway which runs through my constituency 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

of Saskatoon Southeast. The prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Saskatoon and Aberdeen. I so present on their behalf. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of the House Services 
Committee is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and presents its 10th report. I 
move, seconded by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort, the Deputy Chair of the Standing Committee on House 
Services, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North, that 
the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
be now concurred in. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Chair of the Private Bills Committee is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I present the eighth report of the 
Standing Committee on Private Bills, which I hereby table. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Cypress Hills: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills be now concurred in, and further, that Bills 
301 and 302 be referred to Committee of the Whole. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Private 
Bills Committee, the member for Saskatoon Eastview, seconded 
by the member for Cypress Hills, that the eighth report of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills be now concurred in, and 
further, that Bills 301 and 302 be referred to the Committee of 
the Whole. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority: is the authority diverting water from lakes in 
the Watrous and Humboldt area into Last Mountain Lake? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many acute care beds are 
staffed as of March 2007? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 56 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the current occupancy 
rate of publicly funded long-term care beds in the 
province? 

 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 56 
ask the government the following question: 

 
To the Minister of Health: how many acute care beds are 
staffed as of March 2006? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 
a group of students in the east gallery. There is 27 grade 3 and 4 
students from the Westview School in Estevan, and they’re here 
to visit the legislature today and view the proceedings. Mr. 
Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Barnstable and Mrs. Henderson, and also they have a 
chaperone, Mr. Brown. 
 
I hope to be meeting with the students after question period or 
the member from Estevan will be meeting with them. And I 
would ask all members to help me join them in their day here at 
the Legislative Assembly. 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly a couple of gentlemen seated in your gallery. Mr. 
Darryl Hickie is a police officer from the city of P.A. [Prince 
Albert] who happens to be the Sask Party candidate in Prince 
Albert Carlton, along with his campaign manager, Mr. David 
Bach. And I’d ask the members to welcome these gentlemen to 
their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of this Assembly someone who is seated in your gallery. We 
have a former Saskatchewan resident, Brent Rathgeber. He 
grew up in the Melville area, now calls Edmonton his home. 
 
Brent is the executive director of the Progressive Contractors 
Association of Canada. He is here visiting and having some 
short meetings and I had the privilege of meeting very briefly 
with him this morning. We covered a number of issues and it’s 
certainly my pleasure to introduce him and welcome him to his 
home province and to this legislature. I’d ask all members to 
join with me. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Administrative 
Professionals Day and I’d like to take this opportunity on behalf 
of the official opposition to thank those who work in the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus office and our party organization as 
well as those who work very hard in our constituency offices. 
 
If it weren’t for the hard work of Sylvie Toffan and Marianne 
Hoffart, Mr. Speaker, our caucus receptionists, our office would 
quite frankly cease to function. The same can also be said of 
Erin Brehm who performs those same important duties at the 
Saskatchewan Party headquarters. 
 
Sylvie and Marianne and Erin continually go above and beyond 
the call of duty to ensure that our entire organization runs 
smoothly and efficiently and, Mr. Speaker, they are always 
professional. They’re courteous and provide a wealth of 
assistance to people who call our offices as well as to the 28 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and 11 staff 
members within our organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as MLAs we also rely heavily on constituency 

assistants, both full- and part-time, to ensure that our 
constituency offices are able to provide as much information 
and help to the many constituents who call, write, email, and 
stop by our offices. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize Crystal 
Martens in my office in Swift Current. In many cases they take 
on a lot of the roles of an MLA while we’re either on the road 
or here in Regina sitting in the Legislative Assembly. They also 
help us schedule our busy lives and ensure we are at the right 
place at the right time. It’s very important that we take some 
time today to recognize them for their work and to say, thank 
you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 
Administrative Professionals Day. Celebrated every year on the 
Wednesday of Administrative Professionals Week, today is a 
day to identify the invaluable work of clerical employees 
everywhere. 
 
In 1952 the first National Professional Secretaries Week and 
National Secretaries Day were established to recognize the great 
contribution that administrative professionals make to any 
office. In 1998 the name was changed to its present form in 
order to more accurately represent the full range of clerical 
possibilities and positions. Today we honour administrative 
assistants — our own in all of our offices and in the building — 
the receptionists, paralegals, constituency assistants, and many 
others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the United States Department of 
Labor statistics, today there are more than 4.1 million 
secretaries and administrative assistants working in North 
America and more than 8.9 million people working in various 
support roles, which represents the close to 475,000 
administrative professionals who are employed right here in 
Canada. 
 
As I’m sure my colleagues know, Mr. Speaker, it’s customary 
to give small gifts today as tokens of appreciation. And I hear 
that chocolates or flowers are often appreciated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d 
like to thank the many administrative professionals of our great 
province on this Administrative Professionals Day. Without 
their efforts, the running of any office would simply not be 
possible. Without their efforts, our work here would not be 
possible for this great province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

First Nations Veterans’ Memorial Teepee 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, at 2 o’clock this afternoon there 
will be an official sod-turning ceremony to celebrate the 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

construction of the veterans’ memorial teepee at the First 
Nations University of Canada. It’s imperative that we all 
remember the sacrifices made for this country by thousands of 
First Nations men and women from across Canada, including 
approximately 800 from Saskatchewan, during both world wars, 
the Korean War, and other conflicts. 
 
While First Nations men and women served side by side with 
other Canadians and were equals on the battlefield, they 
returned to a nation and to a province that was inhospitable and 
ignored their contribution outright. After World War I, 
veterans’ settlements were not equitable, and nearly 70,000 
acres of reserve land in Saskatchewan was given to non-First 
Nations veterans. First Nations veterans received none. 
 
After the Second World War, First Nations again did not 
receive equal treatment as the men and women that they served 
with in the battlefield. It was only after considerable lobbying 
by the Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans’ Association and 
other groups that long-overdue restitution was finally obtained 
from the federal government in 2002 — far too late for some 
veterans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is a proud day for all of Saskatchewan. 
Recognition will finally be given to our First Nations veterans. I 
look forward to the completion of the veterans’ memorial 
teepee that will not only serve us to remember but also to 
ensure future generations are educated about the sacrifices of 
our First Nations veterans and the battles they continued to fight 
long after the guns and the tanks were silenced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
few days ago I had the pleasure of attending the United Way of 
Regina’s annual tribute luncheon and AGM [annual general 
meeting] to see several Regina businesses and citizens 
recognized for their involvements and efforts on behalf of 
community. 
 
Warden MacDougall and Chantelle Matic, along with Mo 
Bundon, received the United Way of Regina President’s 
Awards recognizing individuals or groups that have made 
outstanding contributions to the community and to the United 
Way. 
 
The Distinguished Corporate Philanthropy Awards recognize 
the outstanding corporate community support and the spirit of 
leadership in building a stronger community as a whole. This 
year, IPSCO and IBM [International Business Machines] 
Canada took the honours. 
 
Glenn Trafford and Mavis Olesen each received Investors 
Group Volunteer Awards for their ongoing and outstanding 
efforts as community builders. I’m especially familiar with the 
good efforts of Mr. Trafford in the Core Community 

Association. 
 
And the Labour Community Service Award, recognizing a trade 
unionist who has demonstrated the principles of the labour 
movement while working to strengthen the community as a 
whole, went to Janice Bernier, a long-time resident in the fair 
riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And we are very proud of 
her, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues in the Assembly to join me 
in congratulating the recipients of this year’s United Way of 
Regina’s annual awards and in extending further 
congratulations to newly chosen United Way CEO [chief 
executive officer], Joanne Grant. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Dinner 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to announce that last night the Saskatchewan Party 
hosted its largest leader’s dinner in the history of the party. Last 
night our leader addressed more than 1,200 people at the 
Queensbury Centre here in Regina. Last night’s event was 
enjoyed by people from all walks of life, and our leader 
delivered another outstanding speech. 
 
I would also like to note that since the Saskatoon leader’s 
dinner held earlier this year, where he spoke to more than 900 
people, our leader has been speaking at a number of 
engagements in constituencies all across this province. Those 
constituencies include my own constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy but also Saskatoon Eastview, Prince Albert Northcote, 
Prince Albert Carlton, Saskatchewan Rivers, The Battlefords, 
Saskatoon Riversdale, Carrot River Valley, Wood River, 
Melville-Saltcoats, Thunder Creek, and Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader has addressed more than 5,000 people 
in that time, bringing them the message of positive change put 
forward by the Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, our events 
continue to grow in size and scope as we continue to attract new 
faces at each and every event. I’d to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues on this side of the House to 
congratulate our leader, the member for Swift Current, on the 
many successful dinners, and thank he and his wife Tami for 
dedicating themselves to the betterment of our province. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Code of Ethics 
 
Mr. Trew: — Today’s question is, why. Mr. Speaker, last year 
the Sask Party adopted a code of ethics. Why? When we point 
blatant breaches of their own code of ethics, the Sask Party 
continues to look the other way. Now the member for Last 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

Mountain-Touchwood, in his constituency report for March 
2007, makes the following accusation on page 4, and I quote: 
 

If they aren’t turning highways back to gravel, they are 
blackmailing local governments into helping pay for the 
rebuilding of the highway. 
 

The phrase, “they are blackmailing local governments,” is a 
new low-water mark even for the Sask Party. We are being 
accused of committing a crime by a Sask Party MLA using 
taxpayer dollars. This is not civilized discourse and 
disagreement. This is underhanded, unethical name-calling. 
 
The Sask Party has a code of ethics. Why? Will the Leader of 
the Opposition ever admit that his caucus acts in an unethical 
manner or will he continue to act just like he did in the Devine 
era and turn a blind eye to the cesspool of ethical misconduct 
surrounding him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Enforcement of Anti-Harassment Legislation 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government introduced 
legislation to expand the definition of harassment in The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act to include bullying and 
abuse of power. Mr. Speaker, critics say that this is nothing 
more than a knee-jerk reaction from the NDP to get out of a 
sticky political situation and, Mr. Speaker, I’m worried that this 
actually might be the case. 
 
While the Saskatchewan Party is generally supportive of the 
Bill that was introduced earlier this week as it will strengthen 
workplace protection for employees, I would like to put on the 
record that if this expanded definition of harassment had been 
in place in 1994 when the first complaints of harassment by 
Murdoch Carriere were lodged, it would not have made a 
difference. 
 
The problem in the Murdoch Carriere scandal was not that the 
policy wasn’t strong enough, it was that the policy was simply 
ignored. Mr. Speaker, these nine women followed the policy. 
However their complaints were simply swept under the rug to 
protect a close friend of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policy that was introduced on Monday won’t 
be worth the paper it’s printed on if the NDP government 
continues to lack the will to enforce it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Former Government Caucus Worker 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

1992 the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus office hired a 
new director of administration, a woman named Ann Lord. In 
late August 1992 Ann Lord disappeared quite suddenly. It turns 
out that she was on the run from police, and Ann Lord wasn’t 
even her real name. Her real name was Ann Davey, and she was 
wanted for 85 counts of fraud and embezzlement in the United 
States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: did Ann Davey ever commit fraud 
or any type of misappropriation of taxpayers’ money while she 
worked in the NDP caucus office? 
 
The Speaker: — While the member may wish to respond to the 
question, I take note that matters within a caucus are generally 
not regarded as responsibilities of cabinet ministers, and 
questions should be asked of a cabinet minister. Nevertheless I 
will allow one response to this. 
 
Next question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on November 21, 1992, a story 
about Ann Davey appeared in the Leader-Post. In that story, 
police said there were no complaints against Davey in 
Saskatchewan. And according to officials in the NDP caucus 
office, there was no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Once again if the 
member can relate this question to a ministerial duty, I would 
invite him to do so. Otherwise he would have to use an alternate 
venue which is provided, which there is room for in this 
legislature. Next question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister responsible for 
the position of Culture, Youth and Recreation, was any 
misappropriation of funds by Ann Davey, was he aware of any 
misappropriation of those funds, and if he was, did he 
immediately report them to the police? 
 
The Speaker: — Once again the response . . . Order. Order 
please. I have made a ruling on this. The member has not been 
able to . . . is not directing it to a ministerial responsibility. So I 
would ask members to carry on with question period, but let’s 
go to the next topic. The Chair recognizes the Opposition House 
Leader.  
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear in a moment that those 
kinds of questions have been certainly allowed and then 
answered by this government related to a similar . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members not to 
comment on a Speaker’s ruling. Next question. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
 
Mr. Wall: — My question is to the Premier of the province. 
For the last several months the NDP government has shown a 
startling lack of enthusiasm or interest in a trade agreement 
between the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that had Saskatchewan shown some 
enthusiasm, some vision, some interest, they could have been at 
the table some number of months ago — years ago actually — 
when the negotiations first began. 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know the government has finally 
released the study by the Conference Board of Canada on the 
impact of that trade agreement on our province economically 
should we engage, should we sign on. Today the Conference of 
Board of Canada report shows that Saskatchewan would gain 
4,400 new jobs and increase our gross domestic product by over 
$290 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why has the NDP government 
waited so long to get engaged in the new West, to get interested 
in this agreement to the great benefit of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one would never accuse 
the Leader of the Opposition of using exaggeration, but to say 
that Saskatchewan has not been reflecting on questions of 
internal trade in a timely fashion I think is inaccurate. 
 
The fact of the matter is that BC [British Columbia] and Alberta 
have been between them discussing this agreement for a period 
of more than three years and then agreed to have further 
discussions on this. I think the people of Saskatchewan might 
be given, you know, a few months to reflect on this agreement 
and to have public input as to what this agreement might mean 
for the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier was attending 
meetings of the Council of the Federation, he would have 
known that these two provinces had been having these 
discussions for some time. More to the point, he and I had a 
discussion of this in this very Legislative Assembly now a year 
ago — a year ago, Mr. Speaker. The government has taken a 
year to begin — what? — another consultation process. And we 
are now, Mr. Speaker, behind. Even as we’re talking today, we 
understand that those two provinces are actually reaching out to 
Ontario. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Conference Board of Canada 
that is saying that our province could stand to benefit from this 
particular agreement, should we sign. Also University of 
Saskatchewan Professor Eric Howe has weighed in on the 
matter — professor of economics at the University of 
Saskatchewan — and here is what he had to say: 
 

Signing TILMA would increase our standard of living. 
There is a strong additional argument that the Conference 
Board analysis produced an underestimate of the 
Saskatchewan’s net benefits. 

 
So what Professor Howe is saying is actually the Conference 
Board, who are saying there are more jobs and investment to be 
had in TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 
Agreement], are underestimating the impact. Again because of 

the lack of leadership from this Premier, we’re a year behind 
where we should be, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier stand up 
and respond? Will he answer the question? Why has he waited 
and delayed so long on this particular opportunity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, an important 
ingredient of leadership is consistency, and I note that the 
Leader of the Opposition was saying this morning that he 
supports consultations. And now he comes into the Legislative 
Assembly and says why should we have consultation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member is selectively quoting 
from reports that were published by the provincial government. 
But he doesn’t quote from a report by, I think it’s Professor 
Helliwell of the University of British Columbia, where 
Professor Helliwell says that, as I understand it: 
 

That the methodology that’s employed by the Conference 
Board of Canada is not credible. It’s like trying to forecast 
a GDP by asking your neighbour how they’re doing these 
days [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Leader of the Opposition, to 
be fair to the people of Saskatchewan, should talk about all of 
the information that had been released today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in example after example whether 
it’s the Pacific Northwest Economic Region, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s the Energy Council, whether it’s an initiative on the 
part of those two provinces to improve the regional college 
system to deal with the labour shortage, under this NDP 
government who don’t like either the Liberals in BC [British 
Columbia] or the Conservatives in Alberta only for ideological 
reasons, this tired old NDP government refuses to engage. 
 
Professor Howe of the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, goes on to say that: 
 

If Saskatchewan does not sign TILMA, it will forego an 
economic opportunity. There’s an economic cost to not 
signing TILMA, he says. Saskatchewan businesses will be 
less competitive in their access to customers to the West. 
Consequently business activity will have a less incentive 
to locate here and more of an incentive to locate 
elsewhere. 
 

The minister was asked this question moments ago: why has he 
been dithering? Why has the Premier been delaying on this? 
Why have we now wasted a year and only now beginning those 
consultations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again those two jurisdictions, BC and Alberta, have 
been discussing this for over three years, Mr. Speaker. I think 
again the people of Saskatchewan should take the time to study 
what it is that they’re proposing. 
 
And I want to ask the member this. Some of the provisions of 
TILMA clearly would be to the advantage of Alberta and even 
BC. Why is the member so strongly advocating we sign on to 
this agreement without any further study, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between this side and 
that side of the House is that the Saskatchewan Party has 
confidence in the ability of our economy to out-compete 
Alberta and British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the low-cost jurisdiction. This is the same insecure and 
insular argument we heard from the NDP during the free trade 
debate. You remember that, Mr. Speaker? That member over 
there, now the Premier of the province, said that free trade 
would be the ruination of the West and of Canada. And of 
course it’s turned out to mean jobs and a trade surplus for 
Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: why does he lack 
the confidence in our province to out-compete Alberta and BC 
given a level playing field? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is no lack of 
confidence in the Saskatchewan economy on the government 
side. Let me tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we took the financial 
devastation left behind by that party, and we repaired the 
financial devastation. And then, Mr. Speaker, we have spent the 
last five years building the Saskatchewan economy so that 
today, Mr. Speaker, we can say with confidence we have an 
economy that is stronger than this province has known for 
decades, Mr. Speaker. It’s true in job numbers. It’s true in 
investment. It is true, Mr. Speaker, in opportunities for our 
young people here at home. 
 
Now the question, Mr. Speaker, in this TILMA debate as it 
unfolds, Mr. Speaker, will be, what is the position of the Leader 
of the Opposition? A year ago in this House, a year ago he’s 
issuing new releases. A year ago he’s saying that Saskatchewan, 
without even thinking about it, should sign on. But, Mr. 

Speaker, when he’s in correspondence with individuals or 
groups, what’s he saying? Well the Saskatchewan Party 
government would quote “study it,” Mr. Speaker. What is the 
position of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member of 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Former Government Caucus Worker 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions have to do with the use of taxpayers’ dollars and with 
the administration of justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of a 
letter dated August 23, 1992. It is a letter of confession. The 
letter says, and I quote, “I have used Caucus Office funds for 
personal use by inflating the cheques payable to me for petty 
cash and other cash reimbursements.” This is written in 
confidence from Ann Lord. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask 
members . . . Order please. The member will come to order. The 
member will come to order. I’ve asked the member twice, and 
so this is the third time to come to order and I would ask, I 
would . . . Order. The member wishes to raise this issue. They 
have every other opportunity except for question period. The 
purpose of question period is for the purpose . . . Order. The 
purpose of question period is for members to have opportunity 
to ask questions of ministers about ministerial responsibility. 
Next question. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Flooding Conditions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I called the office of 
the Minister of Highways regarding highway officers holding 
up trucks trying to get much needed sand into Fishing Lake to 
fill the sandbags to fight flooding. I was told it was a single 
incident. But later that day I found out that the day before one 
truck has been stopped at least three separate times to check the 
amount of sand he was hauling. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, surely this NDP government’s priority must 
be saving people’s homes, especially when everyone knows that 
Highway No. 310 is the second worst highway in this province. 
I know of an individual from Alberta who managed to send two 
semi trucks of equipment to Fishing Lake to help homeowners 
in their fight to save homes. 
 
So my question to this NDP government: what are you 
physically doing to help the people of Fishing Lake right now? 
Are you sending people? Are you sending equipment? Are you 
sending barricades? Are you sending fibreglass barricades? Are 
you sending generators? Are you sending pumps? What are you 
doing today to help the people of Fishing Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. What 
this government is doing, has been working for months in 
preparation of this flooding season. What we’ve been doing is 
making sure that we’ve got the knowledge in the hands of the 
local authorities, making sure that the local authorities have 
plans to cope with the coming flooding season. 
 
What we’ve been doing is making sure that, as the local 
authorities need the help of the provincial government, that 
we’ve been there through the Corrections and Public Safety 
department, through Highways, through the Sask Watershed 
Authority, through the good work of people in Health, in 
Community Resources. I know the members opposite like to 
mock about these things, but we’ve had some very successful 
responses to flooding situations in Red Earth. 
 
What’s happening in Fishing Lake is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a disaster. But what we’re trying to do is to do what works 
and not what will worsen the situation. In terms of . . . I can go 
on about this, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll wait the next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I received an email from Donna 
and Larry Jacobs of Fishing Lake. They quote the minister 
about the advice he gave in this House last year. He told the 
people of Saskatchewan, last year in this House, they should 
build their homes above the high waterline and that would solve 
the problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the people of Fishing Lake would have 
followed his advice, they would still be under water today, 
since according to the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, the 
lake level has already exceeded the high-water mark and is 
expected to rise another foot to 18 inches. And then they’re 
going to have to deal with the ice that comes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government hasn’t come up with a 
solution, and the ministers have to see the situation themselves. 
You have to see it to believe it, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 
commit to coming out to Fishing Lake on Friday and meeting 
firsthand with the people whose lives and homes are devastated 
from the flooding of Fishing Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has been working very closely with the local 
authorities to make sure that there is a response to these 
situations on the ground. In the specific case of Fishing Lake, 
there is a local emergency operation command post that has 
been set up. There has been work that has been done on an 
hourly basis in terms of SaskEnergy, in terms of SaskPower, to 
make sure that the situation around power, around gas, to make 
sure that critical infrastructure is both kept safe, but to — 

particularly in the case of SaskPower — to turn off the power 
both locally and on a larger base in terms of containing the 
threat that could come from power lines going down with all 
that water around, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s very dangerous 
work, and I’m sure the members wouldn’t gainsay that. 
 
What’s going on in communities like Fishing Lake, Waldsea 
Lake, the work that was done on Red Earth, at Yellow Quill 
First Nation, there is some heroic work being done, Mr. 
Speaker, and this provincial government is there to support that 
effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The beaches at flooding lake today have been 
described today as a floating garbage dump. Three permanent 
residents were phoned at 4:30 a.m. this morning and told to 
evacuate their homes immediately because the dikes had failed 
and their homes were going to be flooded. 
 
The people of Fishing Lake have asked me to ask this 
government to commit to finding a long-term solution for their 
flooding this year. We need a commitment now. 
 
Will the NDP minister responsible commit to finding and 
implementing and funding a long-term solution so the people of 
Fishing Lake won’t again lose their homes and businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, one thing I want to make 
very clear to the people of Saskatchewan and to municipalities 
and individuals that have experienced disaster, through the past 
number of days, there’s been some question around the 
availability of provincial disaster assistance program funding. 
And I’m not sure if members opposite are trying to stoke 
uncertainty about whether or not this provincial government — 
this NDP government — will be standing by our responsibilities 
in terms of the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program]. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the past two years 
alone, we’ve introduced nearly $23 million in terms of funds to 
enable local authorities, local municipalities, individuals to 
work to mitigate the effect of disaster. And we’re working on 
that longer-term solution as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to this government, the people of 
Fishing Lake who live . . . Their homes are in Fishing Lake. 
That’s where they live permanently. They’re watching to see 
what this government is saying. They’ve been waiting for 10 
years to hear that this government will come up with a solution 
that’s going to solve the problem — not just a solution — but 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

today and funding it. That’s the question that needs to be 
answered today. For the people of Fishing Lake, will you fund a 
permanent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Would the . . . I’m sorry, 
apologies to the member. Would the member please repeat her 
statement through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will this 
government please commit to funding a solution to the flooding 
at Fishing Lake today? We need an answer today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question around a 
long-term solution at this particular lake is a difficulty for many 
people involved. 
 
Ten years ago there were two projects that were outlined that 
might resolve some of this. One of them was to divert water that 
was coming in from Hazel Lake into Fishing Lake and perhaps 
reduce the amount of water. 
 
Another project was to move water from Fishing Lake into 
Whitesand Lake, into Newburn Lake, and finally into the 
Whitesand River. But that particular project meant moving a lot 
of water downstream. They could not get control of the land 
that would then be flooded in another part of the province. And 
it also would affect the water quality of all of the downstream 
facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The lack of a plan from this NDP government 
is also hurting people in my area. Instead of addressing the 
problem in the beginning, this government did nothing to 
prepare for the flooding, and now we see the product of their 
inaction, Mr. Speaker. Highway 15 right now has water flowing 
across it a quarter to a half a mile wide. 
 
What emergency measures is this government going to do to 
address this? What happens when the residents in towns lose 
this highway for an extended period of time? What is the 
government going to do to address this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to 
recognize the work that’s been done by the Watershed 
Authority, by the Department of Highways and other 
departments who have been collaborating on plans with 
municipal governments across this province. But I think it’s 
also fair that the members opposite should recognize we’ve got 
extraordinary high water levels. In some cases, 1-in-100 years 

doesn’t even register the level that we’re facing this year. So it 
is a challenge. 
 
There are some conditions — Highway 15 is one of them — 
that we’re experiencing some high water levels. I can say that 
the Department of Highways is putting the appropriate staff in 
the appropriate areas to work with local residents to find 
solutions, Mr. Speaker. And I would want to thank all of them 
who have been working very long hours on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Flooding is not only 
affecting Highway 15; it is affecting the grids on both sides of 
Highway 15. The residents right now are looking at a detour of 
close to 300 miles around. Right now there is a bridge that is 
being washed out as I speak. What does the minister plan to do 
about this? Will there be funding for municipalities to rebuild 
lost infrastructure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 
that our relationship with municipalities and funding 
arrangements, as it relates to municipal roads, has been much 
enhanced this year, and I think the members opposite should 
know that. I think it’s fair to say that we will assess the damage 
on the provincial road system. We will work with 
municipalities to assess the damage that these high water levels 
have made in their communities. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, in closing. To listen to 
members on the other side, they would expect the government 
to control the amount of snow, the amount of rain, and the 
amount of moisture on these roads. But I think people of this 
province understand when you have extraordinary situations, 
you have to work together in cooperation to find the solutions. 
Sometimes residents are inconvenienced, but mother nature has 
a way of doing things that can’t even be controlled by this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The minister talks about not controlling the 
flooding. That’s another question I’m going to ask to the 
Saskatchewan water authority, Mr. Speaker. Has Sask water 
authority been diverting water to Last Mountain Lake? Because 
the water that is coming through my constituency isn’t coming 
through . . . from my constituency from melted snow, that 
melted a long time ago. The local flooding, Mr. Speaker, is that. 
 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

My question is, is Sask water diverting water from the 
Humboldt area — from lakes into Last Mountain Lake — and 
in the meantime washing out highways and roads on their way 
doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, to my understanding that 
kind of arrangement is not being made. Any project like that is 
the kind of project that takes all of the local communities 
working together to design something like that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the difficulties we’ve had in a 
number of parts of the province is to get all of the people in a 
region to agree on the appropriate movement of the water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our job as government is to work with the local 
governments, the local people, to make sure that we can provide 
the best response in all of the trying circumstances that we 
have. We have a great deal of sympathy for many people who 
are out of their homes, and we will work hard to make sure that 
they get back there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I’d 
like to . . . [inaudible]. . . a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort, the 
Opposition House Leader on a point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make some comments, if I could, on the 
admissibility of future questions in regard to the direction of 
questioning that was introduced today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1996 a member of the official opposition 
questioned the government on what steps were being taken to 
recover funds that were defrauded from the government caucus 
in the late ’80s and ’90s. These questions were asked in 1996 on 
March 14, April 3, May 10, May 13, May 15, and May 29, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re duly recorded in Hansard. These questions 
were not ruled out of order by the Speaker. In every instance, 
the questions were allowed by the Speaker. And in every 
instance a minister did respond. 
 
These questions that were being asked and are planned to be 
asked in the future are along the same lines. The only difference 
is they deal with the current government instead of a former 
government. Furthermore, these questions deal with the 
administration of justice and wrongdoings that would occur. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is directly related to mismanagement of 
funds of the taxpayers of this province and it is clearly 
important that they be allowed. I would ask Mr. Speaker to 
review these dates in the Hansard record to make sure that we 
clearly are allowed to ask these relevant questions in the future. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of 
order, the Chair will recognize that the judgment of the Chair is 
the appropriate criteria used. There will be some criteria that 
make it permissible to direct questions regarding the conduct of 
executive government by executive government. And that I’m 
sure, Mr. Speaker, upon review of the situation, that you will 
make a decision that is consistent with precedent and past 
practice. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their intervention 
and I will undertake to review this and bring back a ruling on a 
later time. 
 
Why is the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The member’s 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
we might say in . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hebrew.] 
 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Legislative Assembly, five individuals seated in the 
western gallery. They are Jeremy Parnes and Chris Dodd. 
Jeremy, of course, is the director of programming over at the 
Beth Jacob Synagogue. Jeremy, if you could, and Chris, if you 
could stand and give us a wave, please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — They are accompanied by Igor and Ana 
Grebenyuk and Viacheslav Popik. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — These individuals, the three last 
individuals that I introduced, Mr. Speaker, come to us from the 
state of Israel. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hebrew.] 
 
Coming here today. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Hebrew]. 
 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

And, Mr. Speaker, they are here to investigate possibilities for 
work and for immigration to our fair province. I know Jeremy 
and Chris are doing a tremendous amount of work out of the 
Beth Jacob Synagogue, along with our, they’ve been in fairly 
constant contact with our Minister of Immigration and working 
to bring people from the state of Israel, [the hon. member spoke 
for a time in Hebrew], to here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So please, members, all join me in saying [the hon. member 
spoke for a time in Hebrew] to our guests here today. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 
my remarks, I’ll move second reading of Bill. No. 66, The 
Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) 
Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government knows that healthy and safe 
workplaces are key to making Saskatchewan the best place to 
live, work, and build strong futures. That is why I am pleased 
that this legislation brings forward amendments to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s workplace anti-harassment legislation. 
 
Saskatchewan began our long and proud history as a leader in 
workplace health and safety when the NDP government of the 
day introduced North America’s first comprehensive 
occupational health and safety legislation 35 years ago. In 1993, 
the NDP government again led the continent by introducing 
anti-harassment protections into our occupational health and 
safety legislation. Today, with only four other jurisdictions in 
Canada providing some type of harassment protection for their 
workers, Saskatchewan remains at the forefront on this 
important issue. But it is clear that we can do even better. 
 
Our government believes that Saskatchewan workers have the 
right to work in a healthy and safe workplace, and that means a 
workplace free of any kind of harassment. Since I was 
appointed as Minister of Labour, I have heard repeatedly about 
the importance of addressing this critical issue. Concerns about 
harassment that is not related specifically to such things as age, 
gender, religion, or sexual orientation that are protected under 
the Human Rights Code is an emerging issue that is also 
gaining recognition in other jurisdictions across Canada and 
around the world. 
 
And we believe that this is an area where Saskatchewan can 
once again take a pioneering role in responding to an important 
occupational health and safety issue. And so with this 
legislation, Saskatchewan will become the second province in 
Canada, and one of the first jurisdictions in North America, to 
clearly send a message that bullying and intimidation in the 
workplace is not acceptable behaviour. 

We are broadening the definition of harassment and creating a 
special adjudicator’s position to independently resolve 
harassment appeals. This new definition includes expanded 
language to address personal harassment in the workplace. 
Personal harassment is degrading or humiliating to a worker. It 
has enormous effects not only on the health and safety of 
workers, including their psychological well-being, but also on 
the productivity of the workplace. We know that some workers 
experience repeated bullying, intimidation, and abuses of power 
that we can help stop by bringing in the changes that are 
contained in this Bill. 
 
Let me be clear that though we are expanding it, the definition 
of harassment in this legislation is specific. Actions must fit that 
definition. The legislation is clear that management is not 
prohibited from supervising and managing their staff. Rather we 
are addressing actions that are hostile or unwanted and cause 
humiliation or intimidation that affects a worker’s well-being. 
The new special adjudicator will help people who have filed a 
complaint with the occupational health and safety division and 
who wish to appeal the outcome of their investigation. This will 
allow us to dedicate full-time, independent resources to hearing 
harassment appeals. 
 
These changes will build healthier and safer workplaces for 
Saskatchewan workers and demonstrate our government’s 
vision for making Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, 
and build strong futures. Our goal since introducing North 
America’s first occupational health and safety legislation 35 
years ago has always been to reduce workplace illness and 
injuries and the negative impact they have on our economy and 
on the lives of working men and women. 
 
That is why I am pleased that with this legislation 
Saskatchewan will be providing protection against personal 
harassment for our workers. And we’re doing it, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is the right thing to do. And with that, I move second 
reading of Bill No. 66, The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 66, The Occupational Health and Safety 
(Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said 
that this legislation that’s being introduced is being put forward 
because it’s the right thing to do. And while I appreciate his 
comments, I think that the right thing to do would have been to 
have defended Murdoch Carriere’s victims in the first place. 
That would have been the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have stated quite clearly for weeks in this 
Assembly and outside of this Assembly that the official 
opposition welcomes any legislation that will make workplaces 
safe for the workers. But we worry that the reason for this Bill 
that we’re discussing today is not so much about protecting 
workers but about protecting the NDP from the continued 
backlash that they’re facing because of the Murdoch Carriere 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

scandal. They failed to take action where Murdoch Carriere was 
harassing women in the workplace and they want to be seen as 
having taken action today. 
 
While Carriere’s victims did face intimidation, the real source 
of their complaints was sexual harassment in the workplace — 
something that is already banned. There is already legislation in 
place to protect workers against sexual harassment. According 
to rules, regulations, policies, legislation already in place, 
sexual harassment is not to be tolerated in the workplace. The 
situation for Murdoch Carriere’s nine victims was not a lack of 
legislation. It was a complete abdication of responsibility to 
enforce that legislation. 
 
The NDP’s Bill today is more smoke and mirrors to divert 
attention from their appalling record on enforcement of sexual 
harassment legislation. Rules already in place today state quite 
clearly that any supervisor that ignores sexual harassment in the 
workplace will face consequences. Rules state that it is 
misconduct for supervisors to ignore sexual harassment. 
However we have yet to see any disciplinary action against one 
person with regard to this matter. We have yet to see this NDP 
government take any responsibility. 
 
The Minister for the Public Service Commission during her 
press conference on Monday repeated the need for 
accountability, and we welcome accountability. But I would say 
again that this NDP government has yet to hold anyone 
accountable for what happened to these women by Murdoch 
Carriere. The NDP have repeatedly bragged about the changes 
in harassment policy that they implemented in 1993. All the 
legislation, rules, and policies in the world are worth nothing if 
they are not enforced. 
 
The Minister for the Public Service Commission was in 
committee a few days ago, and I asked her a very simple 
question which required a yes or no answer. I asked her if this 
proposed legislation that we are discussing today, if it were in 
place in 1994 or 1997 when Murdoch began harassing his 
victims, if this legislation would have made any difference to 
those nine women. The minister was unable to give us any 
assurance that it would have made any difference. And because 
it was a yes or no question, I asked her repeatedly for an answer 
on this. And her only response to this was, don’t put words in 
my mouth, which would indicate to us that this legislation 
would have not made a difference as the minister could not 
verify that it would have. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Murdoch Carriere’s victims were sexually harassed. And I will 
say again, Mr. Speaker, that legislation to stop those actions in 
1994 and 1997 was in place and it was not enforced. 
 
The minister says that there will be an education component 
around this legislation — and we welcome that — that the 
intent is to increase awareness of what victims of harassment 
can do and where they can go. 
 
Murdoch Carriere’s victims told people. They talked to 
supervisors about what was going on, and they even wrote to 
the Premier of this province to alert him to the situation. Mr. 
Speaker, if no one is willing to listen and then to act, then all 

the training in the world will not help. 
 
And we know the story of Carriere’s nine victims, that at the 
end of the day they were ignored and that the system failed 
them. And what we continue to lack from this government is 
the assurance that supervisors and others in places of power and 
authority who ignore harassment in the workplace will actually 
face repercussions for their lack of action. And we continue to 
be concerned that the NDP refused to answer any direct, 
legitimate questions surrounding the failure to protect Murdoch 
Carriere’s victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what remains outstanding in this debate is the 
continued lack of answers to those very questions. And just a 
few of those questions that remain unanswered are, why were 
complaints of harassment ignored? For years, for almost a 
decade these women went ignored. Why was no one held 
accountable for ignoring these women? And why was Murdoch 
Carriere not fired long before when allegations were raised as 
early as 1994? Without knowing what went wrong in the past, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost impossible to fix what went wrong and 
go forward. 
 
In the spirit of openness and co-operation, I would urge this 
NDP government to support the motion that we put forward to 
send this scandal to a legislative committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members to confine 
their debates to behind the bar. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, in 
the spirit of openness and accountability we would urge the 
NDP government to support the motion that we put forward a 
while ago that would send this scandal to a legislative 
committee so that we could investigate what went wrong. And 
as I said, if we don’t know what went wrong, we can’t fix it. 
And the minister was quite clear when we asked her questions 
that the legislation today, that we are discussing today, would 
not have made a difference for these nine women. 
 
So while we welcome any changes that will keep workers safe, 
we continue to be concerned about the lack of will by this NDP 
government to enforce legislation that already exists. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d simply 
like to add to some of the good comments that my colleague, 
the member from Martensville, has already made with regards 
to this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister first introduced this Bill just on 
Monday and we certainly have to do our due diligence and look 
at what is contained in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague 
has said, there are certainly some very positive aspects to 
address the issues that this House has been dealing with during 
this spring sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 25, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

One of the aspects of the Bill though also addresses the issue of 
bullying and we certainly have seen it in recent times. Some of 
the very negative effects that have taken place have been the 
consequence of bullying, Mr. Speaker, and particularly, 
schoolyard bullying. 
 
We all remember the tragic events of student suicides and of 
those type of issues. And if the provisions of this Bill, if they go 
a long ways to addressing that issue, Mr. Speaker, we view that 
as a very positive amendment that’s contained in this Bill. As 
my colleague said, the issues of harassment and that whole area, 
if in fact this Bill does accomplish some positive steps in that 
area, we would be very supportive of that Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have moved very quickly on this Bill. We have 
sent it to both employer groups and employee groups asking for 
their comments and their assessment of what is contained in 
these amendments, Mr. Speaker. Time, of course, has been very 
short and we have not yet received those comments. 
 
However there has been some comments in the media as recent 
as in today’s Leader-Post, where there’s an article that deals 
with comments both from the employers’ associations and the 
employees’ association. Mr. Hubich is quoted as saying he has 
some concerns about the Bill, Mr. Speaker. Also the 
representative of the Federation of Independent Business says 
they are assessing the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And so therefore we 
certainly do not want to delay, in any manner, passage of this 
Bill but we certainly must live up to our responsibilities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the issues that we would require further explanation on 
is the special adjudicator and the whole process of that position 
being appointed by order in council. We would need assurances 
on the independence of a special adjudicator, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think back to the words of our former Clerk when she was 
given the opportunity to address us upon her retirement, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would quote one paragraph I think that all 
members of this Assembly need to ponder on and give some 
substantial thought to. And I’m quoting Ms. Ronyk here from 
Hansard of December 6 of this past year where she says: 
 

Some very significant reforms have recently been done, 
especially the new committee system that was designed to 
strengthen the role of private members and to increase 
citizen participation in the legislative process. But now 
you have to make those reforms work. You have to let 
them work. You have to use those committees. Use them 
to involve the public and to enhance the roles of members 
and to strengthen the accountability of the legislature. 

 
And I certainly can’t help but agree with those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And those are things that we as 
members of this Assembly must pay heed to. I believe it was 
excellent advice given by Ms. Ronyk. 
 
And so what I would propose, Mr. Speaker, is that rather than 
holding up this Bill and continuing to debate it in this House, 
that we would move this Bill to the appropriate committee. But 
we’d also recommend, Mr. Speaker, that the committee look 
very seriously at calling witnesses so that members of the 
public can have the opportunity to bring forward their 
recommendations as a result of their examination of this Bill 

and consulting with their members — whether it be employer 
members or whether it be employee members. I think it’s 
important that members of the public on this very important 
issue have an opportunity to put their recommendations on the 
public record. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that, I would 
recommend that this Bill be now moved to committee. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 66, The 
Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill No. 66, The 
Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) 
Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 66 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill No. 66 stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 
the good work of the Committee on Human Services this 
afternoon, as well as to undertake the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal service this afternoon which will be held in this 
Assembly, I move that we do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2007 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:42.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1386 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1386 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
 First Nations Veterans’ Memorial Teepee 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1387 
 United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1388 
 Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Dinner 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1388 
 Saskatchewan Party Code of Ethics 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1388 
 Enforcement of Anti-Harassment Legislation 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Former Government Caucus Worker 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1389, 1391 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1389 
 Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1390 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
 Flooding Conditions 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1393 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 66 — The Occupational Health and Safety (Harassment Prevention) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
  Forbes (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................1397 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




