


















































Hansard: April 02, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 40A  MONDAY, APRIL 2, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1115 
 April 2, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today to present a petition in regards to a dialysis unit 
and its need in the Broadview area. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good folks of Rocanville, 
Whitewood, Broadview, and Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills 
concerned about the closure of the SaskPower office as of this 
last Friday. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Shaunavon, Climax, and 
Eastend. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the good community of Maryfield 
and Fairlight. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people in my area who are very concerned 
about the crumbling highways we’re travelling on. The petition 
I’m speaking about today involves Highway No. 49. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Lintlaw, 
Kelvington, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Lintlaw. And I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition concerned about the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] 
unrelenting withdrawal of service from rural Saskatchewan, 
particularly withdrawal of service of the SaskPower office at 
Rosetown. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the fine 
community of Rosetown. And I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
while on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chaplin, Central Butte, and Riverhurst. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I want 
to present a number of pages of a petition of citizens concerned 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

with the safety of driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Meacham, St-Denis, 
Colonsay, Sunset Estates, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the horrible condition of 
Highway 18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Lake Alma. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present a petition from citizens opposed to possible reductions 
of health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Unity and district. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 
another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six years 
old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek and Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek-Willowgrove area. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The petitioners today come from Chotem Place, Wright 
Crescent, and Kenderdine Drive in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition from citizens that are very concerned that the 
withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche and District Health 
Centre would cause undue hardship to residents, especially 
seniors. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens all over rural 
Saskatchewan and even some from Grande Prairie, Alberta. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of our rural school closures. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from Limerick and 
Assiniboia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition — citizens that are concerned with the 
condition of Highway 368, starting 4 miles south of Lake 
Lenore to 4 miles south of St. Brieux, and that this highway 
endangers the safety of drivers and harms economic growth in 
the area. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was signed by the good people of Lake 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

Lenore, St. Brieux, Middle Lake, Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens concerned about rural school closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I have many signatures here from the town of Drake and 
Lockwood and Lanigan and surrounding area. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege in the House 
today to present a petition regarding keeping rural schools open. 
I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Drake, 
Saskatchewan. I am pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 45 move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
a return showing: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Government Relations: 
please provide a copy of the government’s internal 
examination on TILMA, including the economic impact 
study for Saskatchewan prepared by the Conference Board 
of Canada and any reviews focused on the effects of 
TILMA on Saskatchewan. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 45 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how much 
money was paid out as a result of firings related to 
department employees harassment in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
And I have the same questions, Mr. Speaker, right through the 
subsequent years to 2006-2007. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: of the 
harassment complaints filed in the 2000-2001 fiscal year, 
how many were there verified? 

 
I have the same in subsequent questions, Mr. Speaker, all the 
way through to the years 2006-2007. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
department employees were charged with harassment for 
the fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 

And subsequent questions all the way through to the year 
2006-2007. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 45 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
harassment-related complaints were filed in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
And through subsequent years through 2006-2007. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 45 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources: how many 
department employees harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary actions, or firings in the fiscal 
year 2000-2001? 
 

And the same question, Mr. Speaker, through subsequent years 
of 2006-2007. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment: 
what is the expected completion date of the academic 
health sciences centre at the University of Saskatchewan? 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment: 
what is the total amount that has been allocated to the 
academic health sciences centre to date at the University 
of Saskatchewan? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how will the 8.9 million 
allocated for additional surgeries in this year’s budget be 
allocated? 

 
I’ve got a number of questions that aren’t similar. I’m going to 
read the first couple and then just table the rest. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what was the total amount of 
money spent on staff travel with the minister in the fiscal 
year 2006-2007? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many staff were employed 
in the minister’s office during the fiscal year of 
2006-2007? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: who determines when a patient 
is officially put on the surgical wait list? 
 

And one more, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day no. 
45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how much money was paid out 
in severance and to whom during the fiscal year of 
2006-2007? 

 
I have a number of other questions covering various areas. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: does 
SaskEnergy outsource any of its operations to 
out-of-province companies? And if so, what services, what 
companies are providing services, and in which province 
and at what cost? And how long has SaskEnergy been 
doing this? 

 

And in addition, Mr. Speaker, that I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: does 
SaskPower outsource any of its operations to 
out-of-province companies? And if so, what services, what 
companies are providing services and in which province, 
at what cost, and how long has SaskPower been doing 
this? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: does SaskTel 
have any offices in Alberta? And if so, how many people 
are employed there, what functions does the office 
perform, and what is the cost to operate that office? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s some anticipation in the opposition benches about the 
introduction I’m about to provide, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure today to welcome to the Saskatchewan 
legislature the federal Leader of the New Democratic Party, Mr. 
Jack Layton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to welcome Jack Layton again to 
the province of Saskatchewan. He is a regular visitor to our 
province. It is a pleasure to welcome a parliamentary leader in 
Ottawa who speaks clearly to the aspirations of Saskatchewan 
families and, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to welcome a 
parliamentary leader who speaks of accountability to promises 
made to Saskatchewan families. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, 
it’s a pleasure to welcome a leader who comes to our province 
and it’s not a top-secret mission when he comes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask all members, all members to welcome the federal 
Leader of the New Democratic Party, Mr. Jack Layton. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to join with the 
Premier on behalf of the opposition in welcoming Mr. Layton to 
the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may, in the gallery 
opposite it’s a pleasure to introduce a couple of young people 
who are currently living in Calgary but both from 
Saskatchewan. Graham Cooper is the brother of one of our 
excellent researchers, Bill Cooper, has joined us. He is a 
plumber by trade, I believe, originally from the city of Regina 
and he’s joined by his wife, Lisa, who is from the very great 
city of Swift Current, Saskatchewan. She is a teacher. And 
while they’re only visiting from Calgary today it’s obviously 
our hope, Mr. Speaker, that soon and very soon they’d be able 
to call Saskatchewan home again. 
 
I wonder if members will join me in welcoming them to this 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 
introduce a fellow seated in the west gallery. 
 
This gentleman hails from Tisdale where he is a hockey player 
of some renown, a centre ice hockey player, as a matter of fact. 
He’s ex of the U of R [University of Regina] Cougars, but he 
sure knows, just in response to members opposite — 
good-natured — he sure does know where left wing is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the centre-cum-left-winger in the west gallery that 
I speak to is none other than Leigh Spencer, who is the 
nominated candidate for the New Democratic Party in Carrot 
River Valley. And if I may be permitted to welcome Mr. Layton 
— and forgive me, sir, as I say back off, Jack, we found him 
first. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Leigh Spencer to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my honour 
today to introduce to you a group of teachers who are here in 
the legislature to attend the ninth annual Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. The institute 
started on Saturday and will continue through to Wednesday. 
 
Already this group has met with the Chief Electoral Officer, 
members of the judiciary, and observed an educational outreach 
mock parliament with students from Strasbourg, here in the 
Legislative Chamber. They are scheduled to meet with the 
House leaders, caucus Chairs, caucus Whips, private members 
from both sides of the House, and cabinet ministers as well as 
government caucus and legislative staff. 
 
I would like to introduce these teachers, and they might just 
give a little wave as I mention their names. We have with us 
today Brita Baranieski from North Battleford Comprehensive 
High; Martin Berg, Unity Composite High School; Devin 
Bitschy, University of Regina; Jocelyne Cumming, Kinistino 
School; Betty Elliott, Henry Janzen School; Guy Farquharson, 
Delisle Composite School; Debra Highmoor, Grenfell 
Community School; Joanne Johnston, SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] campus in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Jonas Kiedrowski, Public Legal Education Association of 
Saskatchewan; Trever Kutnikoff, École Vickers School in 
Prince Albert; Marilyn Lowenberger, Wynyard Elementary 
School; Julie Mintenko, Punnichy Community High School; 
Mike Nassachuk, WorldBeat project in Regina; Joanne Patron, 
Jack MacKenzie School in Regina; Jeff Perry, Thom Collegiate 
here in Regina; and Collin Walker, Bishop Lloyd Middle 
School in Lloydminster. 
 
I would also like to introduce a special guest who is here to 

observe our institute. She is Diana Panizzone, who is the 
program administrator from visitor services at the Alberta 
legislature. And I would like to make special mention of our 
steering committee composed of four officials from the 
Department of Learning and three teachers who attended past 
institutes. 
 
From the Department of Learning we have Gerry Craswell, Gail 
Saunders, Anna Schmidt, and Brent Toles, and teachers Tim 
McFadden from Thom Collegiate, Randy Glettler, a recently 
retired teacher from Winston Knoll Collegiate, and Ryan 
Hughes, École Vickers School. This group will be observing the 
afternoon proceedings with great interest. I ask all members to 
welcome this group to the Saskatchewan legislature at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the Leader of the Opposition in 
welcoming Graham and Lisa Cooper to the Assembly today. 
I’ve had the chance to get to know Graham through my 
friendship with his brother Bill, and I look forward to talking to 
them after today’s question period. And hopefully I’ll see them 
out at the lake this summer. It’s a pretty valuable invite to get 
invited to the Cooper compound. So I’m looking forward to that 
this summer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’m very 
pleased to introduce one of the teachers that’s here today. Ryan 
Hughes is seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, Ryan and I went 
to school together in Weyburn. We graduated together at the 
Weyburn Comprehensive. We were really good friends in high 
school and actually I’m looking forward to seeing him. It’s been 
a long time. And in fact I think we have some planning to do 
because we have a 10-year reunion to plan for this summer so I 
look forward to talking with Ryan later. And I would ask all 
members to welcome Ryan to his Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — I do have one other introduction. I see 
in the west gallery a former colleague of mine when I was 
teaching school in Prince Albert, and that is Ron Johnson who 
is here with a guest as well. Welcome, Ron, to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

2007 Juno Awards in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, people from all across this 
province have worked long and hard to bring four music award 
shows to four different Saskatchewan cities this year. And each 
and every person involved deserves a huge round of applause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first of these events, the Juno Awards, 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

wrapped up in Saskatoon last night and they were a tremendous 
success. In addition to the gala and awards dinner, there was a 
Juno Cup hockey game hosted by Prince Albert, the showcase 
of First Nations and Métis artists and performers, and JunoFest 
that featured well over 100 artists playing at 15 venues over 
three nights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon really knows how to throw a party and 
the benefits of this one are going to be felt for a long time to 
come. Mr. Speaker, over and above the economic benefits and 
an opportunity to showcase Saskatchewan artists, performers, 
and musicians, the Juno Awards also provide an opportunity to 
showcase Saskatchewan as the volunteer capital of Canada. 
With more than 1,200 volunteers, it is believed Saskatoon has 
had the largest volunteer contingent of any host city — 2,500 
people registered for the 1,200 positions available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
commending the organizers of the Juno Awards and in 
recognizing the Juno Awards volunteers. Their vision, hard 
work, and dedication ensured that the 2007 Juno Awards would 
be an overwhelming success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
member opposite. Last weekend was Juno weekend in 
Saskatoon. The entire weekend was jam-packed with music 
events. 
 
The crown jewel of the weekend was the Sunday awards night 
at Credit Union Centre. There was red carpet complete with 
rock stars, country stars, writers, and producers. Nelly Furtado 
was not only a crowd favourite but was also the winner of five 
Junos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to use this opportunity to congratulate 
Mayor Don Atchison and the entire city of Saskatoon for the 
spectacular job they did of hosting this event. The city turned 
on its warmth and charm, restaurants and hotels were packed, 
some nightclubs were booked by celebrities. There was plenty 
of star sightings throughout the weekend. Saskatonians were 
hired to work doing security and providing special services for 
the performers and their guests. 
 
Events like this require an enormous amount of time, work, and 
energy to stage. Saskatoon well deserves its rightful place as a 
world-class city that can host world-class events. As a 
Saskatoon boy, I’m proud to call Saskatoon my home. 
 
I ask all members to join in congratulating Mayor Don 
Atchison, the Juno committee, and all volunteers who helped 
stage this wonderful extravaganza. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
 

Women of Strength and Distinction Banquet 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Friday 
evening I, along with a number of my legislative colleagues 
including the member for Saskatoon Eastview, the member for 
Wascana Plains, the minister for Northern Affairs, and the NDP 
candidate for Regina Rosemont, attended the Women of 
Strength and Distinction fundraising banquet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the event was hosted by the Women of the Dawn 
Counselling Centre in support of a proposed facility for 
homeless First Nations and Métis women called the Centre of 
Hope Homeless Shelter. The idea is to provide temporary 
housing, health care, and supportive services for homeless 
women, youth, and children in a setting that encourages 
personal responsibility and an opportunity for independence and 
self-sufficiency. Mr. Speaker, the evening featured First 
Nations dancers, a fashion show, and musical entertainment by 
Perry Bellegarde and Michael George. 
 
But what I really wanted to mention were the evening’s 
speakers — all women, and all of whom spoke passionately 
about the many issues that continue to face women today. Mr. 
Speaker, First Nation and Métis women are among the most 
vulnerable in our society, subject to exploitation, violence, and 
poverty. Some steps have been taken to address these issues but 
there is much more work to be done. That’s why grassroots 
work being done by organizations in support of projects such as 
the Centre of Hope Homeless Shelter is of the utmost 
importance. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Retirement Roast for Rosetown-Elrose Member 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday evening I had the pleasure of joining with 200 friends, 
family members, and supporters of the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose as we celebrated his career and wished him 
well on his upcoming retirement from elected life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening was emceed by News Talk radio’s 
John Gormley and featured roasts by the elite of Saskatchewan 
politics past and present, and even the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast was there. Mr. Speaker, at times it was a 
laugh-out-loud, funny evening, but the roasts also included a 
serious and emotional side, indicative of the man we honoured 
that night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we learned a lot about the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose — many facts that we didn’t know, such as 
the fact that he secretly has a twin sister. But, Mr. Speaker, it 
was really his three children who shared real insight into the 
man, and they even shared where the dirt really is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday evening was a good-humoured look at 
the member and it was also a fundraiser for the local health 
foundations as 50 per cent of the proceeds are being donated to 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

some worthwhile organizations. Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to congratulate the member from Rosetown-Elrose and 
his lovely wife, Gail, for their selfless dedication to our 
province and to our country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

North Saskatoon Business Association 
Business Builder Awards 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the Minister of 
Industry and Resources and I and a few other colleagues from 
here in the Assembly had the pleasure of attending the North 
Saskatoon Business Association’s Business Builder Awards. 
Mr. Speaker, for 10 years the NSBA [North Saskatoon Business 
Association] has been honouring their own, recognizing 
business achievement and contribution to the business 
community through the Business Builder Awards. And I want 
to take this opportunity to congratulate the NSBA on achieving 
that milestone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winner of this year’s Business Builder Award 
for job creation is the North Ridge Development Corporation, 
for new direction, Shaw Cablesystems G.P., and for 
management quality, Centennial Group. The winner for team 
building is 1-800-GOT-JUNK; for small business, Advantage 
Collision and Paint Inc. The Export Award went to Display 
Systems International. The Business Builder Award, 
recognizing an NSBA member for contributing to the success of 
other members, went to Great Western Minerals. And the 
Member of the Year, Mr. Speaker, is photographer Milton 
Taylor, owner of the Imagery Studio in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
the finalists and winners of the 2007 Business Builders Awards. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

National Aboriginal Curling Championships 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend I had the 
honour of speaking at the opening ceremonies for the National 
Aboriginal Curling Championships which took place in the 
town of Wynyard in my constituency. Twenty teams from 
across Saskatchewan, as well as Alberta and Manitoba, 
gathered at the curling rink in Wynyard for a weekend of 
friendly competition. This was an exciting opportunity for the 
community to host this event, as it’s previously been held in 
Saskatoon for the past several years. 
 
This annual event began in 1993 as the Western Canadian 
Aboriginal Curling Championships which was hosted by the 
Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. It’s been a great success since it 
started in 1993. Chairman Martin Aubichon, who is a resident 
of Wynyard, decided to invite the rinks to his hometown for the 
2007. Martin, along with the Co-Chair Curtis Brewster, has 

worked hard to make this year’s championship a success. 
 
First place in the men’s event went to the Gerard Bird rink from 
Saskatchewan. Team members included Wilfred Bird, Bill 
Desnomie, and David Bird. In the ladies’ event, first place went 
to the Karen McGillivray rink from Manitoba. Team members 
on that rink were Marie Jebb, Charlotte Campbell, and Shirley 
Carriere. 
 
I ask all members to join me congratulating the organizers and 
the community of Wynyard for holding a successful National 
Aboriginal Championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Budget Vote 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, today is the day. 
Today is the day we will see if the Saskatchewan Party will do 
what is good for Saskatchewan or what is good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. In a few short hours, Mr. Speaker, we will 
vote on the budget — a budget the makes life better for the 
families of the province, a budget that will attract and retain 
young people, a budget that will reduce the cost of drugs for 
seniors and has the largest investment in highways, hospitals, 
and schools that this province has ever seen. This is a budget 
that speaks to the values of Saskatchewan families, Mr. 
Speaker, a budget that will help us together move forward and 
keep our strong economy growing while allowing all people to 
share in the prosperity that is being generated right here in this 
province. 
 
And what will the Saskatchewan Party do, Mr. Speaker? Will 
they vote against the seniors’ drug plan? Will they vote against 
the tax credit for young people to get their careers started in 
Saskatchewan? Will they vote against fully funding CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization]? Will they vote 
against maintaining and improving highways in their 
constituencies? Will they vote against investments in daycare? 
Will they vote against reducing property taxes? Will they vote 
against continuing to reduce business taxes? Will they vote 
against the Saskatchewan people? We will see in a short few 
hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
a landmark agreement between the provinces of BC [British 
Columbia] and Alberta meant to reduce barriers to trade 
between those two jurisdictions came into effect. This new 
trade agreement will create a powerful economic force in the 
country. The Conference Board of Canada says it will create the 
second largest economic region in the nation. 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

It’s been almost a year now since we originally asked questions 
of the Premier as to his government’s intention to participate, to 
look into this agreement. What we find out from the weekend 
media reports though, Mr. Speaker, is that this government is 
only now going to initiate public consultations. Once again 
under this NDP government, at a time when we could least 
afford it in terms of the economic opportunity facing the 
province, this NDP government has Saskatchewan on the 
outside looking in. 
 
Will the Premier answer the following question: why is he only 
now beginning these public consultations? Why is he so far 
behind on this issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the Leader 
of the Opposition about a year ago, this government would take 
the agreement signed by the Government of British Columbia 
and Alberta and give it fair study, Mr. Speaker. We have been 
engaged in a very serious and thorough review of the TILMA 
[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 
agreement. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition should 
know that the governments of Alberta and British Columbia 
spent three years in preparation for that arrangement. 
 
But the question that needs to be asked today, Mr. Speaker — 
the question that needs to be asked today, as the Leader of the 
Opposition suggests public consultation — why is it that on 
May 1, 2006, about a year ago, the Leader of the Opposition 
called upon this government to immediately join the trade pact, 
to immediately join without public consultation, without study? 
He stood in the House and said, join it today. Why would he say 
that then and then say today we should be studying, we should 
be doing public consultation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the point is this. This 
government . . . We raised the issue in this legislature a year 
ago. Three years ago when those two provinces were discussing 
trade opportunities together — the opportunity for a trade 
agreement at the direction, at the request of the Council of the 
Federation — our NDP government had a choice: get in ahead 
of time, begin the process early, make sure Saskatchewan is a 
leader in the new West and not a follower; or move with typical 
NDP laser-like speed, do nothing for a year, and then announce 
they’re going to do some public consultations. 
 
To the Premier: why is he so far behind on this issue? Why is 
he only starting consultations now? And if we are stuck with 
this, frankly, this inadequate NDP plan on this issue, will he at 
least ensure that the consultations are done by an all-party 
standing committee of this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago the Leader of 
the Opposition is calling upon this government to sign on to 
TILMA. He does that without public consultation. He does that 
without study. We are about a year later in this process. 
Considerable work has been done in studying the TILMA 
agreement, not just by government but by community-based 
organizations, by labour groups, by business groups. 
 
Now I ask the Leader of the Sask Party today, in the intervening 
12 months, has he, has his caucus undertaken study of the 
TILMA agreement? And if they have, would they please share 
with the people of Saskatchewan, would they share their 
research, their study which, Mr. Speaker, I anticipate has been 
paid for by their very generous caucus research grants? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t stand up 
one day and say to the government sign on to an agreement and 
the next day say you need to consult and study. Which is it, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province know that if you’re going to get things done in 
Saskatchewan, you better not wait on the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The answer to the Premier’s question is 
absolutely. We began to do our work with the resources we 
have in opposition. We met with officials in Alberta and BC — 
both elected and the senior civil servants — who were part of 
negotiating that agreement. We asked questions about how 
would this impact our Crowns, which is very important to the 
province. How would it impact the autonomy of municipalities? 
We were doing our homework. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also inquired as to whether or not a group 
like The Conference Board of Canada had maybe looked at the 
economic impact of this deal for Saskatchewan and heard by 
the grapevine that in fact the government has such a report. This 
NDP government commissioned a report by The Conference 
Board, we believe, or some third party study. 
 
And so if he’s serious about public consultation, if he’s serious 
about ensuring that Saskatchewan can be a leader in the new 
West, that people have all the facts, will he now table, will he 
release that Conference Board report, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I mean, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard all 
this before from the Saskatchewan Party — this chat about a 
new West, this chat about having Saskatchewan enter some 
kind of an economic integration with Alberta. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we take a different approach. We take the 
approach of building a strong Saskatchewan — a strong 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

Saskatchewan that’s proud not only in the West, Mr. Speaker, 
but proud all over Canada; a Saskatchewan where the jobs are 
here; a Saskatchewan where people are coming here, where 
we’re not looking with envy to other provinces or envy to other 
parts of the West, where we’re building a future for our people 
and our young people right here. That’s the focus of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition has some study 
work that has been done, will he table it? Will he show it? 
Never mind telling us about his trips to Calgary. We all know 
about his trips to Calgary — more interested in supporting the 
Saskatchewan Party than the Saskatchewan public. We know 
about those trips, Mr. Speaker. Show us his research. Show us 
the documented research that he’s done as a leader, as a party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s right. 
They do have a different approach when it comes to 
Saskatchewan’s role in the country. That Premier has said that 
we’ll always be in and out of equalization. That’s what he said, 
that we ought not to aspire to permanent membership in the 
club of have provinces in this country. 
 
You bet they have a different approach. An elected NDP MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] has said it’s statistically 
impossible for this province to even grow at the national 
average. 
 
We don’t agree. The people of the province don’t agree, Mr. 
Speaker. They understand that we should be, we could be a 
leader in the new West if this tired, old NDP government would 
just get out of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board, the 
Conference Board of Canada has said for BC there’s been 
70,000 jobs; 4 billion more in GDP [gross domestic product]. 
We understand that the Premier is sitting on a similar report. 
Why won’t he release it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the Leader 
of the Opposition had too many late nights at the Junos or what. 
He seems to be a little grumpy today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now let’s understand this. A year ago, a year ago 
the Leader of the Opposition says to this government we should 
sign on to TILMA — without study, without understanding, 
without question. He is a 100 per cent full-time supporter of 
TILMA. We know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’m not sure where his deputy leader is. He writes letters 
to the newspapers saying that, well maybe the Saskatchewan 
Party’s not so supportive of TILMA. And maybe we have to 

study. But we know the Leader of the Opposition is one great 
big supporter of TILMA. He says a year ago, sign up, Mr. 
Speaker, without study, without consideration. Now he 
volunteers today in the House that his mechanism of 
consideration . . . You see, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t like 
the answer, they start shouting — do you notice that? — every 
time. They don’t like the answer; they start shouting. 
 
So what does he tell us his consultation has been? Well he flees 
the province. He talks to people in Alberta and British 
Columbia. Has he talked to any Saskatchewan people I wonder? 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Police Investigation into a Community-based Organization 

 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 
Community Resources, will he tell this Assembly today the 
name of the community-based organization that is now under 
the subject of an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll not be divulging 
that name today because, quite frankly, this is a very 
preliminary investigation into an allegation. What’s important 
on this side of the House is that when any allegation is made 
that we go through the proper process to clearly investigate 
these allegations, Mr. Speaker. And I would point out, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to make sure that the 
group that is involved, that we go to the RCMP. In fact we have 
contacted the RCMP. We’re consulting with them, and then 
we’ll determine our course of action after that date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we 
find all roads lead to this minister. Where was this organization 
located, and is it involved in children in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendation that we look at the CBO 
[community-based organization] sector on a more consistent 
basis to make sure that CBO sectors are working within the 
time frame and certainly the accountability framework that we 
have instituted with this new Finance minister, we certainly 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

have done that work. And as was reported in the media, there is 
about 111 CBOs that we’ve investigated, and the vast majority 
of them, I think only three are considered moderate risk, Mr. 
Speaker. I would point out that that’s a credit to the CBO 
sector, and I would point out that the CBO sector does an 
incredible amount of work for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I will say — and I’ll reiterate to that member in case he 
did not hear it — we will not divulge the name of the party that 
we’re currently investigating because quite frankly this is not a 
current contract. We do not have a contract with this CBO. That 
contract has expired but we are investigating allegations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not questioning the 
credibility of CBOs. We’re questioning the credibility of this 
minister. I asked a question. Is this in the fall? According to 
media quoting the assistant deputy minister, this matter came to 
light last fall when a concerned board member stepped forward. 
Mr. Speaker, this is an RCMP investigation involving the 
allocation of public funds. Why did the minister fail to bring 
this forward last fall? Why once again did this government hide 
the bad news and hope that it would just go away like all other 
things that this minister has done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what I would point out 
before I answer the question, to that member from Saskatoon 
Northwest, is first of all we didn’t propose to rip $50 million 
out of the Social Services budget as proposed by that party 
opposite. And now they are attacking CBOs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I would point out, I would point out the vast majorities of 
the CBOs do an incredible amount of work. And I would tell 
the people of Saskatchewan, the CBO sector included, be very 
careful of the witch hunt that’s happening across the way 
because they will not stop at nothing because they’re going to 
work in the interest of the Saskatchewan Party not the 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out further that we’re not going to presume 
guilt unless we’re absolutely sure. If this CBO is guilty of 
anything, Mr. Speaker — and as I pointed out, this CBO no 
longer exists; we don’t have a contract with this CBO — but if 
there’s guilt for some past practices, we will certainly proceed 
with the RCMP to investigate and to charge accordingly. And 
we’ll certainly share that information with the public, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, once again this minister fails 
to answer any question in this House regarding the safety of 
children in this province. Apparently the Department of 
Community Resources conducted an audit into all CBOs 
receiving more than $100,000. And here’s what the minister 
said on October 5, 2006, when the Saskatchewan Party called 
for such an audit: 
 

This motion is a cleverly disguised Saskatchewan Party 
witch hunt . . . there are good accounting systems already 
in place. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister now admit that his comments 
were wrong? Will he apologize? And will he table the results of 
that audit investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me answer the 
question very clearly to that member who has a difficult time 
hearing the answer. The answer is we have advised the RCMP. 
We’re getting advice from them to see if there’s anything here 
to charge a CBO that does no longer exist and does not have a 
contract with Community Resources, Mr. Speaker. If there are 
some past activities that are deemed illegal, we’ll certainly 
investigate them and co-operate fully with the RCMP to make 
sure that the guilty parties are handled according. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, before we presume guilt, we must allow 
the process to unfold and the investigation to occur and the 
RCMP to do their work. I trust the RCMP, Mr. Speaker, 
because they don’t have a political agenda, Mr. Speaker. They 
have a duty to investigate some crimes, and they’ll certainly do 
that. And that’s where my confidence certainly comes from, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, 111 CBOs — the reports basically say they’re in very 
good shape. They’ll continue doing good work for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Disaster Relief Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
spring is usually one of the most optimistic times in rural 
Saskatchewan, but this spring we find out . . . and we’ve talked 
to many of the farmers in the Southwest. Their concerns are still 
there about the drought, probably the third year of drought that 
they’re coming into. They hope it changes, but that hasn’t 
happened to date. We are talking also to many farmers in the 
Northeast and central Saskatchewan that are actually having 
flooding problems already, Mr. Speaker. And I guess what I’m 
asking the Minister of Agriculture today, have you put anything 
in place to deal with both of these problems? And what kind of 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

a disaster relief program are you working on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Of course we have been working steadily on a drought program, 
a disaster program for the province. And with regard to drought, 
members opposite should be aware that there is another $1 
million put in by our provincial government to help with water 
problems in the Southwest. And certainly as far as a disaster 
program is concerned, I’ve told members opposite earlier that 
this provincial government, along with all the provincial 
governments and provincial ministers, want to see a disaster 
program in place across the country. 
 
One of the issues that we have yet to resolve is the amount of 
money that the federal government will put in relative to the 
provincial governments. Most provincial governments are 
saying it should be 100/0, Mr. Speaker. We have said that we 
would accept some of the responsibility for a disaster, and 
we’ve offered 90/10. The federal minister always wants to take 
our money and his ideas and use them in his way but, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to work with the people of this province 
to make sure we have a workable plan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m glad the minister brought up funding and how 
these programs might work. But I think the concern that many 
farmers and ranchers are having out there in rural Saskatchewan 
is when they saw this budget that this NDP government brought 
in, they were amazed when there was a $67 million cut to 
agriculture. I guess to their amazement they wonder how would 
this government be genuine, saying that they want to help these 
farmers out there should the drought persist, should the flooding 
materialize like we think it’s going to, and then turn around and 
cut $67 million. Last year they spent $368 million, the province 
did, on agriculture, and this year they’re estimating they’re 
going to spend 301. Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t look to me that 
they want to help farmers and ranchers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister today commit to those people, 
those farmers, those ranchers that he’ll help when the problem 
arises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t matter how the member opposite tries to 
spin his story. The fact is that the budget over budget is an 
increase of $36 million, Mr. Speaker — an increase. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — And I could tell you very clearly that, 
Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking, when we’re looking at the 
farm situation today, yes there are some disasters. But you 
know what, Mr. Speaker? For 2006 the realized net farm 
income numbers are way up. For 2007-08 they’re projected to 
be above 2006, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will build programs that will provide support, Mr. 
Speaker. And we will do so in a way that will be okay with the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are consulting with 
them regularly to make sure that we have effective program in 
place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister maybe doesn’t read the budget document. 
But last year this government, the NDP government estimated 
they would spend 264 million on agriculture. They ended up 
having to spend 368. So I think they purposely lowballed that 
number, Mr. Speaker, or else they just don’t care about rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s one or the other. 
 
Now we might understand this year of course why they would 
lowball that number, why they would cut 67 million out 
because they’re already running a $701 million deficit and 
didn’t want this money to show up on top of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not helping the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. That’s not helping our ranchers. Should the 
drought continue in the Southwest, those farmers need help, 
both federally and provincially, Mr. Speaker. The same goes for 
the Northeast and central Saskatchewan. If there’s a number of 
acres that can’t be seeded, many of those farmers are going to 
go under without federal and provincial help. Will the minister 
commit to that today, get off his high horse, and actually help 
farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if I got off my horse and helped people like the 
member opposite, they’d be in real trouble because what does 
the member opposite say? What does he say, Mr. Speaker? That 
it should be 100 per cent federally funded — 100 per cent. 
What does he say, Mr. Speaker? That emergency farm aid 
should be fully federal government funded. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve offered 10 per cent because we care. 
 
I’ll tell you what else, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what else. 
Gerry Ritz, the Member of Parliament from northern 
Saskatchewan, had said to APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan] last year, what did he say? He 
said that emergency, agriculture emergency should be a 100 per 
cent, federally funded, stand-alone program. That was what a 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

federal Conservative promised last year. What are they saying 
now? Oh it’s got to be 60/40. They’ll take it out of everybody’s 
pocket to try and do it. That’s it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that the members opposite are listening, I’m going to 
indicate right now that my question is directed to the Premier of 
this province. Last week the official opposition outlined a 
mechanism for the NDP government to release the Justice 
department’s secret legal opinions on the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal. The minister refused. 
 
Will the Premier today stop hiding behind the secret legal 
opinions and agree to table them in the appropriate committee 
in this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as the members will recall — it was about four 
years ago, about now actually — when Arlene Julé, who’s now 
decided to seek nomination or run again, called for the firing of 
Murdoch Carriere who was a 32-year employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And she called for that firing, as 
did the leader of the opposition of the day, the man who had the 
roast in Rosetown on the weekend, he also called for the firing 
of Murdoch Carriere. 
 
And as you know, the member from Regina Rosemont 
recommended to the Premier that Mr. Carriere be fired. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I know that their Justice critic, who is a lawyer, 
will understand this. Mr. Carriere was already demoted, 
punished, sent to Regina, and then, Mr. Speaker, he was, for the 
same series of events, fired. And that’s why we paid Mr. 
Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, Mr. 
Speaker, we did not get an answer to that question. There are 
many people directly related to the Murdoch Carriere scandal 
who know a lot. They want to tell their story, but they want to 
tell it to an appropriate body, not the same NDP government 
who ignored them in the first place. 
 
Will the Premier today commit to using the powers of the 
Public Accounts Committee to call witnesses, table the NDP’s 
secret legal opinions, and investigate the whole Murdoch 
Carriere scandal? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a freedom of 
information and privacy commissioner in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And one of the things that people do have some 
protection of in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly if 
you work in the public service or if you work for a school 
division or a municipal government or a health region, your 
personnel file is personal. It is protected information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I can’t imagine that a legislative committee would start 
discussing the personnel file of a former person who worked in 
the public service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere was fired. We settled with him and, 
Mr. Speaker, that is what we wanted to do. We wanted to fire 
him. We did. We didn’t fire him appropriately and therefore we 
had to settle with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about 
personnel files. We’re talking about a legal opinion. 
 
The minister mentions the fact that a long time ago this was 
raised. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from an article of April 2 
— April 2, 2003 — happens to be exactly four years ago. It 
says this: 
 

Rather than place a premium on fostering a safe workplace 
where female employees are valued, the government is 
signalling that a boys’ club atmosphere prevails in the 
department. Rather than enforce the rules, it conveys the 
impression that Carriere’s touted political connections are 
covering up for him, to the detriment of [the] women who 
dare to complain. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from The StarPhoenix editorial on 
April 2, 2003. These women have waited long enough. They 
want to be able to tell their story to ensure that this does not 
happen again. Will the minister table the documents that are 
needed by the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, people who go to work 
every day in the province of Saskatchewan are protected by the 
occupational health and safety legislation which has a provision 
which this government introduced in 1993 that protects 
employees from harassment, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that there was a 
problem at the fire centre in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. When 
we became aware of it, we took action: Mr. Carriere was fired. I 
also wanted to say to the public that he was removed from the 
workplace in September ’02. He was put on leave of absence. 
He was then put on further leave of absence, suspended without 
pay for three months. He never returned to that workplace, Mr. 
Speaker. He was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a harassment policy in place. And I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, that this would not be able to really . . . this kind of 
event, it would be very difficult for this to happen in the future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 —The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
57, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 
2007 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Minister of 
. . . Order please. Order. Order. It has been moved by the 
Minister . . . Order please, members. Order. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Government Relations 
that Bill No. 57, The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the . . . I would ask the members 
to come to order, members on both sides of the Assembly to 
come to order. 
 
When shall this Bill be read a second time? The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Probably at a quieter moment at 
the next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 58, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Gaming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill No. 59, 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Gaming that Bill No. 59, The Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 886 through 
921 inclusive. 
 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

The Speaker: — Responses for questions 886 to 921 have been 
submitted. 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
my thanks to the members for indulging me to be able to 
introduce a couple of guests. 
 
Seated in the western gallery we have Jason and Jennifer Miller. 
Jason is just finishing up this month a Commerce degree at the 
University of Saskatchewan and is going to be doing some 
political science in the fall. Jennifer has an aesthetics diploma 
and has graduated in 2004. They’re both born and raised in 
Eatonia but currently live and work in Saskatoon. Jennifer, I 
should point out, was in Alberta but moved back to 
Saskatchewan last year. So she’s part of that great story about 
Saskatchewan people coming back to Alberta. 
 
So they’re here with their relative, Darcy Furber. Darcy, who I 
have the privilege of working with in the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety office, he does a heck of a job. 
And if his cousins are anything like that, I’m sure they’re 
bright, hard-working people and they certainly look it, Mr. 
Speaker. Please welcome the Millers to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — Special order debate. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased to stand today 
as the voice of the people from the great constituency of 
Kelvington-Wadena to discuss this budget. 
 
Before I start, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge my 
constituency assistant, Linda Griffith, who’s been with me since 
I was elected in 1995. I can’t possibly thank her enough for all 
the help she’s given me. And I’d also like to acknowledge 
Caren O’Grady-Blatchford, who has been very capably working 
in my office for the last three years and is also a good friend. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my newest colleague, the member for 
Martensville, for her resounding trouncing of the NDP. In fact, 
of all the other candidates in the by-election, she’s already 
proven to be a great asset to our caucus and a great voice for her 
people. She’s not only making her father proud, but those of us 
on this side of the House, her family, and the people who 
obviously made the right choice at the polls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has not gone unnoticed that the combined age of 
the two newest members of the Sask Party could be less than 
the number of one of the members on both sides of this House. 
The lack of age bespeaks of one of the main differences 
between the Sask Party and the NDP. The words young, 
exciting, enthusiastic, energetic, vibrant, and visionary are 
words that haven’t been used very often to describe this tired, 
old, worn out, stodgy government. 
 
This leads me to discuss the budget, the desperate attempt of a 
visionless government to buy the next election with people’s 
money. I’ve had two weekends to be out and about talking to 
the people from Kelvington-Wadena to get their thoughts on 
this budget. 
 
Their reaction, Mr. Speaker, was not surprising and it was 
consistent. The people from Kelvington-Wadena believe that 
this government has failed them again. People saw through the 
thinly veiled attempt to buy votes and, if possible, they’re even 
more cynical about the Saskatchewan NDP than ever. 
 
Their first comment is also always about the deficit. It’s an 
insult to people’s intelligence to tell them the government is 
spending $701 million more than they’re taking in, and they’re 
trying to tell them it’s a balanced budget. After years of being 
told to tighten their belts — which people did and which the 
government did not do — the NDP decided that it was okay to 
go back into a deficit. The Finance minister said in his speech 
that fiscal balance is an important value of the people of 
Saskatchewan. That may be the only comment that he made that 
was bang on the money during the budget. So, I guess, saying it 
was good enough. 
 
It was really unnecessary, in his opinion, to follow up with 
actions. It’s just another example of this government talking the 
talk, but not walking the walk. Rather reminds me of this NDP 
government’s stance, zero tolerance stance on sexual 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

harassment. It’s good enough for them to say there’s zero 
tolerance but they don’t believe they actually have to do 
anything when they find out there is a problem. 
 
The Finance minister also said that since the election in 2003, 
their government had paid down nearly $1 billion in debt. First 
of all, may I remind this government that the people of 
Saskatchewan paid down the debt with their money. Secondly, 
this government has decided — just because it can — that it 
will plunge the people back into debt to the tune of nearly $1 
billion. That’s $1,000 for every man, woman, and child in the 
province. 
 
The net debt will increase $926 million plus an additional $19 
million in debt servicing. Every penny of debt that’s been paid 
off since the last election will be back on the bottom line. The 
government is spending more than it’s taking in, and in 
anybody’s language that means there’s an increase in debt. The 
NDP — and I clearly state — the NDP, not the legislature, has 
decided to increase spending by 9 per cent, while the budget 
increase and revenue is going to be 1.87 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years the Sask Party has been talking about 
growing the economy, and the NDP government laughed at the 
idea. Obviously now, the NDP polling at an all-time low means 
there should be something done, and they don’t know what to 
do about it. It’s a huge conundrum for the NDP government. 
 
Part of the budget speaks about increasing the number of 
workers, and of course the government is doing their part by 
adding another 1,430 people to their payroll. But on the other 
hand, they admit that of the 10,000 post-secondary graduates, 
only 4,000 will be staying in the province. 
 
The shortage of health professionals is the biggest nightmare in 
the health field, and what this government did to solve the 
problem was to add 18 nursing seats and four seats for doctors. 
I kid you not. In an oil boom in Saskatchewan, with record oil 
and gas revenues and nearly $1 billion more in revenues taken 
in last year than expected, plus spending increases of nearly $1 
billion, these saviours of medicare are going to find money to 
educate 18 nurses and 4 doctors. 
 
I guess it isn’t as big a priority as the $1.5 million for the 
exclamation point or the $350,000 to promote the budget or the 
$8 million for the Future is Wide Open campaign or the 
$268,000 to Raise a Flag for Fairness or the $300,000 for the 
Imagine campaign. To say their priorities are skewed would be 
an understatement. 
 
The budget failed to address a number of the very real issues 
that are facing the people in my constituency. There is still no 
recognition that there is a huge amount of snow that is not 
melted in the Northeast. Depending on how quickly the snow 
melts, there could be flooding, or if the melt is long and 
drawn-out, there’s going to mean a huge number of acres will 
not be seeded. 
 
As I drove around my constituency this weekend, I saw there 
were ditches that had been cleared of snow to allow for 
drainage. There’s work being done to protect bridges, culverts, 
and homes from the impending disaster, but where is our 
provincial government? And where are the dollars from the 

plan? There are still hundreds of thousands of dollars owed to 
RMs [rural municipality] and individuals waiting for a payout 
from last year’s disaster. An editor in one of the local papers 
likened the broken federal promises the NDP are crying about 
to the broken promises they’re making to the RMs. 
 
In discussions with the RMs regarding the provincial disaster 
assistance policy, they are quick to point out that this 
government hasn’t dealt with the issues of deductibles within 
that claim. They haven’t dealt with, with what is, could be 
considered a separate incident requiring another deductible. 
They haven’t dealt with any new federal or provincial 
regulations designed that will add a ridiculous amount of money 
to the cost, or the very ridiculous policy of only paying 
municipalities for certain costs. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Far too much of the actual costs are considered ineligible under 
this program. One of them is the cost of heavy earthmoving 
equipment that is only paid for at a rate of the operator’s 
overtime and fuel and oil. An actual rate for a piece of 
equipment should be around $85 an hour, and the RMs are 
getting paid $20 an hour. 
 
Cottage owners at Fishing Lake are on the red alert again for 
flooding this year. Their 1 in 100 year flood is back the third 
time in 10 years. There’s been administrative reports, meetings, 
engineering solutions, but little actions towards solving the 
problem. I believe a government that talks the talk about the 
opportunities for tourism should actually walk the walk. 
 
There is no recognition of the plight of the many communities 
who are in danger of losing their schools. We know that this 
province is losing about 350 K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
pupils a year. It is contempt to pretend there’s actually more 
money going into education when in actuality there are just 
fewer students. Mr. Speaker, I said 350 students per year loss 
— it’s actually 3,500 fewer students per year in this province. 
 
The needs for a classroom remains unchanged regardless of 
whether a classroom has three or four less students. They still 
need teachers, class options, and the support of the community 
that cares about each and every student. They do not need to 
spend hours a day on a bus travelling on roads that — too many 
days of the year — are dangerous, if not impassable. Every 
student in our province has the right to the same education just 
as they have the right to the same standard of health care. It 
appears that this government would prefer its services are only 
available in what is to be the top 58 centres, as discussed in The 
Changing Role of Rural Communities in the Urbanizing World 
by Jack Stabler and Rose Olfert. 
 
The much described drug plan leaked by someone to attempt to 
take the heat off the government over the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal is a desperate attempt by a desperate government to buy 
votes. 
 
My favourite quote was from a senior at the trade show in 
Tisdale this weekend, who said, and I quote, “Do those guys in 
Regina think seniors are stupid? We learned years ago you 
don’t get something for nothing.” 
 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, the much needed changes to the building 
communities initiative were not discussed in the budget. The 
only communities that can benefit from the NDP vote-buying 
program are the ones that have cultural and recreational 
facilities that need at least $1 million. That cuts out every 
community except — you guessed it — the very large ones. 
 
There are as many concerns about the budget as there are 
people, but the two remaining issues that affect people in my 
constituency are highways and agriculture. 
 
The 2006 Canadian Automobile Association estimated that the 
provincial government collected $491.1 million in motor 
vehicle fees and fuel tax. The NDP spent 380 million on 
highways. The new-found concern about highways happened 
coincidentally right after the NDP beating in Martensville, and 
maybe on a deathbed . . . [inaudible] . . . they figured they 
should start talking about it again. I wish the Premier and his 
cabinet had to travel down Highway 310, Highway 49, 
Highway 38, Highway 35, Highway 368, or Highway 349 to get 
to work like the people in Kelvington-Wadena. Mr. Speaker, 
the government would then surely make that a priority. 
 
The farmers in my area don’t even ask what is in the budget for 
agriculture. They know the answer is nothing. The NDP 
government has again cut agriculture spending. They projected 
$670 million less than they spent last year. This government 
only wants to pay 10 per cent of the share. In fact the minister 
today in the House said that he wants to pay 10 per cent because 
he cares. That’s going to be a wonderful headline in the paper 
and the farmers in Saskatchewan are not going to believe that 
they even care 10 per cent worth, but that does actually signal 
the amount of care that this government does have for farmers. 
 
If agriculture were a priority, they would have increased 
spending by the 9 per cent like they did in the other 
departments. This 9 per cent increase would cover the costs of 
the 30 per cent of their 40 per cent share that they don’t want to 
pay under the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 
program. The farmers have spoken on the wheat board issue 
much to the chagrin of this government, and they will speak on 
the lack of funding to agriculture whenever this government 
gets brave enough to call the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. I will be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the member from 
Silver Springs. Before I take my seat I want to repeat the words 
spoken in this Assembly at least twice before by the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast. He quotes Oliver Cromwell, who 
said to the Rump Parliament, “Depart I say; and let us have 
done with you. In the name of God, go!” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying 
what an exciting year it’s been to be the Minister of Advanced 
Education and Employment. We’ve accomplished a great deal 
in a very short period of time. We’ve increased training spaces 
in this budget by approximately 2,118 spaces which is a 7.2 per 

cent increase, bringing our training and skills development 
opportunities to over 31,000. What this means is that we’ve not 
only met our 2003 election promise to increase training by 
5,400 a year but we’ve expanded capacity by 6,164 seats or 
24.4 per cent since the ’04-05 fiscal year. 
 
In addition we’re freezing university tuition for a third year in a 
row at 2004 levels, providing a benefit of over $1,500 per 
student in terms of savings. We’re increasing funding to student 
loans and the provincial training allowance and we’re 
expanding the centennial merit scholarship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we decided as a government that we were tired of 
watching First Nations people not receive proper resources 
from the federal government when it came to training and 
post-secondary education. I’m very pleased to say that we’re 
partnering with our Aboriginal, First Nations institutions and 
Aboriginal training institutions, investing $4.2 million in our 
Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal advantage. This money will go 
towards SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], 
the Dumont Technical Institute, Gabriel Dumont Institute, and 
the First Nations University. This money will create more 
training in the province and will provide on-reserve training to 
young Aboriginal persons. 
 
This year we’ll invest $8.5 million in immigration as we 
continue to increase the number of newcomers to our province. 
Our immigrant nominee program issued 1,255 nominations in 
the last fiscal year, which exceeded our target of 800 by more 
than 400 nominations. These nominees and their families result 
in as many as 4,000 newcomers coming to the province. 
Compared to the 401 that we nominated in 2005, this represents 
a huge increase in the number of people under the nominee 
program. Madam Speaker, we can say that we’re well on our 
way to bringing 5,000 newcomers to our province under the 
immigrant nominee program by 2008. 
 
And in this budget we also created a new $10,000 annual 
exemption, tax exemption, for new graduates. This will mean 
that all new grads working in our province will have their first 
$20,000 in income exempt from taxation for a five-year period. 
As a result of this program a new graduate who comes to or 
remains in Saskatchewan can start their career and realize a real 
tax saving of $5,500. 
 
From just October to December of last year, our province’s 
population grew by nearly 2,100 people and I’m confident that 
this growth has continued. And I’m looking forward to seeing 
the numbers for the first quarter in 2007 because I know for a 
fact that there are literally hundreds of Albertans now in 
Saskatoon looking to buy or rent properties, Madam Speaker. 
 
As well we just hosted our first ever Saskatchewan Youth 
Summit. And it’s a shame that only one Sask Party MLA came 
to hear all of the incredible ideas that the young people of our 
province have to offer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s obvious that some great things 
are happening in our department and throughout government. 
But I now want to talk about the philosophical differences 
between the NDP and those members opposite. In this budget 
we introduced a new, incredible program of a $15 seniors’ drug 
plan. And the opposition opposes this plan and they say it’s not 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

sustainable, and they say it should be income tested. 
 
Well I want to say, as someone who represents a fairly affluent 
part of Saskatchewan, I want to say that the seniors in my 
constituency that have spoken to me certainly appreciate that 
they will have access to this program, that it’s not income 
tested. Because their observation is that now that governments 
have moved away from this notion of universality that there’s 
very little that they’re eligible for, including senior low-income 
housing. 
 
And so, Madam Speaker, they like the $15 seniors’ drug plan 
and it has been greeted very positively. And they have said that 
they’re worried that the Sask Party, if they were to become the 
government, that they’d go to income testing. And they don’t 
like that idea at all. 
 
And in fact they remind me of when the Sask Party opposed the 
notion of income testing when it came to senior citizen 
long-term care beds. And I think you’ll remember that, where 
people didn’t want income testing — the members opposite — 
when it came to long-term care beds, but the members opposite 
want income testing when it comes to seniors’ drugs. And they 
just don’t quite understand that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to speak a little bit about the 
sustainability of the budget, which the opposition says the 
budget’s not sustainable. Well I just want to make this 
observation. They probably know that the fiscal stabilization 
plan is actually funded, it’s actually real money, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I want to say to the members opposite that the 
Bank of Montreal, which is hardly a friend of the government, 
has said that the province of Saskatchewan is projecting its 14th 
consecutive balanced budget for ’07-08, and: 
 

“On balance the province continues to earn top marks for 
its commitment for cutting taxes, keeping spending in 
check, but not to the point of ignoring important outlays 
and maintaining a fiscal cushion.” 

 
Not bad. 
 
Then the Scotiabank says Saskatchewan’s midterm outlook 
remains upbeat, the province’s revenue forecast for fiscal year 
’08 may prove conservative. Well and they say, “Underpinning 
Saskatchewan’s upbeat economic growth has been a multi-year 
reform of provincial taxes . . .” 
 
Now then the CIBC says, and that’s the Canadian Imperial 
Bank of Commerce, “Program spending will grow by a lean 
1.4%.” And, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting is that these folks 
just kind of don’t get it. 
 
Now the final thing I want to say to the members opposite is 
this. We’ve now had 14 consecutive balanced budgets. And at 
the same time in terms of our government, since the last 
election in 2003, we’ll have paid down $1 billion worth of debt. 
We’ve never charged health care premiums and we never will. 
We’ve reduced the PST [provincial sales tax] to its lowest point 
in 20 years. 
 
We have the lowest-cost bundle of utilities in the country. 
We’ve increased funding to literacy, food banks, and social 

assistance. We’ve significantly invested in affordable housing. 
We’ve frozen tuition fees at 2004 levels through to 2008. 
We’ve created a new, five-year 10,000 annual tax exemption 
for new graduates which means $5,500 in real income to our 
students that are graduating from programs. 
 
We’ve increased training spaces by 6,100, an increase of 24 per 
cent, surpassing our campaign promise, and we brought in 
many newcomers to the province — and in fact in this past 
fiscal year 1,255, exceeding our expectations of 800 by well 
over 455 and we’re well on our way. 
 
Well it’s clear, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the members 
opposite really don’t like this. The province is on a roll. There’s 
a buzz about the province. And in fact we now have more jobs 
than people in the province of Saskatchewan. And a year ago 
what were they saying? We’re in the middle of a boom and no 
jobs. Well the reality is that we had jobs but people weren’t 
advertising for them, and they now are through our SaskJobs.ca 
website. It’s obvious that our job numbers continue to sizzle. 
Last month we saw the most people working and the lowest 
unemployment rate on record for the month of February. We 
had over 20,600 more people working in our province in 
February of this year than February of last year. And we have 
advertised on our SaskJobs.ca website 6,430 jobs waiting to be 
filled. 
 
We know the opposition doesn’t like to admit that the job 
market is hot and people are moving back, and we continue to 
see coverage all over the province about people that have come 
home. Well this is not by accident and I want to make this point 
to the public, that when things aren’t good they blame the 
government, and when things are good they don’t blame the 
government. And they don’t give the government any kind of 
credit. Well I can say this, that our population is increasing. It’s 
clear that we have a very significant future ahead of us. 
 
We also note that on The StarPhoenix poll website on Tuesday, 
March 27 we had 7,785 people vote in that poll. And what did it 
say? It said that 61 per cent of them would vote NDP and only 
37 per cent in Saskatoon would vote for the Sask Party. So I 
would say people are starting to feel the buzz inside our 
province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The most negative people in the province now are across the 
way. The population of Saskatchewan is very optimistic about 
its future. They do give the government some credit. I know the 
members opposite like to spin that this is an old, tired 
government. But I would say from their performance in the last 
three weeks that we have a very old and tired opposition. And 
as a result of that old and tired opposition, I don’t know how an 
old and tired opposition can be a vigorous new government. 
 
So I would say that if they want to go to the polls, we will go in 
due course. And we’re all looking forward to an election. I 
remember just before the 2003 election that they thought they 
were going to win. It didn’t turn out quite the way they wanted. 
I hope that the leader of the opposition, the old leader of the 
opposition in Rosetown had a more enjoyable night on Saturday 
because I thought the real roast that he got was prior to the last 
provincial . . . or on election day 2003, not on Saturday night. 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

But we’re looking forward to that election. We’re up for it. And 
I guess we’ll say, may the best party win, Mr. Speaker. I 
suspect that this will be the last budget before we go to the 
polls. And they say, call it. Well they were saying that before 
the last election. They thought they were going to win. They 
had the balloons all ready in Rosetown. It just didn’t quite 
happen. And we’ll see how it all works out. 
 
We have some wonderful candidates that are running across the 
province, and we’re looking forward to winning some of those 
seats that the Sask Party now holds. And particularly I’m 
looking forward to the Carrot River seat where we have a bright 
young Leigh Spencer running for the NDP and Humboldt where 
we have a wonderful woman that’s running. And we think that 
we will win some of those seats back into the NDP fold. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m looking forward 
to the vote later where we will pass the best budget this 
province has ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to join in the debate on the budget this afternoon. I 
have tried to follow all of the interventions from members on 
this side of the House and, frankly, from government members 
on the budget. I’ve been unable to perhaps go through each and 
every one, but I know we’ve had a spirited debate over the last 
number of days in this Assembly on the budget and rightfully 
so, Mr. Speaker, because really the budget takes this province 
back to a place that provincial governments were at in the 1980s 
right across this country, when political parties of every stripe 
in office in the ’80s — whether it was the Bob Rae New 
Democrats in Ontario or the Getty Conservatives in Alberta or 
the Devine Conservatives in this province or even the national 
government — where they routinely racked up huge deficits. It 
was not yet on the public consciousness the damage that this 
could do to future generations. It simply wasn’t an issue of 
public discourse. The people of this country and of every single 
province did not want to hear from their governments about 
austerity measures. 
 
Well the member for . . . What’s he the member for now? 
Regina Victoria? He’s beaking from his seat, Mr. Speaker, but 
you know he never weighs in in this Assembly. He never 
weighs in in this Assembly on the budgeting of his own party in 
the province of Ontario where they almost ruined the province 
of Ontario racking up deficit after deficit after deficit and 
increasing the debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He gets very angry because of course the truth is this, the truth 
is this, that political parties of every stripe, unfortunately, 
tragically in the 1980s — and, Mr. Speaker, encouraged by 
people like that member who asked for more, more, and more, 
encouraged by that member opposite — racked up these huge 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. That’s what happened. In fact that 
member right there was a member of the NDP in the 1980s 
when they tried to out bid the Devine Conservatives. You 
remember that, Mr. Speaker? That member right there 
advocated a seven, seven . . . 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member who’s 
very agitated from his seat is saying, what’s the problem? He 
need only look at himself and the fellow members of the NDP 
to find out what the problem is, Mr. Speaker, because while 
every other political party, nationally and federally, has learned 
the lessons of the 1980s, while every other political party has 
returned, Mr. Speaker, to fiscal probity and fiscal responsibility, 
what is his government doing? What is this NDP government 
doing? 
 
They are taking us back into deficit — the very thing, Mr. 
Speaker, that that member criticized over and over again in one 
of his many, many trips back to the 1980s; the deficits which 
should be rightly criticized, Mr. Speaker. It’s now his 
government that’s doing it, Mr. Speaker. It’s now his NDP 
Party that’s racking up the deficits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, $701 million in deficit in this 
budget. That’s what we have — $900 million more in net debt, 
Mr. Speaker. You know why he’s angry? You know why he’s 
angry? He has become what he beheld, Mr. Speaker. He’s angry 
because he knows his government has betrayed the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan who did all of that heavy lifting 
in the ’90s, as Canadians did across this country in province 
after province and nationally. And now his government is 
taking us right back to deficit, presiding over, Mr. Speaker, a 
reckless budget as my colleague from Silver Springs has 
characterized it on budget day, Mr. Speaker. That’s the fact. 
 
Vision, Mr. Speaker, some have identified as a shining idea 
with which to stir the people from sometimes a numbed 
indifference. Vision can be defined by the act of setting yourself 
apart from others by defining your values with clarity, with 
principle and conviction. Where is any of that in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker? Where is it? The vision of this budget doesn’t see 
past the next eight months or so when the Premier may or may 
not call a provincial election. He has enough vision to see to the 
next election date, to try as he did in Weyburn-Big Muddy 
unsuccessfully, to try to buy the favour of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan with their own money, Mr. Speaker, 
and more alarmingly, while doing so to plunge this province 
back into a deficit, to increase the debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s simply not vision. 
 
The budget is a political document, Mr. Speaker; that’s what it 
is. It’s a political document. There’s no mapping out of a 
long-term plan. Gone even are the projections we used to see in 
minister MacKinnon’s budget or even when the current 
Minister of Industry was the minister of Finance and they tried 
to look down the road a number of years, look at commodity 
prices, try to determine where this province was going. They’re 
not even trying. And you know, Mr. Speaker, they’re not even 
hiding the fact that they don’t seem to have any interest in any 
date beyond the next election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this in this Assembly. The 
people of this province have seen that kind of cynical politics 
before. They saw it in Weyburn-Big Muddy and they rejected 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

it, Mr. Speaker. They saw the highways equipment moving in 
the Martensville constituency, kind of moving around like the 
government was doing something. Another cynical ploy — they 
didn’t buy it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. When the next 
election comes and the people look at the bill that they will 
have to pay for this government’s cynical politics, they won’t 
buy it at the next election either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Canada’s history is littered with 
examples of governments that are dying, that try to throw these 
Hail Mary initiatives at the very end of a term, that desperately 
try to regain favour with their respective electorates. Mr. 
Speaker, what the federal Liberal cabinet minister way, way 
back in 1957, C.D. Howe, had to say I think is instructive for 
this debate. He said, and I quote: 
 

What’s a million? I dare say my Honourable friend could 
cut a million dollars from this amount — but a million 
dollars is not a very important matter. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I could hear the current Minister of 
Finance saying something like that, being that cavalier about 
the fact that we have a $701 million deficit in this budget, the 
fact that we have another $900 million in debt. And we’ve seen 
him in this House kind of shrug his shoulders and raise his 
hands, Mr. Speaker, because it’s about the next election for 
them — not about the next decade, Mr. Speaker, for this 
province. It’s not about the next century. It’s about the next 
general election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the verdict is in from accountants, from former 
Finance ministers of an NDP persuasion, frankly, who are far 
more competent and capable than any cabinet minister sitting 
over there today. The verdict is in on the very important 
question as to sustainability. Is this budget sustainable? It’s a 
pretty important question. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
best way perhaps to measure whether it’s a political document 
or not — whether it’s just about politics, whether it’s about 
trying to get them to the next election, or whether it’s about a 
sustainable plan based on a vision for the future of the province. 
 
The best way to answer that question is to detail exactly 
whether or not the budget is sustainable. Members opposite 
know that it is not sustainable. I believe they know that. I 
believe they understand that this government, in a very callous 
and cynical way, is just going to try to get elected by using 
taxpayers’ money to buy favour. They know that revenues are 
up 1.8 per cent, but spending is up 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in 
this budget. They know that the deficit has increased a total of 
701 million on a financial summary basis, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund drained of a half a billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, and the debt has increased. 
 
The Crowns have been gutted, frankly, for this mad spending 
spree. And I remember . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
now the Premier wants to join in. And we look forward to his 
comments, Mr. Speaker. We wonder if the Premier will want to 
comment on the fact that the Crown Investments Corporation is 
being asked to pay a $200 million dividend; that SaskEnergy 

must pay a $6.9 million dividend and then go out and borrow 
$70.2 million; SaskPower dividend that this Premier wants to 
take, while he chirps from him seat, $135 million. It’s going to 
have to go borrow $475 million. 
 
Do you know what that is, Mr. Speaker? You know what that 
is? And the members opposite will know very well what it is 
because again it’s a practice that happened in this province and 
should never have. It’s called equity stripping, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what it is. It’s called stripping equity from these Crowns 
for the purposes of trying to buy a provincial election, Mr. 
Speaker. And if the Premier thinks he’s going to get away with 
it as he smiles and nods, he’s dead wrong, Mr. Speaker. He 
won’t get . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, interestingly, as I’ve touched on 
already, the budget doesn’t provide any future revenue 
projections. It doesn’t demonstrate how this government’s 
sustainable. 
 
On budget day, the Finance minister had this significant 
credibility gap to try to bridge. And here’s the nature of the gap, 
Mr. Speaker. He said in response to questions from people like 
former minister Janice MacKinnon, from the chartered 
accountants, from the media itself, from others in the province 
who were worried about sustainability, he said and answered, 
no, no, it is sustainable; just trust me. That’s what he said. So 
the media quite dutifully asked him — responsibly so, I would 
suggest — fair enough, why won’t you just table then the 
projections that your Minister of Finance, that the Department 
of Finance was using to crunch the numbers? What happened, 
Mr. Speaker? Did the Minister of Finance do that? 
 
The opposition then asked the same question in the legislature 
the next day. They said to the Finance minister, if you believe 
this — if you believe that this budget is sustainable — if it’s not 
a deficit, if it’s not going to bring us back to where we never 
want to go again, simply table the projections. That’s 
reasonable. Other budgets used to include them as I have 
mentioned. Minister MacKinnon’s budget used to have it right 
in the budget. I remember the minister currently of Industry — 
same thing. He would provide those long-term revenue 
projections. 
 
But this government won’t do it. You know why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they know it is not sustainable, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why they won’t provide that information to this Assembly and 
to the people of this province. Instead they say, just trust me. 
Just trust us. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? Maybe if this 
were a brand new, vibrant NDP government with new ideas, 
recently elected, without the track record they have, maybe then 
the people of the province, who are a generous people and as 
generous as you’ll find, might say I think we maybe should 
trust them, Mr. Speaker. We should trust them. 
 
But this isn’t a vibrant, energetic NDP Party. This is a 
four-term, tired, old government that I believe, Mr. Speaker, has 
among the worst records in the history of Canadian politics for 
hiding the fact, for not telling the truth, Mr. Speaker, to the 
people of this province. And they will not trust this government 
— not now and not when that election is called, Mr. Speaker. 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Consider the record, remembering the Minister of 
Finance said, just trust us. We have the financial projections 
although we’re not prepared to show them. We can’t find the 
napkin that I wrote them on, and so we can’t lay them on the 
Table of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. But he asked the people of 
the province to trust him, this government, Mr. Speaker, which 
has a record that included SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company], Mr. Speaker . . . Do you 
remember that? 
 
Again after questions after questions came from this side of the 
House about a $30 million scandal, Mr. Speaker, and the 
government said, just trust us; everything we’ve told you is true 
so far, until we found out one day in this Assembly and in this 
province of Saskatchewan that that wasn’t the case. And a 
minister was taken out of the cabinet. Some would argue for not 
quite long enough. But the minister responsible for SPUDCO 
had to be taken out of the cabinet because people may have 
trusted them and ought not to have trusted them. 
 
[15:15] 
 
What about the Oyate Safe House scandal, Mr. Speaker? When 
we had . . . When we should have been able to take the word of 
the minister responsible on Oyate when he told this Assembly 
and reporters that everything was fine, that they’d looked into 
matters and everything was fine, and we knew of course that 
everything was not fine. Again not a very credible history in 
terms of that party asking anyone to trust them. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, what about most recently with the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal, Mr. Speaker? Imagine, imagine the 
people of the province hearing that same government, that same 
Premier say, just trust us that this budget is sustainable — when 
at the same time he refuses to answer basic questions as to why 
someone who was fired for harassment and convicted of assault 
should get $275,000, over three years worth of severance, while 
the women who were harassed get $15,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Imagine, imagine him now asking the people of the province to 
trust him on sustainability when frankly, Mr. Speaker, when 
frankly he is unable to explain why in 2003 his then Justice 
minister, the current Minister of Industry, said, you know, we 
are going to fight Mr. Carriere in the courts; we are going to 
defend vigorously the government’s firing and ensure that we 
move heaven and earth to make sure that this person doesn’t 
receive any taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And then we didn’t hear about it for a long time until suddenly 
— suddenly in the wake of something that probably happened 
in December prior to 2003, when a lot of the information broke 
or even more recently this last December I should say, Mr. 
Speaker — something happened then that changed the 
government’s story. And they just wanted to quietly pay this 
man $275,000 and hope that nobody found out, didn’t want to 
tell anyone. 
 
How then can that Premier and that Minister of Finance, with 
that track record, now go to the people of the province and say, 
trust us that this budget is sustainable, even though we will not, 
we will not provide you with those projections. There is a huge 

credibility gap, Mr. Speaker. One that this NDP government, 
this tired and old NDP government has been unable to bridge, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There would be a way to at least help in this regard by the way, 
Mr. Speaker. We would offer this advice to the government. If 
they wanted to improve their credibility, they could at the very 
least do the right thing and begin to table the legal opinions that 
made them take their decisions on Murdoch Carriere and, even 
more importantly, to answer questions on behalf of women in 
the civil service and the people of this province. That might 
help a little bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, even the Minister of Finance can’t 
get his own story straight as to whether this is a deficit or not a 
deficit. Don Newman has — the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] anchor — has certainly seen a lot of budgets in his 
day and he’s talked to a lot of politicians, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t 
take Mr. Newman very long to wrestle a confession out of our 
Saskatchewan Finance minister. I know the members opposite 
believe that whatever is on Mr. Newman’s program is akin to 
the revealed word, and so they’ll be very interested in finding 
out that, from the episode of March 22 Politics with Don 
Newman, here’s an exchange, Mr. Speaker, as recorded by 
transcript: 
 

Newman: But you are going to spend more money in the 
coming fiscal year than you are going to collect. 
 
[The minister]: Yes, that’s right. 
 
Newman: And that’s not called a deficit in Saskatchewan? 
 
[The minister]: Well, it’s a surplus actually on the GRF 
but it is on the summary financial, a deficit. 

 
And, you know, he kind of uses some government-speak here 
because nobody at home in Swift Current ever refers to the 
GRF [General Revenue Fund]. He tries to use a little bit of 
government-speak to cover up the fact. 
 
Let’s read it again. Here’s what the Minister of Finance said to 
Don Newman, who said, “And that’s not called a deficit in 
Saskatchewan?” And the minister said, “Well, it’s a surplus 
actually on the GRF but it is on the summary financial, a 
deficit,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, he’s on the public record. And he should know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of the province will be reminded of his 
own candour. I think the Minister of Finance had an absolute 
moment of honesty and candour, and he did the right thing. Don 
Newman asked the right question, and the Minister of Finance 
said, it is a deficit. The Minister of Finance said, it is a deficit, 
Mr. Speaker. And just in case the Premier hasn’t heard — 
because I sit beside the member for Canora, Mr. Speaker — the 
Minister of Finance said, it is a deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So what do we have to show, Mr. Speaker, for 
this deficit budget of the NDP’s? Well there’s a real question as 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

to whether there is some actual improvement coming for 
highways, and they most assuredly need a lot of improvement. 
There’s costs associated obviously with ensuring that highways 
are passable and properly signed. Some people on Highway 32 
have taken to putting up their own signs, frankly, and they’re 
renaming highways after ministers opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all the money spent for the deficit that’s 
represented in this budget, what was there in terms of the real 
issue of school closures in our province? What was there, Mr. 
Speaker? Was there an allocation for schools of necessity? 
Schools that are going to be very, very remote, Mr. Speaker, 
where kids are going to simply be asked to ride a bus too long if 
some closures go ahead. Any money for that? No, Mr. Speaker. 
Was there money for schools of opportunity specifically? The 
answer, Mr. Speaker, was no. 
 
Was there even the vision in this budget to change how the 
government funds education to take away the bias in favour of 
bussing? Because you know, Mr. Speaker, regardless of where 
you sit in this House I think we can all agree that today there is 
a bias in how this government funds education in favour of 
bussing, Mr. Speaker. And so when boards have to make tough 
decisions, when trustees need to make tough decisions, one of 
the easiest things for them to do — and it’s not a criticism of 
the trustees; I understand exactly what they’re working with — 
but one of the easiest things to do would be to continue to rely 
on bussing, to not worry as much about the bussing costs that 
are going to be implied from school closures, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s covered by the government. 
 
We in the Saskatchewan Party offered this government a fairly 
common sense notion that should have been represented in this 
budget. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that education funding ought 
to be biased in favour of teachers and the classroom and school 
and not bussing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is in this budget with respect 
to the very pressing issue of nurse recruitment and retention? 
This is unbelievable. Arguably the most pressing issue in health 
care today in the province of Saskatchewan is the issue of nurse 
retention, and not specifically just related to those positions 
themselves and the important role that nurses play in the system 
but also because of the ripple effects. 
 
I mean when you’re short nurses, hospitals have to close, Mr. 
Speaker, in places like Preeceville and in places like Kamsack, 
in places like Coronach, in Big River, Mr. Speaker. These are 
real communities, Mr. Speaker, home to families in this 
province who need a hospital, who may need emergency care. 
That is the impact, Mr. Speaker, of a government that simply 
doesn’t have a plan for nurse recruitment and retention. 
 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says there are currently 525 
nursing vacancies in our health system. There will be 485 
nurses eligible for retirement this year. That’s over 1,000 
potential vacancies this year. And this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
brought down by this tired, old NDP government creates 18 
new training seats — 18 — 18 new training seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at 67.2 per cent, this NDP government, this NDP 

government in the birthplace of medicare, the home of Tommy 
Douglas, has the worst nursing retention rate in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. And rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is paying a 
particularly high price for this, although it’s being felt all over 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s not as if the NDP can’t look back to their own 
decisions they’ve made in health care over the last decade and a 
half when they’re trying to assess why the problem is so acute 
in the province in Saskatchewan, more here so than many other 
provinces in the country because those provinces have 
demonstrated some leadership, Mr. Speaker. Remember back to 
decisions taken by this NDP government that cut those seats, 
that wound up reducing the number of nurses we have that 
literally drove doctors from this province because of facilities 
that were closing by this NDP government. That is the legacy of 
this tired, old, and incompetent NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again last week, Mrs. Gagnon was here to provide further 
evidence that the people of the province are the ones who suffer 
when this government, faced with 1,000 potential vacancies in 
nurses, has the unmitigated gall to say, here’s a great budget for 
the province. Here’s 18 new seats, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 
good enough for Mrs. Gagnon. It’s not good enough for the 
rural communities who need hospitals. It’s not good enough for 
our tertiary centres in Regina and Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 
It’s why the nurses are completely fed up with this government 
and increasingly why the people of the province have had 
enough as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mrs. Gagnon . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well, the member for Athabasca has just intervened. He says, 
do you guys actually believe that? Well you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? The people of the province don’t have to take our 
word for it. They can go to SUN and ask the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, Mr. Speaker. That NDP government, if they 
don’t believe that their incompetence has hurt health care in 
Saskatchewan, and in particularly that minister, who presided 
over the Oyate Safe House scandal and is somehow intertwined 
in the Murdoch Carriere case, he can ask the mayor of Kamsack 
and the mayor of Preeceville and the mayor of Coronach, he can 
ask doctors in this province, and he can ask people like Mrs. 
Gagnon as to who they believe. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker. They believe this about that NDP government: they 
have lost their way and it is time for them to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of other editorial 
comments that came in the wake of the budget in the event that 
the people of the province would like to find out about, well 
what the editors of Saskatchewan think or what certain groups 
think about this particular budget and its sustainability. 
 
Randy Burton of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, who for some 
reason now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes and the member 
for Athabasca just did it again. They don’t like nurses, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t seem to like schools in rural 
Saskatchewan. And they don’t like Randy Burton at The 
StarPhoenix I guess. Maybe they don’t like any of the media as 
well. But, you know, Mr. Speaker, he is a journalist that covers 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

politics in this province. He’s seen a lot of budgets in his time, 
and here’s what he had to say: 
 

It doesn’t take an auditor [long] to tell you [this is a quote] 
this can’t go on very long without causing a train wreck 
. . . [Mr. Speaker] The seniors’ drug plan is by far the most 
blatantly political move in the budget, given that any sense 
of fiscal responsibility is almost totally absent from this 
initiative [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
Here’s the editorial from the Regina Leader-Post but I’m sure 
the member for Athabasca doesn’t really care anything about 
what they have to say either. But they’re soldiering on, even 
though the minister may not be reading their paper; they’re 
continuing to publish. And here’s what they had to say about 
the budget: 
 

Budgets are about making hard, but responsible, choices 
and there’s a real question mark over whether this [is a] 
big-spending political budget is sustainable. 

 
Editorial from the The StarPhoenix, quote: 
 

Any time a government that expects its revenues to rise by 
less than two per cent goes on a pre-election [spending] 
binge that hikes spending by nine per cent, then says its 
actions are sustainable, it’s time to worry. 

 
Nola Joorisity of the Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan 
said this, and many members have quoted it. But boy, it bears 
repeating. Because again I would say that Ms. Joorisity brings 
to the issue of fiscal probity much more credibility than any 
member in this House, than absolutely any member. And here’s 
what she said, and we wish . . . Well here’s what she said, “This 
is a deficit budget and the amount of the deficit is . . . 
[serious.]” And again, so everybody can hear, “This is a deficit 
budget and the amount of the deficit is . . . [serious,]” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s not the Saskatchewan Party saying it. It’s not an editorial 
board. It’s not a political columnist. It is the chartered institute 
of accountants for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They have seen a deficit. They know if it walks like a duck and 
talks like a duck, it’s a duck, Mr. Speaker. And quite ironically 
the member for Dewdney chirps up, as I referenced ducks, Mr. 
Speaker, and despite his quacking I can tell you this: we will 
take the word of the accountants over his on this budget every 
day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what did the former NDP minister, 
what did the former minister of Finance for this NDP 
government, Janice MacKinnon, have to say at the prospect of 
this deficit budget from the NDP? Here’s the quote: 
 

“When new programs are being proposed, you have to 
carefully ask that question: Are these affordable in the 
long term? 

 
I think that’s a key question about some of these proposals. 
 
There’s a reasoned, rational comment from a minister with a 

pretty darn good record in terms of fiscal responsibility. I think 
the first Finance minister in the country that was able to balance 
the budget. I began my discussion, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out 
that through the ’80s — unfortunately so, incorrectly so — 
provincial governments of every political stripe, and a federal 
government of first a Liberal government, and then a 
Conservative government nationally, went down the road in 
deficits. There was, there was Bob . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. Order. I 
invite the Leader of the Opposition to continue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone suggests that I should talk a little bit about 
NDP Premier Bob Rae. I’m prepared to do that. But we ought 
not to fault Bob Rae for something that every single premier in 
the province did during the ’80s. Unfortunately they did it. It 
was the practice of the time for all governments of all stripes to 
rack up big deficits. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And it was Minister MacKinnon, who was an NDP Finance 
minister, who was the very first to balance the budget in 
Canada. I mean I don’t know why they’re so angry at that. 
She’s a member of their party, Mr. Speaker. Why would they be 
heckling the fact that that happened in this province? And then 
was followed suit by other governments of . . . Conservative 
governments and Liberal governments, nationally and in the 
provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The difference is, Mr. Speaker, the difference is this: that 
political parties of all stripes have vowed that this country, that 
their respective jurisdictions will never return to that kind of 
irresponsible, reckless budgeting again except, Mr. Speaker, in 
NDP Saskatchewan. Except here, where that same government 
opposite, who have become what they beheld, is prepared to 
plunge this province back into deficit, is prepared to increase 
the debt of this province by $900 million. 
 
And within this budget document, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
vision for the future. The projections don’t go past this year. 
They are spending the future of this province frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget. They’re trying to do it for political 
purposes and political purposes only, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now more than ever, with all of the economic potential we have 
in this province, with all of the momentum we have, now more 
than ever we need sound fiscal management. We need a 
complete growth agenda. We need a vision that sees beyond, 
Mr. Speaker, the next three months or so and a vision that sees 
beyond the borders to what this province can do within the 
West and within Canada. And in order to get that kind of vision 
and that kind of fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to need a provincial election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But in the meantime, in the meantime we can do 
something else. We can stop this tired, old NDP government 
from plunging the province back into reckless financial 
planning. We can stop them actually earlier than the election if 
members on that side of the House would simply remember all 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

of their rhetoric over the last 10 years about the need for proper 
budget planning, if members opposite would simply have the 
courage to stand up and vote against this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll be supporting the amendment and will be voting against the 
budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, as other members have done in this 
budget debate, I want to extend my own congratulations to the 
new member from Martensville on her election victory and 
upon taking her seat in the House. Mr. Speaker, given her 
margin of victory I considered calling for a recount but have 
decided, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll just wait until the general 
provincial election to change that margin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to recognize a young man who fought 
in that by-election campaign, who represented the New 
Democratic Party in that by-election campaign, and if I may 
say, Mr. Speaker, who earned the respect if not the votes of 
thousands of people in Martensville, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
just tell you and I can tell the House that this is not the last time 
you will have heard the name John Tzupa in the political affairs 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand in this legislature in debate of 
a budget which the headlines described as broad and bold, Mr. 
Speaker. It is that, Mr. Speaker. It is a budget that is broad and 
it is bold. It is a budget, Mr. Speaker, that reflects the values of 
Saskatchewan people. It is a budget that reflects the values of 
the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party. It is the values 
reflected in this budget that come from New Democrats in 
government, Mr. Speaker. This is a budget that reflects the 
values of Saskatchewan people and the values of the political 
party I am privileged to lead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget has been 
welcomed. It has been welcomed by the chartered banks of 
Canada. It is a budget that has been welcomed by the working 
families of Saskatchewan. It is a budget that has been welcomed 
by farming families in our province. It is a budget that has been 
welcomed by the business community of our province, both 
small and large. It is a budget, Mr. Speaker, that has been 
welcomed by the Aboriginal peoples of Saskatchewan. It has 
been welcomed by newcomers to our province. It has been 
welcomed by ordinary Saskatchewan families. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because this budget reflects the values of 
Saskatchewan people, the values of Saskatchewan families, the 
values of those who built this province — our seniors and our 
elders. Mr. Speaker, it is a budget that is both broad and it is 
bold. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that this budget comes at a 
time of unprecedented economic strength in our province. This 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is sustained by the strength and the 

prosperity of the economy that we have built in Saskatchewan 
in the past five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a level of economic 
prosperity and strength that we have never before witnessed in 
the history of the province of Saskatchewan. It is that strength, 
Mr. Speaker, that sustains this budget — this budget and 
budgets well into the future. So, Mr. Speaker, we have here a 
budget that’s been described by the headline writers as a budget 
which is broad and it is bold. It is a budget that has been 
welcomed by Saskatchewan families. It has been welcomed by 
chartered banks. It’s welcomed by the Aboriginal peoples of 
Saskatchewan. It’s been a welcomed budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s only one group who have not welcomed this budget. 
Now that would happen to be the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition opposite. The one group who have not welcomed 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, are seated across from us. And that’s 
pretty clear from the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks this 
afternoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell you then why it is the 
Saskatchewan Party opposition has not welcomed a budget that 
speaks to our seniors, that speaks to our youth, that speaks to 
our families, that speaks to our economic prosperity. Why, Mr. 
Speaker, would this opposition party, this Saskatchewan Party, 
not welcome this budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, well first of all it’s just this. You know what, Mr. 
Speaker? They simply can’t stand the fact that the 
Saskatchewan economy is doing as well as it’s doing. They 
simply cannot stand the fact that New Democrats and 
government build economic strength, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They can’t stand the fact — and history demonstrates it — they 
can’t stand the fact that every time they find their way onto the 
government benches, they bring the economy of Saskatchewan 
into a shambles, and the people of Saskatchewan then have to 
again turn to the New Democratic Party to fix the mess they 
leave behind. It’s happened over and over again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they simply can’t stand the fact that what’s 
good for Saskatchewan is not good for the Saskatchewan Party. 
They can’t stand the fact that we have the economic prosperity 
today to provide this budget for the families of Saskatchewan. 
They can’t stand the fact that we took the bankruptcy they left 
behind and turned it, Mr. Speaker, into a boom. They can’t 
handle it. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when the economic turnaround begins 
to happen, as it began to happen two and three years ago now as 
we began to reinvigorate the economy as the foundation for 
social progress — soon as the economy starts to turn around — 
what do they say? What were they saying? 
 
Well I remember last year’s budget debate. You know what 
they were saying? How can you be losing jobs in the midst of a 
boom? That’s what they were saying. How can you be losing 
jobs in the midst of a boom? Well, Mr. Speaker, you notice they 
don’t say that any more. They don’t say that. When they, like 
we, see the jobs increasing in our province month after month 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

after month, they don’t say this any more. When they see the 
Aboriginal unemployment rate in our province falling 
dramatically, they don’t say it. When we have one of the, if not 
the highest rate of youth employment anywhere in Canada, they 
don’t say this any more. 
 
When you can turn to the SaskJobs website on any day of the 
week and find literally thousands of career opportunities in our 
province, when you can pick up the daily papers and find page 
after page after page of want ads and career opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker, whatever happened to that question they were asking a 
year ago? How can you be losing jobs during a boom? Not one 
question in this session about jobs in our province. 
 
Now, so when they, Mr. Speaker, run out of that question, then 
what do they start saying? Well how can you be losing people 
in a boom? How can you be losing population in a boom? Well 
now interestingly enough after last Friday, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
strangely silent about that question; strangely silent when the 
population statistics from the fourth quarter comes in. 
 
And for the first time, Mr. Speaker, for the first time, Mr. 
Speaker, in 10 years the in-migration to the province of 
Saskatchewan from Alberta exceeds out-migration. More 
people moving from Alberta to Saskatchewan than from 
Saskatchewan to Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re not talking about population because in this fourth 
quarter, the largest single population gain for the fourth quarter, 
Mr. Speaker, since — get the year — 1986, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one year they’re saying, where are the jobs 
during a boom? They don’t say that any more. Then they start 
saying, where are the people during the boom? Well they don’t 
say that any more. Now what do they say, Mr. Speaker? Now 
what do they complain about? Now what do they say? Well 
they say the economic fiscal picture that we built, the economic 
strength of this province they say is now not sustainable. It’s 
not sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well that’s not what the chartered banks are saying. No, no, no. 
It’s not, Mr. Speaker, what realtors are saying. It’s not what 
contractors are saying. Mr. Speaker, it’s what they’re saying. 
And you know why? Because that’s the only thing left they 
have to say. They’ve got nothing else to say except that the 
work of the people of Saskatchewan . . . the work of a New 
Democratic Party government now is not sustainable. That’s all 
they can say. 
 
They don’t welcome this budget, Mr. Speaker, because it is 
sustained by and built upon a green and a prosperous economy 
they could never build, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you and all 
members, their opposition to this budget is about something 
much deeper, Mr. Speaker. They oppose this budget because, 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does not reflect their values. This 
budget does not reflect their values. It does not reflect the 

values of the Saskatchewan Party. It reflects the values of the 
New Democratic Party. That’s why they’re so opposed, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why they’re so opposed — make no mistake 
about it. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is a fundamental value of the 
New Democratic Party that you cannot build social progress 
without economic progress. But, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, 
when that economic progress is achieved, it should result in 
progress for people. It should result in progress for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is a fundamental value of the New 
Democratic Party that economic progress must seek to leave no 
one behind. It is a fundamental value of this party and this party 
in government that economic progress should be shared with 
the many and not just the few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cannington chirps away from 
his seat. I think he had a chance to speak in this debate. I don’t 
know if he did or not. The member from Cannington knows 
well the philosophy of the Saskatchewan Party and the 
Conservative Party and the Liberals that joined up over there 
and the reformers and the alliance that have all come together. 
And I tell you why they’re opposing this budget. It is because, 
Mr. Speaker, it so fundamentally offends their values and so 
fundamentally represents the values of the New Democratic 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a budget which says economic prosperity should be shared 
among the many not just the few, that economic prosperity 
should seek to build equality and community. These are not the 
values of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now I note this, Mr. Speaker. I note this. And maybe the 
member from Arm River would want to respond to this. Mr. 
Speaker. I note this with great interest. When this New 
Democratic Party government is cutting the taxes, when we’re 
cutting the taxes and the royalty rates to encourage economic 
progress in our province, do they raise any question about the 
sustainability of that? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 
Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker . . . And again when we cut the 
income taxes, when we cut the taxes on the education portion 
for farm land, even when we cut the PST they don’t, they don’t 
stand up and question sustainability. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just as soon, just as soon as we invest $100 
million in our inner cities and northern communities, in families 
there, they start questioning sustainability. Just as soon — as 
this budget does — we start to pave roads to reserves or partner 
with SIIT in the training of young Aboriginal people, just as 
soon as we do that, they start to question; they start to oppose. 
And just as we start investing in our young people with training 
spaces by the thousands — 2,100 more this year, 5,000 last year 
— just as soon as we do that they start shouting from their seats 
in opposition. Just as soon, Mr. Speaker, as we unveil in this 
province a bold, imaginative program to encourage our young 
people to build their careers here and to encourage young 
people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would just ask the member for 
Cannington to allow the Premier, who has got the floor, to 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

continue with his remarks. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just as soon as 
we unveil this kind of bold approach for our young people, just 
as soon as we want to reward the young people of this province 
for their commitment to a future here, what do they do? They 
say it can’t be done. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I have asked the member for 
Cannington to stop the interruption, the consistent and ongoing 
interruptions, and consider the difference between interruptions 
and a brilliant heckle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And I’ll ask all members to come to order and 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware it’s not wise or 
good to reflect on Speakers’ rulings, but I’ve never heard a 
brilliant heckle yet from that opposition. We’ll wait a long time. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, I go back to it. You see if a budget that 
takes economic progress and takes that economic progress to 
put it in the hands of people reflects your values, you’d vote for 
this budget. But just as soon as we start taking the prosperity 
that we’ve built and start lending it to families and to young 
people in bold, new initiatives, what happens? They say it’s not 
sustainable. They say it can’t be done. We can cut taxes and 
they say nothing about sustainability, but as soon as you want to 
start doing something for people, they say it can’t be done; it’s 
not sustainable. 
 
And get this, Mr. Speaker, now what they say is that we should 
not take the dividends that belong to the motorists of 
Saskatchewan in their Auto Fund, that we should not take those 
dividends and return them to the people of Saskatchewan and 
return them to the drivers. They say that shouldn’t be done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They want to, I guess, hold that money in some account that 
they think some day they could get their hands on like their 
federal friends do with the employment insurance program in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, they 
don’t want their rates to go down either. They don’t the rates 
. . . You know why? Because, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t reflect 
their values. They don’t believe in public Crown enterprise. 
They don’t believe in a public Auto Fund here that keeps rates 
going down — frozen and then going down — and returns 
dividends to motorists. 
 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, the most telltale of all perhaps. 
Just as soon as we start providing health benefits to vulnerable 
workers, just as soon as we raise the minimum wage, just as 
soon as we begin to provide new and improved benefits for our 
neighbours in need, and just as soon as we unveil a universal 
drug plan for the seniors and elders of this province, they start 
screaming sustainability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this budget debate, Mr. 
Speaker, this budget debate it’s not just a question of 

economics. This is a debate about fundamental values, Mr. 
Speaker. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, the universal seniors’ drug 
plan unveiled in this budget is the best example of all, of where 
our fundamental values as Sask Party right wingers and New 
Democrats differ. It is maybe right here where the difference is 
so obvious and so stark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have unveiled for the seniors and elders of our 
province a drug plan that will enable them to travel to the 
pharmacy and to take from those formulary prescriptions any 
prescription that has been provided by their physician at no 
more than $15 per prescription. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke, I spoke to a senior 
couple in Saskatoon who had done the numbers on their own 
prescriptions. This has the potential to save that senior couple 
$916 in the course of a year. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you 
know what they say? As soon as we unveil a universal seniors’ 
drug plan for our seniors and elders, you know what they say? 
You know what the member from Cannington says? He says we 
should get rid of it. He says, give us government and we’ll get 
rid of it. They say we shouldn’t do it. 
 
You know what they say? They say it should be income tested 
— income tested. He just said it from his seat. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have news for the member of Cannington and the 
member of Arm River, the member of Weyburn. I have news 
for them. We have, we have an income test in this province. It’s 
called income tax, Mr. Speaker. We have an income test in this 
province so those of us who have much and more can contribute 
more greatly to the community. We have an income test. It 
applies to our seniors. 
 
What they want to do, Mr. Speaker, is put an income test on 
health benefits. That’s their value. That’s not a value of the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this party, this party fundamentally believes there 
should be no income test at the admission desk in our hospitals. 
There should be no income test at a doctor’s office, Mr. 
Speaker. And as we have been able to do, now no income test 
for our seniors and elders at the pharmacy counter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s the value of the New Democratic 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we New Democrats believe 
that as far as we are able, no senior in our province should have 
to make the decision between a prescription medicine and a 
healthy diet, that no senior in this province, Mr. Speaker, should 
have to make a decision about which of the prescriptions 
they’re going to fill this month. And no senior in our province, 
as best as we are able, should have to make the decision 
between a prescription or a small gift for the grandchild. Mr. 
Speaker, these are the values of the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party. The Sask Party says they’ll throw the plan 
out because, Mr. Speaker, it’s not in their value system. 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

This is a debate about values as much as it is a debate about 
economics. We believe that the prosperity we have built must 
be shared with the many and not just the few. We believe that 
the families of Saskatchewan, the seniors of Saskatchewan, the 
young people of Saskatchewan, the Aboriginal and First 
Nations and Métis peoples of Saskatchewan, the newest 
newcomer among us should share in the prosperity we have 
built. The Saskatchewan Party opposite obviously does not 
share that value, and the Leader of the Opposition made it very 
clear this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the headlines had it right: this budget is bold and it 
is broad. Get this, Mr. Speaker, in the last four years, we have 
now paid down from that Devine deficit virtually $1 billion in 
debt in four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have lowered the 
income tax and simplified it. We have lowered sales tax, the 
narrowest base in Canada at a rate now which provides for 
Saskatchewan families under sales tax much less than they 
would pay in health-care-premium Alberta. We have 
dramatically lowered the education portion of property tax on 
our farm lands. We’ve been able through this budget to 
announce a 10 per cent reduction in education tax on property, 
business, and residential for everyone in the province. We’ve 
changed our royalty structures. We changed our business 
taxation to encourage economic growth. 
 
We’re building a future transportation network for the families 
of Saskatchewan. We’re investing in community facilities, in 
new hospitals, in new schools, and we’re investing in our 
neighbourhoods of need, Mr. Speaker — and something they 
would never do, investing in our neighbourhoods of need. 
 
We’re investing in our young and we are investing in our old. 
We’re standing with, partners with our First Nations and Métis 
peoples in new and innovative ways. We’re investing in the 
safety of our neighbourhoods. We’re investing in the future of 
our autistic children in this province. We are investing through 
Project Hope in lives that are being destroyed by addictions. 
We’re investing in vulnerable workers, so many of them 
women, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re investing in a green and a prosperous economy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. I so look forward to the 
days and weeks ahead during the month of April when this 
government will unveil our green strategy and we will unveil 
our climate change strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re investing in people. We are investing the prosperity we 
have built into the families of the young people of 
Saskatchewan because that’s our value, Mr. Speaker, that’s our 
value. These are not the values reflected by the Saskatchewan 
Party and we’ll see it in moments, because if you vote for this 
budget you’re voting for the value that says, economic 
prosperity should be shared. If you vote against it, you’re 
saying economic prosperity should be confined to the few and 
not the many. Let us see how the vote is conducted here later, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now before I take my place I want to speak to one other value, 

one other value that is reflected in the budget of the New 
Democratic Party in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s not very 
often — in fact it may be unique, it’s certainly rare — that the 
people of Saskatchewan are delivered on one week two 
budgets, a federal budget and a provincial budget. And in the 
comparison of those budgets, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
fundamental value difference, a fundamental value difference, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us just set aside for a moment the fairness of 
Saskatchewan’s case in terms of equalization and a fair 
equalization formula. Let us just set that argument to one side. 
Let us just set aside for a moment the fundamental unfairness of 
millions and billions of dollars going to support to our nearest 
neighbours next year, and we’re going to get zero next year. 
Let’s set that aside. Let us just set aside for a moment the fact 
that we have a federal government that will be extracting from 
the province of Saskatchewan resources to pay for their own 
political future in Ontario and Quebec. Let us just set that aside. 
 
And let us just even for a moment set aside the fact that we 
have an opposition over here in the Saskatchewan Party so deep 
in the hip pocket of this federal Conservative Party in Ottawa 
that they won’t even stand up outside the House — never mind 
in the House — and call upon their own friends, the 12 
Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament], to vote against the 
budget that punishes the people of Saskatchewan. Let’s just set 
that aside. 
 
Let us just ask the fundamental question, let us ask the 
fundamental question of the federal budget: did the Prime 
Minister of Canada and his 12 Conservative MPs from 
Saskatchewan keep their promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan for the full exclusion of 100 per cent of our 
resource revenues? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. Mr. 
Speaker, did that Prime Minister and his 12 Conservative MPs 
from Saskatchewan keep the promise they made to the people 
of Newfoundland and Labrador? The people of Nova Scotia? 
The people of British Columbia? The people of Alberta? The 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 
 
Did the Prime Minister of Canada and his 12 MPs, close friends 
of the folks opposite, keep their promise to the income trust 
holders of Saskatchewan? No. Did this Prime Minister and his 
12 Conservative Party MPs keep his promise to the police 
forces of Canada, a promise that said he was going to put 2,500 
new officers on the street and not one has appeared since they 
became government? And now the police services of Canada 
are having to raise the issue publicly. Have they kept their 
promise there? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, have they kept their promise to the 
Aboriginal peoples of Canada, a promise that said they would 
adhere to the principles of the Kelowna accord and move 
forward? Have they kept their promise to the First Nations and 
Métis people of Saskatchewan? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So here is the fundamental question. Here is the fundamental 
question, a question of the Stephen Harper Conservatives, the 
Sask Party conservatives — neither of whom are Progressive 
Conservatives — here is the question, Mr. Speaker. Can you 
trust any promise that a Stephen Harper Conservative or a Sask 
Party conservative will make? The answer also is no, Mr. 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

Speaker, and here is the value difference. Here is the value 
difference: a budget delivered by the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party of government that keeps its promises to the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A promise, Mr. Speaker, made in the last 
election that we would build a green and prosperous economy, 
Mr. Speaker. Today’s economy, today’s economy hardly even 
reflective of the economy we inherited about four or five years 
ago, Mr. Speaker — an economy that is booming on all fronts, 
Mr. Speaker, providing career opportunities for our young 
people, drawing people to Saskatchewan from around the 
country, an economy that is sustaining this budget that is a 
budget for people. We made a promise. We’ll keep that 
promise. We made a promise, Mr. Speaker, to make life better 
for Saskatchewan families. We made that promise, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We made a promise to encourage our young people to build 
their futures here, Mr. Speaker. We made a promise that we 
would seek a world and a province where no one is being left 
behind in a period of economic prosperity. Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget, a future for our young people; in this budget, a 
universal seniors’ drug plan; in this budget, the tools to retain 
and build the economic prosperity which is sustaining this 
budget. This is the difference: New Democrats — promises 
made, promises kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget which 
seeks to build a future for the people of Saskatchewan — a 
future for our people whether they be young or whether they be 
old; whether they be First Nation or Métis or the sons and the 
daughters, the grandsons and granddaughters of immigrants; or 
whether they be the newest immigrant family coming to our 
province from Calgary or from Kowloon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is our vision and our value that in this bright future for this 
great province, the prosperity that we are building will be 
shared not just with the few, Mr. Speaker, not just with the few, 
but with all, Mr. Speaker. That’s the value of the New 
Democratic Party. It’s the value of this government, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I submit it is the value of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And that’s what makes Saskatchewan 
stand tall in this Confederation of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the test will come. The test will come in just 
moments. In just moments we will be called upon in this 
legislature to vote. And we will see, we will see if this 
Saskatchewan Party conservative operation across the way 
votes against fully funding CAIS, votes against an imaginative, 
bold program for our young people. We’ll see. 
 
Will they stand in this House today and vote against a universal 
seniors’ drug plan, Mr. Speaker? Because I can tell you this: on 

this side of the House, this caucus and this leader will be voting 
for the people of Saskatchewan. We will be voting for a budget 
of values, a budget for the future. A budget, Mr. Speaker, that 
makes life better for Saskatchewan families and builds a better 
future for our youth right here at home in the great province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It is my duty pursuant to rule 52(3) to 
advise the Assembly that the Hon. Minister of Finance is about 
to exercise his right to close the debate and afterwards all 
members will be precluded from speaking to this question. 
Therefore if any member wishes to speak, let him or her do so 
now. Notwithstanding anything else contained here, according 
to rule 28(5) the mover of the budget motion shall have, in no 
case, any more than 20 minutes in which to close the debate. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed my pleasure to rise today to close this budget debate 
in the Assembly as we proceed to the vote. I was particularly 
pleased on March 22 to deliver the provincial budget, a budget 
that, as the Premier has clearly outlined, speaks to the values 
not only of the New Democratic Party but the values of 
Saskatchewan people. This is a budget that will make life better 
for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Our NDP government has outlined that in our budget plan that 
we will make life better by capping seniors’ prescription drug 
costs at no more than $15 per prescription. We have said that 
we will create a new program where graduating post-secondary 
students will pay no provincial income tax on the first 20,000 
they earn in each of the first five years after graduation. 
 
We have committed 20-some million dollars to freeze 
university tuition fees this year again at the 2004 levels. We 
have added 24 per cent increase in seats — 2,100 new seats in 
this budget alone — at our training institutions to help young 
people. We have cut business taxes so that we can help 
businesses expand and create more opportunities for young 
people. We funded our largest capital budget to improve the 
roads and the highways, our schools and our hospitals and our 
other community infrastructure. And we have provided a PST 
rate in this budget which is at its lowest rate in 20 years and is 
the lowest sales tax outside the province of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, these 
initiatives are only a few of the many highlights of this budget 
that will indeed make life better for Saskatchewan families. I 
haven’t mentioned the fact that there’s new money for literacy, 
new money for licensed child care spaces, new money to 
increase access to health care, new money for our municipalities 
in this budget. Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on about 
how every one of these initiatives makes life better for 
Saskatchewan families. This budget does many good things. 
 
What I find amazing, as I have listened to this debate in this 
Assembly during these last six days, is how it is that the 
opposition Saskatchewan Party can still — in the light of all 
these initiatives— find something to complain about. It amazes 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

me the depth that they will sink to in misrepresenting what this 
budget plan outlines. 
 
It’s interesting that the first thing that these opposition members 
said on standing up is that the budget was not sustainable. And 
even more spurious is they went out and said that we would 
borrow money to balance the books. This is completely, 
completely false, completely false, and the members opposite 
know that. 
 
It’s a far cry, interestingly, from where the Finance critic was 
just a few months ago when he went on every radio station and 
every TV station he could find, went into the newspapers and 
said what? He said we’re “sitting on a mountain of money.” 
“Sitting on a mountain of money,” he said. That was the 
position of the Sask Party but a few months ago. So what is it 
that has changed from that position of just a few months ago to 
the position of that Sask Party today? 
 
I think it’s very interesting that they forget to mention that it 
was this NDP government that cash financed the stabilization 
fund. We took $1 billion in cash and put it into a savings 
account so that we could draw it down in future years to 
backfill the tax cuts that we made. As such — now the members 
opposite will be particularly interested in this — withdrawals 
from this fund do not impact our debt position because we are 
taking cash out of a savings account. And you can tell John 
Gormley that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to say very simply, we built up 
that savings account under much criticism from the members 
opposite because we knew, we knew that in order to backfill the 
tax cuts that we needed to provide for Saskatchewan people to 
get this economy growing, that we could not provide those 
without cutting social programs unless we had the money in the 
bank. 
 
And so last year and the year before, we made a concerted 
effort to put cash in that bank account so that we can backfill 
those tax cuts, so that we can continue to provide the social 
programs that we have. 
 
And you know what’s very interesting in terms of those tax 
cuts, Mr. Speaker? In the last year alone, we have been able to 
provide more than half a billion dollars — half a billion dollars 
— in tax cuts for Saskatchewan families and businesses to 
create more jobs and more opportunities for young people. And 
this budget builds on that commitment for growth. 
 
It’s also interesting to note that under this Premier’s leadership, 
since we were elected in 2003, we have paid off $1 billion in 
debt — $1 billion worth of debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Now the members opposite don’t make 
much of that, but it is $1 billion in cash that has been 
transferred to pay down our overall debt. Fiscal prudence is the 
hallmark of this NDP administration, and it’s evidenced by the 
fact that after the last budget, which they said was 
unsustainable, after the last budget we received our 14th, 15th, 

and 16th credit rating upgrades, giving us a credit rating that’s 
equal to the province of Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the banks agree with us. 
And I want to read into the record what some of the bankers 
have been saying and what Bay Street’s been saying about our 
balanced budget. The Bank of Montreal says, and I’m quoting: 
 

The Province of Saskatchewan is projecting its 14th 
consecutive balanced budget for . . . [2008]. The $75 
million surplus in the General Revenue Fund follows an 
estimated $70 million balance in 2006-07. 

 
The current year’s surplus is larger than the 5 million estimated 
in the third quarter. And on balance, the province continues to 
earn — now the opposition will particularly like this, this is the 
Bank of Montreal: 
 

On balance, the province continues to earn top marks for 
its commitment to cutting taxes, keeping spending in 
check, but not to the point of ignoring important outlays, 
and maintaining a fiscal cushion . . . 

 
What does the Scotia Bank say? Maybe they don’t bank at the 
Bank of Montreal, maybe they don’t believe them. What does 
Scotia Bank say? Mr. Speaker, Scotia Bank says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s mid-term outlet remains upbeat, with 
buoyant demand for its key resources, including grain, 
given the recent upswing in U.S. and Canadian 
grain-based ethanol production targets. Following upward 
revisions to provincial revenues through FY07, the 
Province’s revenue forecasts for FY08 may prove 
conservative . . . 

 
Hardly the dire picture that the members of the opposition 
would paint. What is it the Laurentian Bank say, Mr. Speaker? 
Well if they don’t like the Scotia Bank and they don’t like the 
Bank of Montreal, what does the Laurentian Bank say? It says, 
quote: 
 

The new fiscal measures [contained] in the budget are 
necessarily modest but nevertheless smartly crafted, 
particularly in light of the province’s need to maintain a 
“competitive tax structure” . . . 

 
These are but a sampling of what Canada’s chartered banks 
have to say about how we are handling the province’s finances 
on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now the opposition has been running around this province all 
over the place, telling anyone that’ll listen that the budget is not 
sustainable. But the banks don’t agree. And I will tell you this, 
Mr. Speaker. I will take the word of the chartered banks of this 
country above the graduates of the Grant Devine school of 
economics any day of the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — So, Mr. Speaker, let’s for a second 
believe . . . Let’s just accept that they actually believe their own 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

rhetoric. Let’s accept that they believe their own rhetoric that 
the budget’s not sustainable. I thought I’d give them the benefit 
of the doubt and I listened to their speeches. And what is it that 
they said? They went on and they said, you know what? The 
budget’s not sustainable. The government’s got a spending 
problem. 
 
Now I’ve gone through their speeches and I thought it was very 
interesting what they propose. Now you would think that if they 
believed in all honesty that the province was running a $700 
million deficit, they would be out there trying to cut spending 
left and right — mostly right. You could be almost certain that 
this is what a party that believes in — what is it their leader 
calls it? — fiscal probity, that this fiscal probity party over there 
would be out saying here’s the ways to get rid of this program. 
Cut this. Cut that. Do they say that? Well amazingly they don’t 
say anything of the nature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every single member that stood to speak said, what do they 
need to do? Cut more taxes. Obviously if you’ve got a spending 
problem, the first thing you’d want to do is cut your revenue, 
right? Well this is what the members of the opposition seem to 
think. Let’s cut the revenue. 
 
So that’s not good enough. They didn’t stop there. They got up 
and they said we need the government to spend not less money, 
more money. Spend more money. So the opposition says there’s 
a spending problem. It turns out the spending problem is we’re 
not spending enough. That’s the logic of the Sask Party, fiscal 
probity party, the fiscal probity party over there. 
 
What is it they called for? And I could go through the list of . . . 
Just on highways alone, almost $600 million worth of new 
spending this year alone they want on highways. We’ve 
budgeted 433 million because that is what we can afford, Mr. 
Speaker. And I could go on and on about the highways number. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about health because, when they talk 
about health, they also suggested that the problem was a 
spending problem. But what is the problem? We need to do 
more spending. Despite the fact that we’ve invested $3.45 
billion in the health budget this year, member after member 
over there called for more spending on health care — 
unbelievable that this is what we get from the quote, “fiscal 
probity party.” That the Sask Party leader would even pretend 
to know anything about fiscal probity, let alone be in a position 
to lecture this Assembly on it, I think is a true embarrassment 
and a betrayal of his true roots. 
 
The opposition has provided in this budget debate no credible 
alternative. In fact, in fact what we heard today from the Leader 
of the Opposition was an attack on the tax cuts that we’ve 
actually introduced that they used to call for — unbelievable 
that they are now calling and attacking the tax cuts that we’ve 
undertaken, tax cuts that the Finance critic said just a few 
months ago were sustainable. So why is it that, when they fall 
back and say we’ve got a spending problem, that what it is that 
they’re now calling for is deeper tax cuts on property and more 
spending in health care, more spending on highways, more 
spending in education, more spending in agriculture. How can 
that be a credible position for a so-called government in waiting 
of a quote “fiscal probity party.” 
 

[16:15] 
 
And what is it . . . Now they’re not entirely, not entirely without 
having identified cuts. In fact what was the very first thing they 
said that they would cut? The very first thing that they said they 
would cut is health care. The only cuts they have been able to 
identify in this budget is a cut to health care which I think is 
amazing. They are saying that in a $3.45 billion budget that we 
cannot afford $35 million to cap the prescription drug costs for 
seniors. They say that in a $3.45 billion budget there’s no 
money that could be found to provide cheaper drugs for our 
seniors. That is an amazing, an amazing position from the 
members opposite. 
 
But what is it they did manage to find? Because they want to 
cut back on the drug plan but instead they are prepared to go 
and hire more health care workers. Well it was a very 
interesting type of health care worker they wanted to hire. The 
first thing that they said they would hire is more auditors. It 
turns out the Sask Party thinks the prescription to the problems 
in health care is more auditors. Well I am just overjoyed that at 
some point they’ll be going out to people and saying — you 
know what? — your medical decisions are between you and 
your doctor and a Sask Party-appointed auditor if that party 
ever forms a government because that is what they’re going to 
do. 
 
Now I have some questions about these auditors. Who are they 
auditing? Are they going to be auditing the patients to see 
whether they’re overusing the system? Are they going to go 
through the doctors’ records and see what they’re prescribing? 
Are they going to go through and see what the nurses are 
doing? Are there too many nurses on the wards? What are these 
auditors going to do, and when on earth did auditors become 
health care professionals that we should be funding through the 
medicare budget? 
 
I also thought it was interesting, when it came to the graduate 
tax credit, that they attacked it. They attacked the graduate tax 
credit, saying instead what they wanted was a tuition rebate 
program. Interestingly the program that they would provide 
would give lawyers a greater benefit than welders. Their 
solution, their solution to a labour shortage is to provide a 
bigger benefit to white-collar workers than to the skilled 
tradespeople that the province’s economy actually needs. 
 
How disconnected from the reality of what’s going on in the 
provincial economy can the Sask Party be than to have this 
distorted view where they would rather give lawyers a bigger 
tax break than the welders and the apprentices and the skilled 
tradespeople that are actually driving economic growth in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on 
outlining the hypocrisy and the lack of credibility of the Sask 
Party that claims to present a credible alternative. Let me 
simply say this. Their position is incredible. And while we have 
listened to the Sask Party try to speak out for fiscal probity — a 
notion that, frankly, is far removed from his own track record 
when he was last in the government — all I can conclude is this 
must have been one of those learnings, one of those learnings 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

that the Leader of the Opposition had when he said it was an 
attribute to have been part of a government that was described 
as the most corrupt administration in Canadian history. Well 
that’s something to be proud about. And I guess if that’s the 
only learning he came away from, that member’s got a lot more 
learning to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. We 
cannot afford the Sask Party plan that calls for lower taxes and 
more and more and more spending. We cannot afford a plan 
that the Sask Party presents that calls for auditors to be hired at 
the expense of health care professionals. We cannot afford a 
plan that calls for more tax breaks for lawyers than welders. We 
cannot support a plan that calls for, as the Finance critic who’s 
chirping from his seat right now, called for us to raid the Auto 
Fund — break the law, raid the Auto Fund — to bring the 
money over into the GRF. 
 
We cannot afford an opposition that will have its leader stand 
up and denigrate his own constituents, denigrate his own 
constituents as he did this afternoon by saying they don’t 
understand the difference between summary financials and the 
GRF. We cannot afford the plan that has been outlined by the 
members opposite. 
 
And let me just ask you this. Is there any greater spectacle than 
the debacle that they have showed in the face of their 
constituents who came here protesting school closures? And 
their only solution, their only solution was to repackage, 
repackage an existing plan and then suggest, suggest that it 
would have a different outcome — a shocking, shocking 
position on the part of the opposition. And I think it really does 
speak to how shameless their pandering has become in a 
calculated political move to get votes. 
 
I find it amazing that they are arguing we can’t afford 35 
million for a drug plan in a $3.45 billion health budget. I find it 
interesting they’re calling for more tax cuts for the wealthiest 
landowners but won’t support a tax cut for recent graduates. It 
is clear that those members opposite will say anything to get 
elected, and they will promise anything to get a vote. 
 
Well here’s the rub, Mr. Speaker. They have now said that the 
current spending cannot be afforded. We disagree, the banks 
disagree, and the public disagrees. The plan that we have 
outlined is balanced in its long-term vision, and this plan will 
make life better for Saskatchewan families in the long run. 
 
If Saskatchewan people want to pursue a different path as is 
outlined by the opposition and if the voters agree with that and 
elect them, let me make this very clear: you cannot have the 
NDP cake and Sask Party icing. The choice is clear. 
 
A change in direction will require cuts to existing programs or 
increases in existing taxes. The programs we’ve outlined in this 
budget are balanced, and they are affordable, and they are 
sustainable, and they fully commit this province to making life 
better — through the PST cut, through the business . . . 
[inaudible] . . . cut, through the largest road building budget in 
the history of the province, the biggest health care budget in the 
province’s history, and through new programs like the graduate 

tax credit and the new $15 cap on prescription drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say this: this budget makes life better for 
Saskatchewan families. It deserves the support of the 
Saskatchewan legislature as it already has the support of 
Saskatchewan people in our common effort to make sure this 
place remains the best province in Canada to live, work, and 
raise a family. And I would encourage the Sask Party to stand 
up for Saskatchewan people and vote for this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The debate on the 
budget has now come to a close. 
 
There are two questions before the House. The first is the 
motion by the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina 
South, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the Government, 

 
And the amendment to the main motion, made by the member 
for Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the member for 
Martensville: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 

 
condemn the government for plunging the province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 
addressing the most pressing needs of the Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
We will first vote on the amendment to the main motion. The 
amendment once again is the motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs and seconded by the member for 
Martensville: 
 

That the words after “the Assembly” be deleted and the 
following added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging the province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 
addressing the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the amendment, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:25 until 16:27.] 
 



April 2, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

The Speaker: — Order, please. The question before the 
Assembly is the amendment to the main motion moved by the 
member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the member 
from Martensville: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging the province into a 
deficit without creating a real growth agenda or addressing 
the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 
Would those in favour of the amendment please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kerpan 
Kirsch Brkich Morgan 
Merriman Heppner Duncan 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment please 
rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 27; 
those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. The remaining 
question before the Assembly is the motion moved by the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Regina South, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Those in 
favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe that ayes have it. Call in the 

members for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:30 until 16:31.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Regina South, the Minister of 
Finance, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Those opposed to the motion please 
rise. 
 

[Nays — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kerpan 
Kirsch Brkich Morgan 
Merriman Heppner Duncan 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 28, those 
opposed, 27. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the Human Services Committee, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2007 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:32.] 
 



 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1115 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1116 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1117 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1117 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1118 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1119 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1119 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1119 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2007 Juno Awards in Saskatoon 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1119 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
 Women of Strength and Distinction Banquet 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
 Retirement Roast for Rosetown-Elrose Member 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1120 
 North Saskatoon Business Association Business Builder Awards 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
 National Aboriginal Curling Championships 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
 Budget Vote 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1121 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1122 
 Police Investigation into a Community-based Organization 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1123 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1123 
 Disaster Relief Program 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1124 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1125 
 Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1126 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1126 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 57 —The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  



 

 Bill No. 58 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1127 
 Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
 Recorded division (amendment)................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Recorded Division (motion) .......................................................................................................................................................1145 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


