


















































Hansard: May 16, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 63A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 16, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1643 
 May 16, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again today to present petitions on behalf of residents 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And I know people are 
becoming more angered with the lack of leadership from this 
government. And in particular we have the issue of dialysis in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer regarding 
a request for a dialysis unit into the community of Broadview: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present this afternoon are signed by 
folks from the communities of Broadview, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Whitewood, Grayson, Virden; Burlington, Ontario; Elkhorn, 
Grenfell, Cowessess, Kahkewistahaw, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I have yet 
another petition signed by people who want the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. Mr. 
Speaker, they are concerned that if the office closes, the citizens 
of Rosetown and surrounding communities will not have a 
personal contact with SaskPower representatives. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from 
Rosetown, Spiritwood, and Ponteix. And I’m pleased to present 
it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are concerned about the Estevan campus of 
the Southeast Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present hundreds of signatures on a petition from the citizens of 
Biggar concerned about possible reductions of the health care 
services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek, Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek, Willowgrove. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures come today from northeast Saskatoon, from 
Chotem Crescent, Kucey Crescent, Beckett Crescent, and Peters 
Cove. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the South that are very 
concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre would cause undue hardships, 
especially to seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Lafleche. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are concerned with the 
potential health problems in the area and the lack of recruitment 
and retention of our doctors in the area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all signatures on the petition are from the good 
community of Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan and 
other places, Mr. Speaker, who are concerned about people who 
are involved in motor accidents and are not tested for drug or 
alcohol testing when they have caused a major accident. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug- and alcohol-level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Calgary, Beiseker, 
Saskatoon, and other communities in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition that is concerned with the current road 
ban on Highway 225 from Highway 2 to Batoche, and on 
Highway 320 from Highway 2 to Highway 20 and that it’s 
causing extreme hardship to farmers and business people in the 
area and has the potential for economic disaster. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action immediately and address serious concerns of the 
people affected by these road restrictions. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Domremy, 
Yellow Creek, Wakaw, and Bellevue. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present yet another series of petitions calling for mandatory 
drug and alcohol testing following motor vehicle accidents. 
These petitions are signed by citizens from many places across 
this province and also out of province. I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug- and alcohol-level 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition runs many hundreds of pages long 
and signatures from throughout the province. I’m pleased to 
present on behalf of those citizens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today 
whereas a citizen of the province of Saskatchewan was killed in 
a motor vehicle accident in September 2005 in Saskatoon while 
stopped at a red light, whereas the citizen was struck from 
behind by another vehicle and drug- and alcohol-level testing 
was not administered. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the public is protected 
from operators of motor vehicles who are involved in an 
accident causing injury or fatality, and that those operators 
be required to undergo mandatory drug and alcohol 
testing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From various communities including Humboldt, Saskatoon, and 
Calgary. I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition calling on the 
government to fix a very important highway in my 
constituency. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Coronach, 
Fife Lake, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Willow Bunch, and Big 
Beaver. And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to present the second report of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, which I will now 
table. Mr. Speaker, the legislature’s Committee on Public 
Accounts has had a busy year. We think we have a rather 
substantial report to table. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to thank the many people 
involved in not only the preparation of the report but the work 
that goes behind it — my colleagues on the committee on both 
sides of the House. I want to thank the Clerk, Ms. Woods, who 
did an excellent job of guiding the committee and providing 
professional advice to us. I also want to thank the Provincial 
Auditor and his staff, who attended the majority of our meetings 
and was an integral part of the work of the committee, as well 
as the comptrollers from the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the recommendations that the committee 
dealt with were agreed upon unanimously. These were 
recommendations by the Provincial Auditor. Most of them were 
concurred in. Mr. Speaker, the odd one, there was some 
disagreement and refusal to concur, but the majority of the work 
was done in a very co-operative spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were some repetitive problems — some 
departments that seemed that they cannot solve some of the 
problems that keep reoccurring, and that is a concern to our 
committee. It’s an issue that we’ve continued to raise after it’s 
been pointed out by the Provincial Auditor. Some of those 
departments include Community Resources, Employment, 
Environment, Indian affairs and Métis Relations, Liquor and 
Gaming, Northern Affairs. And we sensed that there was a real 
desire amongst everyone involved to solve the problems, but it 
does concern us that they keep reoccurring. 
 

I want to take this opportunity, which may be my last 
intervention on the floor of this House, to thank the many 
people that I’ve worked with. We don’t know when the election 
is going to be called, but if it’s called before this House 
reconvenes, I want to take this last opportunity to thank my 
many colleagues in the House that I’ve had the opportunity to 
work with. I want to thank my family again publicly for the 
support they’ve provided; my constituency assistant, Tammy 
Danychuk, who has taken care of things back in 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to move, seconded by the 
member for Regina Rosemont: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose, seconded by the member for Regina 
Rosemont, that the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts be now concurred in. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my great pleasure this afternoon to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the House a group of 
very community-minded men and women who are today seated 
in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, they are here today at the 
legislature to participate in a very special signing, a ceremony 
that will occur later this afternoon, which marks, Mr. Speaker, 
another Saskatchewan first. Today YouthBuild Saskatchewan 
officially becomes the first Canadian affiliate of YouthBuild 
International. 
 
Mr. Speaker, YouthBuild is a non-profit organization dedicated 
to helping young people ages 18 to 30 who face barriers to 
employment, to help them to continue their education while 
gaining valuable work experience. YouthBuild is dedicated to 
building lives and rebuilding communities while building 
affordable homes for families. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to all members 
those who are in the gallery now who later will be participating 
in the signing ceremony. Some are to join us, I believe, a little 
later. But I will want to welcome and have all members 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

welcome, first of all, Peter Twichell, senior program director of 
YouthBuild International — if Peter could give us a wave. 
Mayor Rod Haugerud of Craik, who is the executive director of 
YouthBuild Saskatchewan. Doug Morrison, who will not be 
here, who is from Advantage Employment Co-operative, who is 
not here yet but will be later. Todd Myhre, Advantage 
Employment Co-operative; Dave Earl, YouthBuild 
Saskatchewan; Lori Lovas, YouthBuild Regina; James 
Kirkland, YouthBuild Saskatoon; and from YouthBuild partner 
Greenough and Associates, Sandra Greenough, Brian Gordon, 
Dorothea Schrader, Michele Huszar, and Breanna Kinna. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these people and 
wish them well in YouthBuild Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is also my 
delight to welcome to the Assembly this afternoon, again seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ken Winton-Grey. Ken 
Winton-Grey is a health care worker in our province, a 
technologist in sleep disorders at Royal University Hospital. 
He’s very active in his union, the service employees union. 
And, Mr. Speaker, he is now a nominated candidate for the 
New Democratic Party and the next member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last night the Swift 
Current business community honoured its top businesses of the 
year at the ninth annual Swift Current Business Excellence 
Awards. I was fortunate to have the opportunity to attend last 
night’s banquet where there was approximately 250 people at 
the Legion Hall in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business people of Swift Current take much 
pride in their work, and it’s evident in the fact that there were 
44 nominees in six different categories. 
 
The winners this year are Diamond Energy Services for 
community involvement. The Shaunavon Credit Union received 
the Southwest Award. The New Business Award went to TCBY 
& extraorDONAIR. South West Animal Services won the 
Customer Service Award. Wide Mouth Media was presented 
with the Young Entrepreneur Award. And finally, Mr. Speaker, 
the top award, the Business of the Year, was presented to 
long-time Swift Current business, T.S. Metals. 
 
Archie Green, a long-time volunteer, was named Citizen of the 
Year for his involvement in the community. And Golden West 
Radio was inducted into the Business Hall of Fame, as was 

Melhoff Electric. 
 
I’d also like to make special mention of another locally owned 
and operated Swift Current business, Mr. Speaker. On May 1, 
Southwest TV News received a 2006 Radio Television News 
Directors Association award in the Prairie region for the best 
use of new media. They’re an Internet-based news provider. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the winners and all those who were 
nominated as well as the Swift Current Chamber of Commerce 
who, year after year, put on a great event and do an excellent 
job of representing the Swift Current business community. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I, along with the Minister of 
Industry and Resources and a capacity crowd, had the pleasure 
of attending the Greater Saskatoon and District Chamber of 
Commerce 12th annual Celebrate Success Awards Gala. It was 
a great event, Mr. Speaker, reflecting the city’s excitement at 
the opportunities of the present and possibilities of the future. 
 
The winners of the 2007 SABEX [Saskatoon Achievement in 
Business Excellence] awards include: for new business venture, 
FIS Structural & Finishing Co.; in the growth and expansion 
category, Associated Engineering (Saskatchewan). The award 
for new product went to TinyEYE Technologies; for marketing, 
1-800-GOT-JUNK; for customer service, Cardwell Murphy. 
MD Ambulance Care won the award for community 
involvement. The Award of Innovation went to John Gordon 
and Fang Li of Western College of Veterinary Medicine. Myrna 
Bentley, CEO [chief executive officer] of Concentra Financial, 
received the ATHENA international award and the Business of 
the Year is Lafond Insurance & Financial Services. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, earlier this year the Yanke Group of 
Companies’ CEO, Russel Marcoux, was nominated for the 
SABEX Hall of Fame. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 2007 SABEX 
winners and nominees on their achievements, and in thanking 
them for their significant and ongoing contributions to the 
strength of the economies of both Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in the congratulations that he extended 
towards the SABEX awards winners in Saskatoon. I and my 
colleagues had the privilege of attending a capacity crowd at 
TCU Place. The size of the crowd, Mr. Speaker, was so large 
that I actually thought I was at a Sask Party event. 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

The significant inductees, Mr. Speaker, was Russ Marcoux, 
CEO of Yanke Group of Companies, was inducted into the 
SABEX Hall of Fame. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Marcoux is well 
known in this province and has been a great community leader. 
He thanked specifically his individual family members. He is 
one of 11 children and he had a number of his siblings there as 
well as his own children and many of his long-term employees, 
some of them that have been with his company for as long as 20 
years. He’s been enormously well respected in the business 
community, and during his brief remarks he paid a great deal of 
tribute to his family and his employees. And he’s one of the 
individuals that makes Saskatchewan a truly great place to do 
business. 
 
The Business of the Year was Lafond Insurance, which is 
owned by Lester Lafond. That business carries on in Saskatoon 
on the Muskeg Lake Cree Nation and Lester Lafond did a 
magnificent job of starting a new business and participating 
with Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal businesses. I wish to ask 
all members to join me in congratulating all winners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

2007 Award of Excellence in Nursing 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the 
outstanding contributions of a Saskatchewan resident who 
recently received the prestigious 2007 Award of Excellence in 
Nursing — an award given to only three Canadian nurses a 
year. 
 
Paula Stefankiw of Balgonie is a home care nurse for the 
Kawacatoose Health Centre. In winning the award, Mr. 
Speaker, Ms. Stefankiw said, “I’m no different than all the other 
nurses doing great work out there.” A humble statement from 
someone who has dedicated her career to helping people in 
need. 
 
Ms. Stefankiw was nominated by her peers for her care and 
treatment of people with diabetes — a health issue that has a 
profound effect on her community. 
 
To improve overall health in Kawacatoose, Ms. Stefankiw has 
started health and diabetes workshops, wellness clinics, and 
general information sessions. Her exemplary work makes a 
difference to many individuals each and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating Paula Stefankiw 
and offering best wishes in her continued commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan and to excellence in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

St. Angela’s Academy Closes 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it is with regret that I rise to 
speak of the closure of a long-standing educational 

establishment in the constituency of Cypress Hills. 
 
After 88 years of educating young women, St. Angela’s 
Academy in Prelate will be closing its doors on June 30. 
Founded in 1919 by three Sisters of the Ursuline order and a 
priest, the residential academy has seen more than 6,000 
students pass through its doors and the Sisters of the Ursuline 
order have been dedicated to providing instruction, guidance, 
and leadership, as well as financial assistance, to the school. 
 
St. Angela’s is a well-known academy in Saskatchewan and it’s 
known beyond the province as a centre for Christian education, 
with an emphasis on fine arts. 
 
For over 20 years the possibility of closure has loomed, but the 
executive director, Sister Rosetta Reiniger, has persistently 
persuaded the board to continue with the service. Unfortunately, 
as the age of the sisters who operate the school increases and 
the enrolment of the school drops, the decision to close the 
school doors was recently made. 
 
The announcement of the closure was difficult to take for the 
sisters, teachers, students, and community. The closure will also 
have a direct economic impact on the community of Prelate and 
area, as many teaching and support jobs will be lost. 
 
I wish to extend my thanks to the Sisters of the Ursuline order 
who have dedicated their lives to the goal of St. Angela’s 
Academy which is “Educating for Life,” teaching academics, 
study habits, Christian ethics, and homemaker skills. Their 
contributions have touched a great many people in our country 
and around the world, and for that we should all be grateful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Health Career Role Models for Northern Youth 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, five outstanding individuals 
from the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation were recently honoured 
as health career role models for northern youth. 
 
Betsy Ballantyne is from Pelican Narrows. As a mother of three 
children, she worked diligently to complete her certification in 
Saskatoon before accepting a position as a lab and X-ray 
technician at the Big River Health Centre. Bonita Beatty is from 
Deschambault Lake. She holds a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts], M.A. 
[Master of Arts], and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in political 
science. She specializes in First Nations governance and health 
policy development for the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations. She also teaches at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Shavonne Custer is a registered nurse from Pelican Narrows. 
She completed a northern health sciences access program and 
then attended the nursing education program in Saskatoon. 
Theresa Highway attended university in Alberta but chose to 
come home to Saskatchewan to take a posting at the Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon. Theresa works at the neonatal 
intensive care unit. Tom McDermott was raised at Denare 
Beach near Creighton. He played junior hockey for six years for 
the Flin Flon Bombers. He’s also a pilot. He’s now a primary 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

care paramedic for La Ronge Emergency Medical Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, posters will be distributed to northern schools to 
inspire our young people that they too can reach their dreams if 
they work hard. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these outstanding 
individuals. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Rights of Children and Youth 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his annual 
report yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate, Marvin 
Bernstein, outlined his office’s children’s- and youth-first 
principles, and I’d like to put them on the record. 
 
The principles this NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
must adopt are that all children and youth in Saskatchewan are 
entitled to the following: 
 

1) . . . those rights defined in the United Nations 
Convention of the Rights of the Child. 
 
2) . . . participate and be heard before any decision 
affecting them is made. 
 
3) . . . have their ‘best interests’ given paramount 
consideration in any action or decision involving them. 
 
4) . . . an equal standard of care, protection and services. 
 
5) . . . the highest standard of health and education 
possible in order to reach their fullest potential. 
 
6) . . . safety and protection from all forms of physical, 
emotional and sexual harm, while in the care of parents, 
governments, legal guardians or any [other] person. 
 
7) . . . be treated as a primary client, and at the centre, of 
all child serving systems. 
 
8) . . . have consideration given to the importance of the 
unique life history and spiritual traditions and practices in 
accordance with their stated views and preferences. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Investigation into Caucus Response to 
Misappropriation of Funds 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago I wrote to the Regina Police Service and the 
commercial crimes section of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] asking for an investigation into the NDP fraud 
scandal. Today the Regina police issued a news release 
announcing that the Regina police have asked the RCMP to 
investigate their files on this case from 1992 and 1994. 
 
My question is to the Premier: will the Premier commit that 
every member of his caucus and staff will fully co-operate with 
this investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yes, without question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
three weeks the Premier refused to accept the former 
Government House Leader’s resignation from cabinet. Today 
the Premier has accepted that resignation. Why did the Premier 
change his mind? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all we 
welcome the review that will be conducted by the RCMP. We 
are all anxious to bring clarity to this matter, and this 
mechanism can accomplish that, we believe. I received from the 
member from Moose Jaw North his offer to step down from his 
cabinet responsibilities, to continuing service as the member 
from Moose Jaw North, during the period of this review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is fair to say that no member in this House holds 
the integrity of this institution more dearly or in higher regard 
than the member from Moose Jaw North. Equally he believes in 
his personal integrity and places high value . . . as does his 
community. Mr. Speaker, he recommended to me that during 
this interim period as the RCMP conduct this review, he felt it 
best that he step aside from his cabinet responsibilities — not 
his member responsibilities, but his cabinet responsibilities — 
and I have accepted his resignation and recommendation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1994 former NDP Pat Lorjé told police it was the intention of 
the NDP caucus to conceal fraud. That statement suggests more 
people knew about this than just Jim Fodey and the former 
Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: who else knew? And will the 
Premier be asking for their resignations? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I wish to advise the Assembly 
that this question is out of order because it is not the 
responsibility of any cabinet minister. I will allow a voluntary 
response. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have asked our own 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner to review these matters and 
provide for this legislature an opinion. 
 
Today the Regina City Police have requested that the RCMP do 
a review of the events of 1992 and 1994 and the files thereof. I 
am very confident, Mr. Speaker, that the work that will be 
conducted by the RCMP and the work that will be conducted by 
our own Conflict of Interest Commissioner will answer all of 
the pertinent questions. I put my faith and my trust in the work 
of the police and in our own Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
 
But while the member’s on his feet perhaps he’d like to respond 
or perhaps the Leader of the Opposition would like to respond 
when it is that that member who’s now asking the questions is 
going to apologize to the public, to this House — and when his 
colleague from Saskatoon is going to apologize to this House 
and the public — for misleading the public on a matter of 
documentation that they had in their possession for over a year. 
When will they be doing that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for . . . 
Order please. Order. Once again the Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Judge’s Suspension 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the official 
opposition asked questions about Terry Bekolay, the Prince 
Albert judge who was suspended December 2005 and has been 
receiving his judge’s salary of $200,000 per year ever since. 
 
The Justice minister’s response was that it was inappropriate the 
matter was even brought up. The next day apparently the Justice 
minister thought that it was appropriate to phone one reporter 
and give him many more details about Bekolay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister not answer questions in this 
Assembly and to a group of reporters on Monday yet saw fit to 
hold a personal interview with just one reporter later on? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I answered all the 
questions put to me in the legislature, and I answered all the 
questions put to me by the press on that date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the member called for on Monday in the 
legislature is that, that I personally interfere and direct how the 
hearing committee conduct itself. He then went outside the 
legislature and denied that he did that. That was in the 
newspaper story on Tuesday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, if he wants to follow this line of 
question again today, he take a script with him when he goes 
out, so he can remember what he said in here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is quoted in today’s 
paper as saying, “he believes judges should be held to a higher 
standard . . .” Well so do the people of this province, but 
unfortunately that’s not what’s happening. 
 
Right now a police officer is facing a public hearing for 
phoning in sick when he wasn’t sick. According to the minister, 
Terry Bekolay was somehow linked to a criminal investigation. 
The judge’s conduct in a role raised some questions. And the 
Justice department laid the conflict of interest complaint against 
Bekolay, but the public has almost no information about the 
judge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what are those allegations? Will 
the minister stand in the House today and provide all of the 
facts about Terry Bekolay and remove the cloud of political 
suspicion and cover-up that is once again covering this NDP 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order please. 
Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
again calling on the government and particularly the Minister of 
Justice to interfere with the work of the judicial council and to 
interfere with the independence of the judiciary thereby, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Not only do I believe that judges should be held to a higher 
standard; I believe that MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and officers of the court of which the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast is both should be held to a standard. I wish 
that he held the same belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear that I do not 
believe this minister or that government had anything to do with 
a cover-up, but unfortunately the appearance that is taking place 
in the media right now is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
case of the first judge to be suspended in this province in 11 
years. And as of December 2005 that judge was suspended, and 
we have heard nothing from this minister. What we want from 
this minister is to tell us the information that he has received. 
Under the statute, he is obliged to receive information. 
 
Terry Bekolay was investigated by the Prince Albert police, and 
we have heard nothing from this minister. The Justice 
department laid formal complaints about this judge a year ago. 
Will the minister tell us today why the judge is being held to a 
higher standard and what he knows and what information he 
has received, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am of course going to 
treat this matter with the same respect I would treat any trial or 
any hearing. I’m not going to comment on matters that are 
going to be decided by others, and that is in this case by a 
hearing committee, Mr. Speaker. And what the member wants 
to do by innuendo and implication is asked these questions to 
which he knows he cannot receive answers. 
 
Everybody in Saskatchewan now knows that this was dealt with 
in entirely appropriate way. The Department of Justice referred 
the matter to an outside prosecution office, the Alberta 
prosecution office, and let them make the decision as to how it 
should proceed. When they received a report that the matter 
should not proceed to a court, my department referred it to the 
judicial council, where it properly belongs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite knows nothing was done wrong here. He 
just is seeking a better headline than he’s been able to get so far, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the only reason that the public 
heard anything about this story in the first place was because 
CFQC phoned the Justice department last November 29 
because they had heard so many rumours about Terry Bekolay. 
If that telephone call hadn’t been made, I suspect that none of 
the details about Terry Bekolay would be known to this day. 
Once again, this NDP government waits until the details have 
leaked out through the media before addressing this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister come forward today and tell us 
all of the facts and all of the background that he has received? 
Now that the minister has told part of the story, why does he not 
come clean and tell the Assembly and the people of the 
province the rest of this story and everything else that’s there? 
What are the allegations about this judge, and what’s taking 
place in this matter? Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts in this 
matter are going to be determined by a hearing committee, Mr. 
Speaker. The facts are going to be determined by a hearing 
committee, and they will make a recommendation. And this 
government will comply with the legislation, and this 
government will provide the reports that are required to be 
provided to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Plans to Combat Climate Change 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Premier. Other provinces in the country, 
significantly the province of Alberta, are moving on the issue of 
climate change. They have introduced and passed a Bill to deal 

with greenhouse gasses, to reduce those in their province, and 
also to ensure that any attendant penalties and carbon credits 
stay in the province of Alberta and are not redistributed across 
the country. We know that the government has committed to 
tabling such a plan in this Assembly this session. 
 
The minister has said, on April 23, “. . . in a couple of weeks. 
And Mr. Speaker, we will be setting out some very, very 
challenging goals for . . . us” within the next two weeks on this 
issue. On April 17, he said, “we’ll be setting out our targets 
around climate change and . . . sustainable energy policy very 
shortly.” There’s another quote similar to that on April 12 when 
the green plan was announced and a plan for greenhouse gasses 
was committed to later last month, the month of April. The 
question to the Premier is, where is the plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as we had this discussion, 
this very discussion in the legislature yesterday, I again will 
inform the Leader of the Opposition that in about a week’s 
time, we are sending a team of our people to the nation’s capital 
to sit down with the federal government to spend three days, 
three days working through the implications of what the federal 
government has announced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to present a plan to the people of Saskatchewan that is 
whole — a plan that significantly has this province pulling 
above its weight in terms of the reduction of greenhouse gases, 
a plan that is going to be real and tangible and that will build a 
better future for our families and a better future for our children. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition, he seems to think that the 
Alberta plan should simply be implemented here in 
Saskatchewan. All he’s talked about yesterday and all he talks 
about today is the Alberta plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
satisfied with the Alberta plan. We’re not satisfied with plans of 
other provinces. We are going to build a plan for the future of 
Saskatchewan that’s going to — I again say — pull above our 
weight on a national and international context. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that the Alberta plan 
may not be right for the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
Saskatchewan Party would like to see then indeed what the 
Premier, what the government has in mind for our province. 
We’d like to be involved in that debate in a constructive way. 
 
However others in the country, namely the Leader of the Green 
Party, Ms. Elizabeth May, said this about the Alberta plan, 
though it might not be right for us. She said: 
 

“My initial reaction was that I was encouraged that 
Premier Stelmach is talking about regulations.” 
 
“When you recognize that the language coming out of 
someone’s mouth appears to be what you had always 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

wanted to hear, you encourage them . . . 
 
That’s the Leader of the Green Party for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t the opposition; it was this Premier and 
this government that at the beginning of this session, spring 
sitting of this legislature, said that the environment will be their 
number one issue, that they’ll be coming with a plan for climate 
change, for greenhouse gases. On three different occasions the 
minister has said it’s coming. The date they gave was at the end 
of last month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what’s taking so long? What’s 
happened with this? Where is the plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I hear a member opposite — I’m 
not sure which one — saying it’s day 63. Well it is interesting. 
On day 63, the Leader of the Opposition — I must say he did it 
yesterday — finally gets up and asks a question about the 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for four years we’ve been talking 
about building a green and a prosperous economy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members will come to order. 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. For four 
years we’ve been building a green and a prosperous economy in 
this province. We have been taking leadership, not just 
nationally but internationally, on issues like clean coal 
technology, on carbon sequestration, on wind-generated 
electricity, Mr. Speaker. We’re now the per capita leader in 
Canada in wind-generated electricity. We’re leading Canada in 
some of the programming to help citizens build energy-friendly 
homes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a little johnny-come-lately on the last or 
almost virtually the last day of the session for the Leader of the 
Opposition to now get interested in the environment, Mr. 
Speaker. Now I just wonder why. Is he so embarrassed of his 
performance and his caucus’s performance during this session 
he’s trying to redeem it on the last couple of days? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear 
environmentalists across the country. They’ll talk also about 
what this NDP government has led in. They’ve led in 
emissions, Mr. Speaker — 62 per cent over 1990 levels; 62 per 
cent over Kyoto targets in greenhouse gas emissions. That’s 
what they have led in. 
 
And I know the Premier believes in the near mystical and 
mythical powers of Al Gore, but even his presence in the 
province of Saskatchewan doesn’t change this government’s 
record with respect to greenhouse gasses. 
 

The Premier quite rightly pointed out yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
quite rightly pointed out that provinces need to move on their 
own plan to ensure that carbon tax credits or penalties that we 
may want to levy against heavy emitters in our province aren’t 
lost to a national plan, that they’ll stay in the province for R&D 
[research and development], for our own green initiatives. But 
we have waited and waited for that plan. It’s not here. By the 
Premier’s own admission, this is what is at risk. What’s taking 
so long? He promised it at the start of session. Where is it, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the inconvenient truth for 
the Leader of the Opposition is that he’s now realized the 
session has passed by. He has not dealt with substantive issues 
of public policy during this session, and he’s now trying to 
redeem himself by becoming the environmentalist at the last 
minute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me repeat. This government, this New Democratic Party 
government has been showing leadership, Mr. Speaker, in the 
nation and beyond the nation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair once again recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again I say, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government has been leading this province and participating 
with the citizens of Saskatchewan — not just leading in Canada, 
but leading in North America and in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Right here south of Regina, the world’s largest carbon dioxide 
sequestration project — the largest in the world. We’re building 
in terms or agroforestry. We pioneered in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, the use of a bio-friendly fuel — ethanol — in our 
gasoline. We’re pioneering it in Canada. We’re building that 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This has been the building of a green and a prosperous 
economy. Why, Mr. Speaker, the building of a green and 
prosperous economy? Because we know that that’s what will 
make life better for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Farming Issues 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today we learned from Statistics Canada that Saskatchewan lost 
the most farms in Canada. In fact I quote from Statistics 
Canada: “The number of farms fell in every province, and the 
rate of decline was fastest in Newfoundland and Labrador and 
Saskatchewan.” Here we go again, Mr. Speaker. We tied with 
Newfoundland. We’re either behind Newfoundland or if we’re 
ahead, we’re just ahead. 
 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

In every area that Statistics Canada does a study, we’re always 
tied for last place in this province. Mr. Speaker, can the Ag 
minister explain to us today . . . remembering of course under 
NDP ag policy for the past 15 years they haven’t really made 
agriculture a priority, and I think that’s starting to bear fruit, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re losing the largest number of farmers of 
anywhere in this country. Can maybe the Ag minister enlighten 
us on why this is happening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
first of all I think it’s important to recognize the deep 
commitment that this province has had to agriculture and 
continues to have under this NDP government — 5.2 times the 
provincial per capita average expenditures by the people of 
Saskatchewan on agriculture; significant investments, Mr. 
Speaker, and new investments this past year in research and 
technology; some of the leading research done in plant science 
in this province, Mr. Speaker; some of the leading work done in 
building, developing, and development of short-line farm 
equipment which leads the world in terms of minimum and zero 
tillage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are vitally important, but they are also 
pieces that impact the size of farms in Saskatchewan. We have 
seen more amalgamation of farms over these past years, and 
technology is a huge part of that amalgamation. As the 
technology gets better, farmers are expanding their operations, 
and they are reaching for higher efficiencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister’s right. It’s happening all across this country. The 
problem being is it’s happening faster in Saskatchewan than 
anywhere else in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the AIDA 
[agricultural income disaster assistance] program, the CFIP 
[Canadian farm income program] program. We’ve got a CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program that that 
minister or minister of that government should have been at the 
table and putting forth that help farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Then this year we brought to light the comparisons of Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan when it comes to crop insurance. How are 
farmers in this province responding to those programs that that 
government seems to have brought forward, Mr. Speaker? 
They’re getting fed up. They’re quitting farming, and they’re 
leaving the farming industry. 
 
And what we see is farms are getting bigger at a faster rate than 
anywhere else in this country. Mr. Speaker, the little time that 
NDP government has left, will they finally come to the table 

and help farmers in this province with things like crop 
insurance and the CAIS program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
of course the member opposite ignores the fact that this 
province struggled very hard with the federal government and 
the other provinces to get a better program than CAIS. Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government insisted on that particular 
program and the way that it was being developed. The current 
government is working to try and change that to some extent, 
but they still have a very distorted policy on how the costs are 
divided up. This province is in for 5.2 times the provincial per 
capita average to fund the programs that are in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The federal government does not come to the table in any 
substantial way to help this province which has 43 per cent of 
Canada’s arable farm land, Mr. Speaker — 43 per cent. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that those Conservative members of 
parliament need to do more to work with us, with this NDP 
government, so that there will be success for our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to give you another example today of this 
government and that minister not walking the walk. He come 
out here a little while ago and said when the flooding was going 
on in north central and the drought was being brought to the 
forefront in the Southwest, he said that they were going to bring 
forward a pasture lease program where farmers didn’t have 
pasture for their cattle because it was too wet in one area, too 
dry in another. Farmers out there took him at his word and need 
that pasture right now, Mr. Speaker. But we’ve had a call from 
a farmer that called the 1-800 number, and to his dismay, the 
program’s not set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know and I understand that this NDP 
government is been so busy turning MLAs out to pasture, they 
forgot to create the program, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister explain that to us today? Who do these farmers 
contact? Should they contact Manitoba? Alberta? Because 
nothing’s happening here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, there are a 
number of pieces that are working for farmers in terms of 
providing forage and in terms of providing pasture. There are 
private entrepreneurs who are offering their pasture land that is 
available. There is the program that is available through our 
community pastures, Mr. Speaker. And farmers can apply, and 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

they can move their cattle into the community pastures today, 
Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you very clearly that all one has to 
do is get into The Western Producer and you see a large page of 
available pasture for cow-calf pairs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that through that combination of 
private and public offerings that the farmers who need to have 
pasture land have that land available for them, Mr. Speaker. I 
can tell you as well, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
shown leadership and is committed to finding ways of making 
sure that those farmers have what they need to have success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I guess what the minister’s saying is really in 
Saskatchewan we don’t need a Department of Agriculture; we 
need a subscription to The Western Producer. That’ll solve all 
our problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in this Assembly for 
12 years — that government’s been here for 16 — and before 
that I farmed, before I come here, Mr. Speaker. That 
government has not helped agriculture in this province to one 
degree. In fact many of the program cuts they made hurt 
agriculture, and many of the programs they brought in have not 
helped one little bit. We saw where crop insurance in this 
province is inferior to the other provinces. We know CAIS is 
not working. And what does the minister say over and over 
again? It’s the federal government’s fault; it’s their 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after 15 years I would ask the minister, when will 
he take responsibility for our farmers and help out farmers all 
over Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the other day the member opposite was referring to his 
mother and his hope that he wouldn’t cross the line. Today he’s 
crossed the line, Mr. Speaker. I’m really sorry; Mrs. 
Bjornerud’s going to have to speak to her son. 
 
But I can tell you very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government and this minister have been working with farmers 
to build programs that will work. Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
perfect, and they generally are provincial-federal programs. 
And we are working with our other provincial counterparts and 
with the federal government to try and make sure that we have 
programs that will work. 
 
The comments about crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, have been 
explained to the member opposite. If he doesn’t get it, that’s his 
problem, not ours, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that crop insurance 

across the country is similar, Mr. Speaker, and it depends on 
what the fiscal situation is, the impacts on any particular 
province’s program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip, 
the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government I’ll be tabling 
response to written question 1,485. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 1,485 has been submitted. The Chair 
recognizes the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By leave to 
move to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 
requested leave to proceed directly to motions for returns 
(debatable). Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I will be moving for an order of the 
Assembly, that the Assembly do issue for return no. 2 showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: a copy of the 
settlement agreement between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Mr. Murdoch Carriere for the 
settlement that was announced on February 27, 2007 by 
the Minister of the Environment. 
 

That motion will be seconded by the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak very briefly to this motion. 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s my first opportunity to speak to 
this matter and I’m distressed and troubled by the position that 
the government is taking with regard to release of this 
information. 
 
This settlement agreement that is being sought by this motion is 
something that deals with some of the very fundamental rights 
of the public. The public, Mr. Speaker, have a right to know 
where their tax dollars are going and where their tax dollars are 
being spent. They also have a right, Mr. Speaker, to know what 
kind of deals are being made by the government, what kind of 
settlements are made, what kind of compromises are being 
made. 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

And that public should, except in the most rare exceptions, have 
full and complete and unfettered access to all of those 
documents. In this case the government chose to try and hide 
and to try and conceal this information. 
 
We understand from the various comments that the ministers 
have made is that this document does not contain a provision in 
it that requires it not to be disclosed. We understand that Mr. 
Carriere did not ask for or request such a term and there is not 
such a term in that agreement. 
 
The document itself doesn’t have any of the usual things that 
would be in the agreement that would require it to be withheld 
from public consultation, Mr. Speaker. That type of thing would 
be where it dealt with something in dealing with the 
competitive issues that the government has to deal with, 
something dealing with children, or dealing with something 
where there is ongoing competitive issues with the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this agreement does and what this agreement 
contains in it and what most of the public find offensive is that 
from what we understand — the government has chosen to 
release — is that there is a payment to Murdoch Carriere that is 
sanctioned by this agreement in the amount of some $275,000. 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that is a substantial top-up to Mr. 
Carriere’s pension. 
 
And what we’re asking the government is what they’re afraid 
of, why they won’t disclose it. What is in that document that 
causes them to be afraid to do it? In this last session they have 
had a battering like I have never seen a government in this 
country before. The scandals and the frauds and the various 
things that have faced this government are absolutely 
unacceptable. And the one thing that they’re doing is in the face 
of all that, Mr. Speaker, is they are refusing to give this 
document, when that government is facing some of the most 
horrific allegations that a government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order please. Order please. Order 
please. The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, given the scandals and the fraud 
allegations that have been made by the police and by other 
people against this government during this last session, 
cover-ups, concealment, everything else that could have gone 
on, you would think that this government would have said, this 
is terrible; we’re going to put everything out. So there must be 
something terribly damning in this particular document that 
they’re afraid of that they don’t want it to come out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see what’s in that document, and 
frankly so would the citizens of this province. The citizens 
would like to know what’s in that settlement document and 
what the members opposite have got to hide. Given what 
they’ve already hid during the last session, why wouldn’t they 
want to come forward and put this here? Because there’s 
probably something pretty damaging in there and something 
that’s going to destroy what little political credibility this 
government thinks that they have left. 
 
And you know, if I was giving them advice, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m not, but if I was I would suggest to them that they come 

clean and put the document on the Table — table it today, table 
it as soon as possible, so that they can remove the speculation 
and the cloud that’s of them. In all likelihood the truth won’t be 
as bad as what’s happening in the public’s imagination as to 
what could be in there, but clearly it has to be incredibly bad. 
 
If they are legitimately concerned about privacy issues with the 
complainants that are affected by this agreement, did the 
government make any effort, Mr. Speaker, to try and mask their 
names, to obtain their consents, or try and deal with it in any 
way so that the document and the provisions that are in that 
document could be put forward? No. Nothing. They are 
choosing to sit over there and stonewall this entire application. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Today we will end up voting on it. They will use the weight of 
their majority to try and overcome the public’s right to know 
one of the most fundamental things — where public dollars are 
going, how public dollars are being spent, and what kind of 
deals this government is making on behalf of the citizens of this 
province. Mr. Speaker, what is taking place by those members 
on the government side is absolutely unacceptable and is an 
abomination. 
 
And that we have to be sitting here on the second-last day of 
session, debating this, is something that the public will 
remember when they go into the ballot box sometime in the 
next few months. Mr. Speaker, there’s not very many of them 
over there left that are going to be running, but the few that are 
running will have to confront that issue when their electors and 
when their constituents go into the ballot box. Because those 
people know full well that this government has chosen to 
stonewall them and chosen to refuse information that they have 
every right as citizens to have. And that information should be 
made public and should be put forward and should be tabled in 
this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that this government has with 
this issue is the issue of fundamental and basic competence in 
administration and in routine dealings . . . [inaudible] . . . They 
should have, as they were going through the late ’90s and early 
2000s, when they were dealing with issues of sexual harassment 
in the workplace, they should have had a plan that was in place. 
They should have had a policy. They should have had a 
protocol so that when there was complaints brought forward 
that the complaints could be dealt with in a timely manner. 
 
Those complaints should have had appropriate follow-up. 
Proper records should have been kept. Those records should 
have been kept on Mr. Carriere’s file. They won’t produce any 
of those other records. We don’t know how many of them are 
there or not. But that was something this government should 
have had. If the government would have had a good, proper 
plan that they would have chosen to enforce, those women that 
were victimized by Murdoch Carriere — and effectively by the 
members opposite — if there would have been a good system in 
place, we wouldn’t be in a position today of having had to pay 
out 275,000 taxpayers’ dollars in a document they will not 
produce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government should have good internal 
discipline. They’ve been in government since the early 1990s. 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

They should have had plans and contingencies in place so that 
they could deal with them. If it took place in that office in 
Prince Albert, how many other places did it take place? How 
many other unsettled allegations are out there that are dealing 
with these complaints? It’s not acceptable for this to happen in a 
province in the year 2007 that we’re even having this. They 
need to go back and do some serious soul-searching as to why 
they abysmally and totally failed these women that are there. 
They need to go back and rethink and review the protocols and 
everything else that has led up to this and try to come up with a 
process that’s going to avoid this from ever happening again in 
this province. 
 
At the time this matter first surfaced, the then minister of 
Justice, who is one of the people that is leaving the sinking ship, 
he said they would fight this all the way. He made clear and 
abundant statements that this was something that they would 
fight all the way. They would resist any payment. They would 
fire this individual. The Premier got up and the Premier said, 
we’re going to fire this individual. The Justice minister said, 
we’re not going to settle; we’re not going to pay out any money 
on this thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what happened. What did the 
government do? The government decided to make a substantial 
payment, well in excess of a quarter of a million dollars, to an 
individual with close ties to that NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that individual received almost $300,000 of 
taxpayer dollars and this government rolled over, would not 
even go to the point where they would go to trial on this thing, 
wouldn’t deal with it, wouldn’t fight it. They just decided, 
we’re going to pay it. Was it because he was an NDP supporter? 
Or was it because they had so abysmally and incompetently 
handled the entire file right from the outset? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a number of issues that came up about 
this particular firing as the matter went through the courts and 
through the various media things that we went through during 
the last session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had questions about whether this individual 
was even fired or not. We had questions whether they had done 
the firing properly or not. The Minister Responsible for the 
Public Service Commission got up in the House and said, we 
bungled the firing. Well I’ll tell you, she bungled the firing and 
bungled the firing incredibly badly. If she would have looked 
at, if she would have looked . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
the minister is speaking over there. And she stood up and talked 
about the bungling that took place. 
 
If she wants to pass it to one of her colleagues that may have 
been more directly involved with it, that’s fine. There’s lots of 
blame to go around to each and every MLA on that side of the 
House on this thing. They all knew about it. They all sat there. 
Not one of them stood up. Not one of them stood up and said 
that what was going on was wrong, inadequate, or should never 
have happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you can’t handle a firing without cause, they 
should be hiring some outside counsel. They could go back to 
Olive Waller or whoever they want to go to. Any law firm in 
this province would have given them some competent advice as 

to how to fire somebody without cause and to see whether you 
do have cause or not. But they can’t even fire somebody 
without cause. You know it’s just an incredible situation. They 
can’t look at the legislation and say, this is the person that’s 
entitled to fire this person; it has to be the permanent head. No, 
they chose to make the firing and put the blood on that, on the 
hands of either the minister or the Premier or somebody that 
wanted to take political credit for having done the firing, rather 
than the proper individual that’s designated under the 
legislation. 
 
So then the issue arises, was the individual fired at all? Was his 
paycheque entitled to be continued on an ongoing basis, 
because they don’t even know even now whether the individual 
was fired or not? What an embarrassment for them to even be in 
that kind of a position, to determine whether the individual was 
or was not fired. Who had the capacity to fire him? Why don’t 
they get out the Act, have a look at it? Why don’t they hire a 
law firm? Get on with the thing and make some decisions on 
the thing. 
 
Was there an issue on there as to whether there was the other 
discipline that took place? We understand that Terry Scott, who 
was another casualty in this disaster, attempted to discipline Mr. 
Carriere by giving him a short suspension. So then the issue is, 
is it double jeopardy? Was he fired twice for the same issue? 
How incredibly inappropriate for that to happen. So they have 
to terminate that employee as well. Yet another set of 
severance, another issue that’s there. 
 
Then they lay criminal charges. They lay nine criminal charges, 
Mr. Speaker, and they get two convictions. Mr. Speaker, there 
is a fundamental difference between the standard that’s 
necessary for a criminal conviction and the standard in law 
that’s necessary for a civil matter. What we’re talking about is 
the settlement on the civil matter. And the civil matter that we 
settled, that we don’t have the documents to, that we’re looking 
for today, would have been, if it would have went to trial, 
settled and determined by the Court of Queen’s Bench on the 
balance of probabilities rather than on proving guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt — a fundamental and significant distinction 
that is absolutely lost on the NDP government across. 
 
They have no sense that they had a much lesser standard to 
prove had they chosen to resist payment on this and run the trial 
on this one. And it’s quite likely, had they run the trial, they 
may very well have been successful if they wouldn’t have been 
so terribly bad in bungling the actual firing and the actual 
termination, Mr. Speaker. So they’ve gone from one mistake as 
to how they do the termination to another mistake whether they 
should make a settlement as to how everything else, how the 
criminal matter comes into play. 
 
They really should get some proper advice, listen to whomever 
they want that could give them some assistance so that they’re 
not in the position now that they’ve got this incredibly 
embarrassing document — the incredibly embarrassing 
document that they cannot, will not, and are afraid to release 
because the document clearly discloses the absolute, incredible 
amount of incompetence and embarrassment that’s there. And 
who knows whatever else might be in there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Another issue that this document deals with is the amount of 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

payment — the sum of $275,000. What this individual received, 
Mr. Speaker, was approximately three years of severance pay 
— three years. 
 
We have a province that’s got well-settled jurisprudence on 
what people are paid for wrongful dismissal in this province. If 
you terminate somebody and you don’t have just cause, the 
general rule in this province is 12 to 14 months. Somebody, an 
individual like this, towards the end of his career might be 14 to 
18 months. But that would be the outer end of what would be 
ordered by the courts if this matter went through. 
 
But because that government isn’t even capable of doing a 
termination, they chose to just open their wallet. And it’s not 
their wallet; it’s the wallet of the taxpayers, the people in this 
province. And what did they do? Hemorrhage cash — 
$275,000, not to mention a pension top-up. Outrageous. 
Unacceptable. 
 
And the citizens of this province will not forgive that 
government when they go into the next election because they 
will be reminded of it. They will be reminded of it by the 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs, by the Saskatchewan Party 
candidates who will point it out to each and every voter in this 
province. And when those voters go to the ballot box, they will 
remember, and they will not reward those members there with 
another term. Clearly, never again will they want those people 
back in government and back in control of the purse strings. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is an even worse message that comes 
out of this settlement agreement, and that is the settlement and 
the treatment to the nine women that are involved in this thing. 
What is the message that we are sending to women in this 
province, women in the workplace? What do we do? We give 
them a settlement of $15,000 apiece — $15,000 apiece — 
which is a terribly long ways away from the $275,000 plus 
pension top-up that Mr. Carriere got, a long ways away. 
 
And then the minister has the nerve to stand in this House and 
say, we consulted with the women first. What’s the nature of 
that consultation? What did that minister do? She had one of her 
officials phone and leave a message on their voice mail: by the 
way, we gave Murdoch 300 K today. Well there’s something 
fundamentally wrong with that kind of a voice mail — just 
shouldn’t happen, shouldn’t happen in this province, shouldn’t 
happen in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people should be ashamed. They should be 
embarrassed. If they want to have real consultation, Mr. 
Speaker, they should have invited the people into their office, 
had a meaningful, reasoned discussion with them, told them 
they were obliged to settlement, told them what the legal 
considerations were. 
 
Those people by and large, Mr. Speaker, are still employees of 
this government. And, Mr. Speaker, the treatment — the 
abysmal, embarrassing treatment — that those women received 
continued on because they were afraid to come forward because 
of Murdoch Carriere’s ties to that government. 
 
The settlement that Murdoch Carriere received, the settlement 
that they won’t disclose to us, that settlement outrages those 
women. The outrageous conduct just goes right to the very heart 

of what those people are like across the street, that they chose to 
coward out on the thing — not to go to court, not to stand up for 
those women. What do they do? Those women are in the 
workplace. They’re afraid to come forward for years afterwards. 
And when they do come forward, do they get any support? Do 
they get any help? No. They get unkindly visits from ministers, 
ministerial assistants, deputies going up there saying, don’t 
worry about it, forget about it, sweep it under the street, with a 
veiled threat that their jobs, their careers would be at risk if they 
came forward or talked to us. 
 
The Minister for Public Service Commission stood in this 
House and smugly said one day: do you have permission from 
those women, knowing that she had gone to them or had 
somebody go to try and dissuade them from talking. 
 
Well the reality, Mr. Speaker, is those women were courageous. 
Those women came forward. Those women stood their ground. 
Those women went to the police. Those women came out, and 
they put their positions forward. Those women should be 
commended. Mr. Speaker, the outrageous . . . [inaudible] . . . 
first they were victimized by Mr. Carriere. Then they were 
victimized again by that NDP government. And it is not 
acceptable today to have that happen in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have got an absolutely unacceptable 
government across the street, across the way, and that 
government should resign. We should have an election, and we 
should have that government put their conduct on the table. And 
right now what that government should do, if they had any 
courage or any shred of decency, would be to put that document 
on the table today so that we knew where we were at, so that we 
could go back to the electorate and the electorate could stand up 
and they could say, we want nothing more to do with these 
people. We want to turn them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had nothing but a cover-up from this 
government. They waited until the last of this was trotted out by 
the media. It was trotted out by these women. They wouldn’t 
disclose anything on this thing until it was absolutely necessary. 
And now, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, the actual 
settlement agreement is being hidden and being concealed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it stinks for the members of this province. 
It’s a clear indication of a government, Mr. Speaker, that has 
lost its way. It is a government with no moral compass. They 
are truly adrift, and the people of this province are tired. They 
are fed up. They want an election. They have a right to know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to urge all of the members in this 
House to vote in favour of this motion so that they have the 
right to have and to get a full understanding of what this 
government has chosen to do with their money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move an order of the 
Assembly that the Assembly do issue for return number two 
showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: a copy of the 
settlement agreement between the province of 
Saskatchewan and Mr. Murdoch Carriere for the 
settlement that was announced on February 27, 2007, by 
the minister. 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

That motion, Mr. Speaker, will be seconded by the member 
from Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Southeast to move 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 2. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 
my colleague for his passionate speech on this topic. It makes 
me proud to be part of a party that actually takes the concerns of 
its citizens to heart, as opposed to the NDP who chooses to 
ignore them. 
 
I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that last night during the 
Premier’s estimates the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission was sitting on the opposite benches and was giving 
us a hard time, saying that we hadn’t been talking about the 
priorities of the people of this province. 
 
And I found it quite shocking, Mr. Speaker, that having talked 
to one of the victims of Murdoch Carriere, I would say that the 
safety of women in the workplace and how they are being 
treated should be a priority of the people of this province. And 
it was quite shocking that the NDP didn’t consider that a 
priority for any political party to be discussing this. 
 
And I found it interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 
said again today, in response to questions, that we have not 
dealt with any substantive issues during this spring session. Mr. 
Speaker, I find that absolutely shocking. And yes, we have 
spent a lot of time discussing the Murdoch Carriere situation, 
the scandal that’s erupted because of the NDP incompetence. 
And for the Premier of this province to say that that is not a 
substantive issue is an absolute insult to the nine victims of 
Murdoch Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have said over the last 
few weeks that they are done talking about Murdoch Carriere. 
And Mr. Speaker, we’d probably be farther down the road to 
finding a resolution to this situation if the NDP would stop 
hiding information and start answering the legitimate, detailed 
questions that we have been asking them for the last number of 
weeks. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, too that I find it interesting that on 
the very same day that we find out there is an investigation into 
the NDP fraud cover-up, that we are debating yet again another 
incident of the NDP covering up information and not bringing it 
to light. You would think that they would have learned from 
their past behaviour. 
 
I think this is systemic of this government to conceal and to 
cover up. They tried to cover up the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company] debacle. They have tried 

to cover up their own caucus fraud. And they are now 
continuing to try to cover up their dealings with the Murdoch 
Carriere situation. 
 
The NDP have consistently said that they did the right thing in 
settling with Murdoch Carriere. This is in direct contradiction to 
the former NDP Justice minister who said that they had made 
the right decision and that they would defend that vigorously in 
the courts — something that they later backed down from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out too that the Premier said that 
had they been given the chance to do this again, he would do it 
again. If the NDP truly believe that they did the right thing, then 
why are they hiding the settlement agreement from not only us 
but from the victims of Murdoch Carriere? Mr. Speaker, if the 
NDP truly believe that they did the right thing, then why won’t 
they release their secret legal opinions, opinions that they say 
forced them to make this decision to settle with Murdoch 
Carriere? And, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP truly believe that they 
did the right thing and have nothing to hide, then why have they 
continued to refuse to send the Murdoch Carriere scandal to a 
legislative committee so that we can get to the bottom of this to 
find out what went wrong and why Murdoch Carriere’s nine 
victims were failed so miserably? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on February 27 of this year, the NDP government 
announced that it had reached a legal settlement to pay 
$275,000 to a former senior civil servant who had been accused 
of sexual harassment by nine of his female employees, and was 
later found guilty of assault. What we don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 
is how they came up with this dollar figure — $275,000. I know 
that for the hard-working, honest, law-abiding people in my 
riding $275,000 is a lot of money. 
 
And for the government to hand this over to Murdoch Carriere 
without any justification as to where they came up with this 
dollar amount is pretty outrageous. Not only did Murdoch 
Carriere get $275,000; he got a bump up in his pension so that 
he could retire well. These nine women have to carry the burden 
of Murdoch Carriere’s harassment with them, and I don’t think 
there’s a lot of retiring well in their future, Mr. Speaker. But the 
NDP certainly made sure that Murdoch Carriere was going to 
retire well. 
 
And I think that not only Murdoch Carriere’s victims but the 
taxpayers of this province deserve to know how that money, 
that dollar figure was arrived at. And I find it disturbing that the 
NDP — although they continue to say that they did the right 
thing — that they’ve refused to let us know how that dollar 
figure was arrived at. 
 
When the NDP government first learned of the accusations 
against Murdoch Carriere — a senior official in the Department 
of the Environment — a consultant was called in to review the 
situation, but this was only after years of these women being 
harassed. And it was determined that harassment had taken 
place both in terms of abuse of authority and in terms of 
inappropriate sexual behaviour. The government’s response to 
all these allegations was to praise Murdoch Carriere while at the 
same time telling Murdoch Carriere’s victims to be quiet. 
 
And I quote from a memo from Terry Scott dated February 12, 
2003, and he says, “I want to thank Murdoch for his valuable 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

contributions to the Fire Program.” And, Mr. Speaker, on the 
very same day that the government was praising Murdoch 
Carriere, they were telling the nine victims this, and this is also 
from Terry Scott dated February 12, 2003, and I quote, “I want 
to specifically caution you to treat this decision and any 
information related to this matter with strict and absolute 
confidentiality.” He goes on to say, “You have a very 
significant personal responsibility to ensure that this 
requirement is satisfied.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that outrageous, that Murdoch Carriere is 
praised and his victims are told to stay quiet. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP’s response to the allegations against Mr. Carriere was 
not to fire him, but to move him to a different department, to 
provide him with a positive letter of recommendation, and to 
tell these women to not talk about the investigation. Luckily for 
these nine women and for the people of this province, a copy of 
that consultant’s report was leaked, not only to the 
Saskatchewan Party, but to a reporter as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP did not act in this situation and fire 
Carriere until after the story became public, after they were 
grilled in this House and after outrage from the public. They 
didn’t do this voluntarily; they did it because it was politically 
expedient, and they were being embarrassed politically by their 
lack of action in this situation. Considering the NDP’s track 
record of concealing and hiding from their responsibilities, we 
have little doubt that no action would have been taken had this 
report not been leaked in the first place. In true fashion, they 
acted only after getting caught. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government opted to settle this case out 
of courts. And as I stated before, the former NDP Justice 
minister said that they would fight this vigorously in court, and 
they did not do that. They settled out of court and paid the nine 
women $135,000. Mr. Speaker, we don’t know where that 
dollar figure came from. We don’t know if they pulled it out of 
a hat or if they, you know, had a pool on the other side to figure 
out where this money would come from and what dollar values 
they would arrive at. 
 
But $135,000 equals about $15,000 for each of Murdoch 
Carriere’s victims. This is at the same time that Murdoch 
Carriere was getting $275,000 plus a bump-up in his pension, 
and we have no idea where any of these dollar figures were 
coming from, Mr. Speaker. And I think the people of this 
province have a right to know how this government is spending 
their money and why because, as my colleague mentioned 
before, this money didn’t come out of the NDP pockets. It came 
out of the pockets of the taxpayers in this province. 
 
The NDP have sent a very negative message to women in the 
workplace, especially women working under an NDP 
government that claims that it stands up for working people. 
Mr. Speaker, the actions that this government has taken is 
nothing more than a slap in the face to the many women 
working in our public service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere worked in the public service for 
32 years. And we have to wonder, considering the fight that 
these nine women had to be heard, if there aren’t other women 
who have been harassed in the workplace — and seeing how 
the NDP refused to deal with these serious harassment 

complaints, if there’s other women who are afraid to come 
forward now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government’s decision to pay Murdoch 
Carriere $275,000 in this settlement will no doubt send a chill 
over the workplace. After witnessing this NDP’s government 
lack of will to enforce anti-harassment rules in the workplace, 
we do worry that women are too scared to come forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although we’re absolutely very concerned as to 
why the government refuses to not release the settlement 
agreement that they have with Murdoch Carriere, there are other 
things that they won’t answer. And I alluded to the fact before 
that they refused to send this to a legislative committee. And 
they also refused to release their secret legal opinions, opinions 
that they said forced them to settle. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have long lists of questions and, as I 
stated before, the government doesn’t want to talk about this 
issue. They say that this isn’t of any substance, that it shouldn’t 
be a priority for us or for the people of this province. But, Mr. 
Speaker, these questions deserve to have answers. Murdoch 
Carriere’s nine victims deserve to have answers. 
 
And one of the very important questions that they have is, why 
weren’t earlier harassment complaints taken seriously? I find it 
shocking that the earliest complaint that we’re aware of was in 
1994 and nothing was done for these women for almost a 
decade. That’s the track record of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, is leaving these women ignored for almost a decade. 
And why, Mr. Speaker, did the NDP, despite their own 
anti-harassment legislation stating otherwise, refuse to take 
action against the numerous individuals who ignored the 
harassment complaints? Mr. Speaker, this case is more 
questions than answers and that’s disturbing for us. 
 
We also would like to know why, after one of the nine women 
wrote to the Premier of this province, why they continued to 
ignore the situation. They wrote to the Premier on March 10, 
2003 and warned him that Mr. Carriere would continue to 
harass people, other women, and they were concerned about 
women in the workplace in Regina where Mr. Carriere was 
being transferred. Mr. Speaker, they took the time — they put 
their name on this letter — they took the time to write to the 
Premier of this province to warn him in order to protect other 
women and other workplaces against what Murdoch Carriere 
could possibly do to them. 
 
And what was the Premier’s response? To ignore this 
complaint, Mr. Speaker. He did nothing to back up what these 
women were saying or to investigate it or to find out if there 
was anything that could be done to protect women in the Regina 
office where Murdoch Carriere was being sent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated before, we would also like to have this 
sent to a legislative committee so that we can find out if there’s 
other women who need our help, other women that may have 
been ignored by this government over the years, women who 
are too scared to come forward, and after seeing the NDP’s 
track record doubt that their complaints will be taken seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the women in this case, Murdoch Carriere’s nine 
victims, deserve to have answers. We have spoken with them 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

many times over the last few months over this, and they’re hurt 
that their government hadn’t taken them seriously. And I 
wouldn’t be surprised at all, Mr. Speaker, that if they listened to 
what was going on in this Chamber over the last two days that 
they would be hurt once again, to know that their government 
doesn’t believe that us questioning the government on this 
situation is a priority, that it’s of any substance at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a letter that one of the victims 
wrote to us. It was dated March 25, 2007. And she says: 
 

I am one of the nine women in the Murdoch Carriere 
harassment case. Some of us were harassed by Murdoch 
Carriere as early as 1994. We discussed our harassment 
with supervisors many times prior to any investigation 
taking place in late 2002. Most of our supervisors brought 
our complaints forward to higher ups in the department. 
Nothing was done to stop the harassment [or to] . . . make 
our workplace safe. [Nothing was done, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
After repeated attempts to address the harassment, a 
meeting took place in July of 2002 . . . 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, after this meeting took place with the 
assistant deputy minister, officials from the Department of 
Environment, their answer to all of this, to almost a decade of 
abuse at the hands of Murdoch Carriere was, and I quote, 
“That’s just Murdoch.” That was the government’s response to 
these women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these women were ignored for almost a decade, 
and the least that this government could do now was to provide 
them with the answers to the questions that they have been 
asking. And one of those questions is, how on earth did 
Murdoch Carriere get $275,000 and a bump up in his pension 
so that he could retire well and while at the same time these 
women got a mere $15,000 each? 
 
I think it’s a legitimate question. It’s a question that the victims 
of Murdoch Carriere have, and I think it’s a question that 
deserves an answer, Mr. Speaker. And all we get from the NDP 
is the runaround. And they’ve been hiding the answers from us, 
and I don’t understand what they’re hiding. They keep saying 
that they’ve done the right thing. If they’ve done the right thing, 
why don’t they just come clean with the answers to the 
questions that we have? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our party is not the only one who’s concerned 
about this. We had thousands of cards returned to our office in 
response to a postcard campaign, and they’re still coming in. 
Mr. Speaker, people are outraged by the behaviour of this NDP 
government. I’d like to quote from StarPhoenix columnist Bob 
Hughes. This was from earlier this year. And he says, and I 
quote: 
 

The public has every right to know exactly what is going 
on here. It is, after all, the public’s money that the NDP 
used to grease Murdoch Carriere’s palm. 
 
. . . [We] are dealing with taxpayers’ money here. You are 
protecting the rights of women to work in a 
harassment-free atmosphere. There has to be some sense 
of responsibility there. 

There are . . . too many unresolved issues and unanswered 
questions about this whole procedure. 
 
The only winner has been Murdoch Carriere. The nine 
women who complained about him certainly won very 
little. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree with him more. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And as I said in my opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, on a day 
when we have an investigation into a cover-up of possible fraud 
in the NDP caucus, I would hope, I would hope that this NDP 
government would learn from their mistakes and, considering 
these recent events, that the NDP would realize the importance 
of openness and accountability and release the information that 
we have requested, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a long-standing 
precedent in this House to respect privacy and personal 
information. And honouring this precedent, Mr. Speaker, the 
government considers it inappropriate to provide the settlement 
agreement between the Government of Saskatchewan and Mr. 
Murdoch Carriere. Therefore this government will be voting 
against this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Southeast, 
seconded by the member for Martensville, to move an order of 
the Assembly to issue for return no. 2 showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: a copy of the 
settlement agreement between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Mr. Murdoch Carriere for the 
settlement that was announced on February 27, 2007 by 
the Minister of the Environment. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe . . . Would the members . . . Call 
in the members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:02 until 15:04.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

the motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Southeast, 
seconded by the member for Martensville, to move an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no. 2. Would those who favour 
the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 26] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kerpan 
Kirsch Brkich Morgan 
Heppner Duncan  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Mr. Speaker, 
those opposed, 28; those for, 26. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion defeated. 
 

Return No. 21 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
join in to move a motion regarding return no. 21 asking the 
Minister of Health to provide a copy of the most recent update 
provided to Sun Country Health Region by Deloitte Inc. as part 
of an occupational and service delivery review undertaken by 
the health authority in January 2001. 
 
It’s interesting that this motion would come up for debate today. 
Having been through Premier’s estimates last night and sitting 
in this House I guess, yesterday afternoon, listening to the 
debate between our leader, the member from Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, and the Premier, the member 
from Riversdale, and the first questions that our leader asked 
the Premier was really all around health care. And it was really 
quite interesting. 
 
And I’ve looked into Hansard, and I do want to quote from 
Hansard in a couple of cases the irony of the Premier and the 
fact they’re not releasing this report from the Sun Country 
Health Authority. So I do have a number of statements that I’m 
going to be making. So . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, to ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am very pleased to introduce 
to the members of the legislature this afternoon 33 students 
from St. Mark’s School in Saskatoon in the constituency of 
Riversdale, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
St. Mark’s School is a very exciting school. I have had many 
occasions to be at St. Mark’s School, and I believe the last one 
was when the school very graciously hosted a wonderful 
citizenship court. And I’m so pleased to see these students from 
grade 6 from St. Mark’s here this afternoon. They are joined by 
two of their teachers, Mr. James Strasky and Mr. Syd Figora 
and a number of folks who have come along as chaperones. So 
I’d ask all members to welcome the students of grade 6 from St. 
Mark’s. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 21 
(continued) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I was 
saying that it’s interesting that this motion wouldn’t have been 
answered by the government, that we’d have to have the debate 
today on this very thing. Having heard the Premier speak last 
night and the debate that went on last night in the Premier’s 
estimates, I was saying that the Leader of the Opposition asked 
some very good questions on health care. 
 
The first question he asked was really centred around human 
resources because that is the issue in health care right now. By 
far the most important issue is the lack of nurses and the lack of 
doctors and the impact that is having on the health care system. 
It’s a huge impact. It’s an impact that we see the symptoms on a 
regular basis. 
 
The symptoms are closing of emergency rooms — whether it’s 
in Kamsack or Canora, Preeceville, Spiritwood, Shellbrook, all 
the different hospitals. I think I’ve added them up. There’s 14 or 
15 facilities that have had temporary closures of service just 
because we don’t have the proper complement of health care 
professionals, whether it’s nurses or whether it’s doctors. 
 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

So that was a premise of the question put forward by our leader 
to the Premier last night or yesterday afternoon in estimates. 
And he talked about it wasn’t a new issue. This issue has been 
going on for a number of years. And he read, as I had read, 
some of those same clips back in the mid-’90s, clips from the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons about a looming doctor 
shortage. This was back in the mid-’90s. And now we’re seeing 
it come to fruition. 
 
We also heard concerns from SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses]. And they’ve said over and over again that this 
government simply didn’t listen to their concerns, and if you 
don’t listen to our concerns, we’re going to be facing huge 
nursing shortages, which we are now. And because of those 
shortages, we’re facing facility closures, temporary closures. 
 
So that was the premise of the question put forward by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
And I read through Hansard . . . well I listened to the Premier 
yesterday afternoon answer that question, and he tried to deal 
with the issue of shortages. And he tried to talk about how 
they’ve increased the number of seats by 55 per cent, I think, in 
about the last 10 years, which is really kind of interesting that 
they would use the percentages; they wouldn’t use the numbers 
because if they used the numbers, you would soon find out how 
low they cut the number of training seats in our universities. 
They cut them so low that when they add, you know, 100 or 
150, it looks like a lot if you use a percentage. We increased it 
by 55 per cent instead of using the actual numbers. 
 
So he talked about that. The Premier talked about that for a little 
while. But then he got on to certainly what we know is going to 
be what they think is a huge attack point for them in the next 
general election. And I just want to read from Hansard what the 
Premier had to say. I won’t say it quite as well as he did, but 
I’m going to read word for word what the Premier had to say in 
Hansard. 
 
And he goes on to say, well all that we’re hearing from that 
Leader of the Opposition . . . because what he was questioning 
is, does the Leader of the Opposition have any solutions? And 
of course we have lots of those solutions. But what he wanted to 
key in on is one thing that we have been talking about, that the 
leader has talked about in brief, so he goes on. I better just read 
this from top to bottom: 
 

Well all that we’ve . . . [been hearing] from that Leader of 
the Opposition and that opposition is a plan to audit health 
care expenditures in this province — not to add nurses, not 
to add doctors, but to add auditors to the system to audit 
the system. And, Madam Chair, I say to the health care 
workers of Saskatchewan, you ought to beware of the 
auditors that that party would put in place if they’re . . . in 
government, Madam Chair. They’re not auditors who are 
worried about the health care of Saskatchewan people or 
Saskatchewan families or Saskatchewan children. They’re 
auditors worried about the bottom line. 

 
So that’s what the Premier had to say about the patient-first 
evaluation of the system that we’re talking about. He’s very, 
very worried about putting auditors into the system. He says if 
we put auditors into the system, we’re not putting money into 

doctors and nurses. 
 
Well the Leader of the Opposition then went on to explain to 
the Premier that, under his watch, there are auditors in the 
system. And that’s exactly what this return talks about. This 
return talks about Deloitte Inc. auditing the Sun Country Health 
Region on occupational and service delivery review. That’s 
what it’s called. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Well it was interesting to listen, to watch the Premier after the 
member from Swift Current pointed out that under his 
government the health authorities are being audited right now. 
And it was really quite interesting. So I go on after the Leader 
of the Opposition questioned the Premier and said yes, but 
you’re doing it. This government under your watch have 
auditors, are putting auditors in place. 
 
Well the next response, it was . . . You know, there’s a 
commercial running on, I think, one of the radio stations right 
now. It’s through Murray Wood. And when you have somebody 
kind of caught and he doesn’t know what to say, Murray Wood 
goes back to the Jackie Gleason Show and it’s a hummena 
moment — when he goes “hummena, hummena, hummena” 
because he doesn’t know quite what to say. Well I would 
honestly say watching the Premier last night or yesterday 
afternoon, he had a hummena moment because he wasn’t quite 
sure what he was going to say. 
 
But I do have it, and the nice part is we have Hansard. The 
great part is we have Hansard. And we are going to . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member from Regina 
Victoria or Dewdney, who we’re not sure if he’s going to come 
back, he certainly still has a voice. I don’t know if he has the 
energy. 
 
It’s interesting that the Minister of Finance at 39 years old 
would say he doesn’t have the energy to continue on. But this 
member does have the energy. I think that’s a real telling story 
of how much energy is left in that government when they talk 
about the former Minster of Finance as the energy source for 
that government. That’s a pretty scary thing. 
 
But let’s go back to the motion that we’re debating, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think that’s what you rather me talk about. 
And so anyway, so the Premier has difficulty with our leader’s 
response. So what the Premier goes on to say: 
 

[Well] Madam Chair, this of course is the normal course 
of business within the regions. Of course this is the normal 
course of business. This is quite a different approach, quite 
a different approach, Madam Chair, than what has been 
recommended by the party opposite. Now we first 
interestingly had this idea . . . it’s not a new idea. It’s not a 
new idea [at all]. 

 
Isn’t that interesting? He’s saying that we’re looking at auditing 
and that he’s going to really lash out at us doing an evaluation, 
a patient-first evaluation in the health care system. And he’s 
really kind of lambasting us. And in his second answer, he’s 
going on to say that, well this is not a new idea. It’s not a new 
idea at all because they’re doing it. It was really interesting. 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

So they have an auditor in more than just one health authority. 
We’re talking about the Sun Country Health Authority, but 
there are many other health authorities that are doing the same 
process. So if a provincial government was to look at the whole 
system, would that be wrong as opposed to individual health 
authorities looking at their own operations? It was really quite 
interesting. It definitely was a hummena moment because the 
Premier just really kind of got caught in his tracks, and you 
know for the rest of the estimates he never brought up that audit 
because they’re doing it; the government is doing it themselves. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, all we were asking for . . . Because it’s 
taxpayers’ money that goes in to performing one of these audits, 
it’s taxpayers’ money that has hired Deloitte Inc. to do an audit 
of the Sun Country Health Region. All we are doing in this 
Assembly is asking us to, asking us to . . . asking the 
government to release that audit, to release that audit. And for 
some reason they seem not to. Well I certainly know why they 
don’t want to, I mean, because I’m thinking it’s going to 
probably be telling us that they are far short of the number of 
proper complements of doctors and nurses that this province 
needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think I’ve made my point. I think I’ve made my point that 
the Premier sure likes to talk about how terrible having auditors 
in the health care system are until it’s under his watch when 
they do have health care auditors, and well that’s not the same. 
It’s different, but really, Mr. Speaker, it’s not different at all. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy: 
 

That a copy of the most recent update provided to the Sun 
Country Health Region by Deloitte Inc., as part of the 
occupational and service delivery review undertaken by 
the health authority in January 2007. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, seconded by the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, to move an order of the Assembly to issue for Return 
No. 21 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: A copy of the most recent 
update provided to the Sun Country Health Region by 
Deloitte Inc., as part of the operational and service 
delivery review undertaken by the health authority in 
January 2007. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to second the motion put 
forward by the member for Indian Head-Milestone, and I 
appreciate my colleague leaving me a smidgen of time this 
afternoon to talk about this important subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why I think these are important 
questions that are being asked is throughout this entire session 
. . . and it goes back before this session. But what got me 
thinking about this was a lot of times, whether it’s question 

period or whether it’s in debate, we have members from the 
government side calling over to our side talking how we want to 
do an audit of the system, of the health care system. And 
particularly the Minister of Finance and the Health minister, 
they like to use this line. 
 
But somebody probably should have told them that their own 
health regions are doing audits in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we know that Deloitte is currently 
completing an audit of the Sun Country Health Region and so 
that’s . . . When I learned of this I thought it would be 
interesting to get the government members’ perspective on this, 
knowing, them knowing now that their own health regions are 
doing audits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a part of this motion for return (debatable) asking 
for a recent update, it actually goes hand in hand with a couple 
of written questions that were put in by my colleague, the 
Health critic. And the three questions that he asked were which 
health regions had engaged Deloitte for an operation and 
service delivery review. 
 
And the second question, the second question’s interesting. It 
was, what are the timelines for completion? And the answer that 
we got back from the Minister of Health is that the department 
is not aware of the timeline for this review; Sun Country Health 
would make this determination. And, Mr. Speaker, I question 
whether or not the minister actually phoned Sun Country and 
asked what the timelines were because I know the timelines are 
that this review would be completed by May 2007. Yet his 
department is not aware of that. So do they not discuss this? 
Would he not, when he gets these written questions, would he 
not phone down to Sun Country and find out when the review 
would be completed by Deloitte? 
 
These are particularly serious questions considering what’s 
happening in Weyburn right now at our hospital. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that we learned just in the last couple of weeks that 
maternity services are being temporarily — in the words of the 
minister — temporarily suspended over the summer. But then 
there’s some confusion to that because in committee I asked the 
minister about that and he was confident that maternity services 
would be operational by the fall, by the end of the summer. And 
now the officials, the vice-president of Sun Country Health, 
isn’t sure if maternity services will be offered by this fall. 
 
So the people of Weyburn and area, the people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, particularly the people around Weyburn who use the 
Weyburn General Hospital, they are very concerned about what 
is the state of the hospital, what is the state of the health region, 
the entire health region. 
 
And so if the government would table the most recent update 
provided by Deloitte, this would help to clarify some of the 
questions that I’m hearing in my constituency office, questions 
that I’m hearing at events that I’m at on the weekends, when 
I’m raking my lawn and I have people on my street coming up 
to me and asking what’s happening at the hospital, at the health 
region. And as we know, as we know and as I said, maternity 
services are being suspended over summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of representing the people of 
Weyburn and at one time they were represented by former 



May 16, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

Premier Tommy Douglas. And Premier Douglas talked about 
providing health care services from cradle to grave to the people 
of this province. Well in Weyburn right now it’s not so much of 
the cradle side of it, Mr. Speaker. And people are very 
concerned that maternity services will not be offered over the 
summer. 
 
And the minister, he’s saying that it’s not only due to a shortage 
of nurses. But everybody that you talk to in Sun Country Health 
Region, anybody that you talk to says that it’s because of a 
shortage of nurses. That’s the reason. 
 
And if we could see this review being done by Deloitte, if they 
would get this review, the update of the audit that we could see, 
then that would alleviate, I would think it would alleviate some 
of the concerns. Because right now there’s a lot of rumour and 
there’s a lot of speculation. 
 
We know it’s maternity services right now but officials from 
Sun Country have said that in the past it was ICU [intensive 
care unit]. In the recent past, just in the last couple of months 
ICU services had to be temporarily suspended because they 
didn’t have enough health professionals to run those 
departments. 
 
And so I find it very interesting that members from the 
government would accuse the members of this side, our party, 
of hiring audits — when what we’re talking about is a patient 
care review — at the same time when they’re hiring audits in 
the health care system, in the regions like Sun Country. And as 
the written questions would show, we asked which health 
regions had hired Deloitte. They answered one, the Sun 
Country. 
 
But I question that also. I believe there are others. I believe 
there’re possibly three others that have been hired by Deloitte. 
So to me, Mr. Speaker, the answers that we were given don’t 
exactly tell the whole story. And I think perhaps the Minister of 
Health should make a phone call to Sun Country and clarify his 
answers so that we can get the proper information on this 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if we had the updated information and 
recent update provided to Sun Country . . . Perhaps Deloitte 
hasn’t finished the entire audit. I believe that they’re now out of 
the health region. They’ve wrapped up their work by May, by 
this month, but they’re probably putting together what 
information they did come up with after auditing the Sun 
Country Health Region. But I’m sure they did update the health 
region and the department as to what their findings were. I’m 
convinced that Deloitte, in their audit of the Sun Country Health 
Region, that they would have provided an update. So what 
we’re asking for, what this motion is asking for is for this 
government, for this Minister of Health to provide a copy of the 
most recent update of the audit that is taking place in Sun 
Country Health Region. 
 
Perhaps there are other regions. I believe there are three other 
regions that have hired Deloitte in the recent past to do an audit 
of the health care system under this NDP government. And I 
think that this minister should provide the update of that audit 
that was given to the management, to the steering committee of 
the Sun Country Health Region, and I think that that would 

alleviate, that would at least give information. People of 
Weyburn have concerns of what’s happening in their health 
care system, not only at Weyburn General but at other facilities, 
and I believe that perhaps some light could be shed on what 
Deloitte is finding through the audit that they are doing of the 
health care system under this NDP government. 
 
And so I am very pleased to second this motion put forward by 
the member for Indian Head-Milestone to return no. 21 
showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: [provide] a copy of the most 
recent update provided to the Sun Country Health Region 
by Deloitte Inc., as part of the operational and service 
delivery review undertaken by the health region in January 
2007. 

 
I think the people of Weyburn and area, the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, need to know what the audit of the Sun 
Country Health Region under this NDP government, what that 
audit is going to show, what the interim report, if there’s an 
interim report of an audit that is taking place under the NDP 
government of the health region. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the review referenced in the 
motion is one that was prepared for the health region in 
question and consequently is the property of that health region. 
It does not belong to the government. As such, the Government 
of Saskatchewan is unable to release the review in question and 
will be voting against this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Is there a member that 
would like to take the floor at this time? The question before the 
Assembly is the motion moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, seconded by the member for Weyburn, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 21. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the nos have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Nos have it, on division. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2007 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the good work of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:32.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1644 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1645 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1645 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................1645, 1660 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
 2007 Award of Excellence in Nursing 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
 St. Angela’s Academy Closes 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
 Health Career Role Models for Northern Youth 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
 Rights of Children and Youth 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Investigation into Caucus Response to Misappropriation of Funds 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1648 
 Judge’s Suspension 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1649 
 Plans to Combat Climate Change 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1650 
 Farming Issues 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1651 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1652 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 Return No. 2 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1653 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1657 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
 Recorded Division ......................................................................................................................................................................1660 
 Return No. 21 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


