






















































Hansard: May 03, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 56A  THURSDAY, MAY 3, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1489 
 May 3, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Good morning. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this morning to present another petition in regards to 
health care and the health care needs in the province of 
Saskatchewan and in particular the need for lab services in the 
Lafleche and District Health Centre. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present this morning is signed by 
folks from the communities of Lafleche and Wood River. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens of the province regarding rural 
schools and the issue around whether they should be under 
review or keeping them open. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Francis and Sedley 
schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Francis, 
Sedley, Creelman, Odessa, Weyburn, Arcola, Carlyle. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are concerned about the future of the basic 
education classes at the Estevan campus of the Southeast 
Regional College. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that basic education classes 
continue to be offered at the Estevan campus of the 
Southeast Regional College. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from the citizens of Wilkie who are concerned 
about cutbacks in their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the South that are very 
concerned about the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre and the hardships it will cause the 
residents particularly seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
Woodrow, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with our health 
care system and the potentially dangerous situation that’s 
happening in my area — Rosthern, Shellbrook, Spiritwood, and 
Hafford. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to improve timely access to medical 
treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are all from the fine 
community of Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition for the people of Saskatchewan who 
are deeply concerned about the presence of sexual predators 
that present a threat to our communities. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up public disclosure process so 
that communities are alerted to the presence of a known 
sex offender in their community as soon as possible. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth, 
Prud’homme, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the underfunding to school 
divisions that’s causing schools to close: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These particular petitions are signed by the good citizens from 
the towns of Watrous, Nokomis, Redvers, Regina, Govan, and 
Lanigan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to present a petition that the citizens of Imperial, 
Govan, Nokomis, Drake, and surrounding areas are well served 
by the schools in their communities and that the closure of these 
schools would cause undue hardship to residents, particularly 
young students. 
 
And the prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that Imperial, Govan, 
Nokomis, and Drake schools remain open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Govan and Nokomis, I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you and to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce 25 grades 9 to 12 students, I believe, seated in the 
east gallery. These students are from the great city of Saskatoon 
and the great high school of St. Joseph’s high school. They are 
English as second language students. They are here today 
accompanied by their teachers, Larraine Ratzlaff and Elizabeth 
de Carle; Sheena Wing and Charlene Boes as teacher assistants. 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of ourselves and the government, I’d 
like to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce a very special group 
of students here today. They are four high schools travelling 
together from Saskatoon, and they’re seated in the east and west 
galleries. Now all of these students are English as second 
language high school students, and they come from many 
different parts of the world, and now they’re making Saskatoon 
their home. 
 
First I’d like to introduce, from E. D. Feehan Catholic High 
School, 25 grade 9 to 12 students and their teacher is Roberto 
Godoy. Now of course he is the coordinator of this trip, 
accompanied with Theresa Hitchings. 
 
Bishop James Mahoney High School is here as well — 25 grade 
10 and 11 students. Their teacher is Donalda Gerstmar, and 
they’re with Tami Shirley and Rosanne Cechaniwicz. And as 
well, 13 grade 10 students from Holy Cross High School, and 
their teachers are Jean McLachlan and Margaret Schatz. And as 
well as introduced already, the group from St. Joe’s high 
school, 25 grade 9 to 12 students, teachers Larraine Ratzlaff and 
Elizabeth de Carle, Sheena Wing and Charlene Boes. 
 
So I’d ask all members to give them a warm greeting to this 
House. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want also to of course 
welcome all of the students, but one in particular. Lorenzo 
Gonzalez is a friend of mine who is living with my wife 
Lorna’s and my son and his wife, Jay and Kaeli Trew in 
Saskatoon. And Lorenzo is one of the grade 9 students, but he 
hails from Monterrey, Mexico. Monterrey is a city in the 
northern part of Mexico, and I just want to acknowledge 
Lorenzo’s part here today. And I want to share with him that 
I’m looking forward to seeing him over the weekend in 
Saskatoon at my son and daughter-in-law’s place. So please, 
again welcome my friend, Lorenzo Gonzalez. Thank you. 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members, I would 
like to introduce a couple of noted performers who may or may 
not be seated in your gallery. Three-time Grammy winner, 
Walter Ostanek may be up there; I can’t see the whole gallery. 
But Walter will be performing at the Mae Wilson Theatre in 
Moose Jaw on Friday night and at a sold-out performance at 
Casino Regina on Saturday. 
 
With Mr. Ostanek performing is Ron Sluga of Cleveland, Ohio. 
And Mr. Sluga played banjo with America’s polka king, 
Frankie Yankovic, and boasts the distinction of being the 
musician fired most frequently by Mr. Yankovic over a period 
of almost 30 years. In addition to their Friday and Saturday 
performances, Mr. Ostanek and Mr. Sluga along . . . And here 
they come, Mr. Speaker, a timely entrance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was giving the introduction for these gentlemen, 
Mr. Sluga and Mr. Ostanek. I’d ask Mr. Ostanek to give a wave 
so people would know who he is; and Mr. Sluga, the most-fired 
frequently by Frankie Yankovic over almost 30 years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in addition to their Friday and Saturday 
performances, Mr. Ostanek and Mr. Sluga, along with 
Saskatchewan’s Western Senators, will be taping 13 new 
episodes of their hit television series, PolkaRama, on Sunday, 
Monday, and Tuesday of next week. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming our guests to the 
Saskatchewan legislature. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join the hon. member across 
the way in welcoming Walter Ostanek and Ron Sluga to our 
legislature. I understand as well that Mr. Ostanek and his wife, 
Irene, are celebrating their 50th wedding anniversary this year. I 
congratulate them on that and also 50 years as a band leader. So 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating them and 
welcoming Walter and Ron to our legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Possession of Confidential Reports 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have found out this morning that the Regina Police Service has 
launched an internal investigation into how two of their 
confidential reports came into the possession of someone 
outside the police service. The Sask Party tabled these illegally 

obtained documents in this House on Tuesday. They also posted 
them on their website for the entire world to see. 
 
The police will, no doubt, be very interested in just how the 
Saskatchewan Party got a hold of these illegally obtained 
documents. All the public knows is that a mysterious brown 
envelope showed up in the Saskatchewan Party caucus office. 
How did this envelope get there? We don’t know. When exactly 
did it show up? We don’t know. Who delivered it to their 
office? We don’t know. 
 
The reason we don’t know any of this is because the Sask Party 
has not exactly been forthright in providing this information to 
the police and the public. We certainly hope that the 
Saskatchewan Party will be far more co-operative with the 
police and their investigation into this than they have been so 
far with the people of Saskatchewan on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Fundraising Event for Sofia House 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I had the privilege of attending a special fundraiser put on 
by three Saskatchewan Party candidates from the Queen City. 
Terrill Young from Regina Coronation Park, Raynelle Wilson 
from Regina Lakeview, and Christine Tell from Regina 
Wascana Plains joined forces with Candyce Bakke of Regina’s 
Shear Escape Salon & Spa and hosted Martinis & Manicures, 
an event in support of Regina’s Sofia House. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Sophia House provides safe and 
affordable housing, counselling, support groups, and 
community resource referrals for abused women and their 
children. 
 
The spa was abuzz last night with women from all over Regina 
who turned out to find out more about our candidates and to 
support the women who find themselves in abusive 
relationships. Other guests last night included Peggy Hennig, 
the executive director of Sofia House; Saskatchewan Party 
president, Michelle Hunter; and even my colleague from Wood 
River. On a lighter note I must say, Mr. Speaker, the 
aestheticians were bound and determined to give the member 
from Wood River a pedicure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the more than 50 women that 
came out for last night’s event, all of the young women from 
Richard’s Beauty College & Esthetics who donated their time 
and experience, Candyce Bakke of Shear Escapes for hosting 
the event, and the three Regina Saskatchewan Party candidates 
for putting on a wonderful fundraising event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

Confidential Document 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recent events make it 
crystal clear that members of the opposition are willing to 
trample anything and anyone they think is in their way getting 
to the Premier’s office. That includes, Mr. Speaker, making 
public an illegally obtained document by tabling it in this 
legislature — a document that was not only illegally obtained 
but also contained private, confidential, and personal 
information about Saskatchewan citizens; a document that in 
hands of a more responsible and less power-hungry men and 
women would never have seen the light of day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this unconscionable breach of confidentiality 
and privacy did not stop there. The Sask Party actually posted it 
on their website. Now, Mr. Speaker, Regina police are 
attempting to get all the copies of this confidential document 
back into their possession where it belongs. But thanks to the 
irresponsibility of the Sask Party, that’s just not possible. 
 
That’s how the Sask Party acts in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people? No, Mr. Speaker, that’s how the Sask 
Party acts in the best interests of the Sask Party, and the 
citizen’s right to privacy be hanged. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Humboldt Broncos Give Their All for the Anavet Cup 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend the Humboldt Broncos put up the fight of their life 
in the championship game of the Anavet Cup in Selkirk, 
Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, after four gruelling overtime periods, 
the Broncos lost to the Selkirk Steelers 4 to 3. 
 
Following an exhausting schedule of six games in seven nights, 
the series stretched into its eighth night with the championship 
matchup going well past midnight. After two goals by the 
Steelers in the first and second periods, Broncos players, Russ 
Nielsen and Steven Schroeder scored back-to-back power play 
goals in the second period. The Steelers gained the lead again, 
but soon after the Broncos’ Matt Kirzinger tied things up in the 
third period sending the game to overtime. 
 
After three overtimes, Mr. Speaker, the game was still tied with 
both teams’ goalies facing more than 50 shots on goal during 
six periods of play. The Steelers scored their fourth goal on a 
power play during the fourth period of overtime. Mr. Speaker, 
Broncos’ goalie Nathan Heinen should be commended for 
stopping 60 of 64 shots on goal. 
 
The member from Arm River-Watrous would also like to 
commend his constituent, Tory Allan, for games well played. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 
to join me in congratulating all the members of the Humboldt 
Broncos as well as the head coach, Dean Brockman, for giving 
it their all during the Anavet Cup. The fans are very proud of 
them. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Theft From Saskatchewan Party 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting that the 
Saskatchewan Party has spent all session, every question 
period, looking into personnel matters that are 5, 12, or 14 years 
old. Now the newspaper has another five-year-old personnel 
issue, but this one is headlined “Sask. Party had its own theft.” 
 
What exactly did this theft entail, Mr. Speaker? A story right 
out of Hollywood movies — there was a hidden spy camera, a 
complicated sting operation, and a timeline of several weeks of 
questionable activity before the issue was resolved. But what I 
found most interesting is how long it took for this information 
to become public. The Sask Party has been unequivocal in their 
position. They have a zero tolerance policy for any of these 
types of incidents. They should be reported no matter how 
small. 
 
Who planted the security camera? We don’t know. Who was 
the person who took the money? We don’t know. Was an audit 
done? We don’t know. Were the police called in? We don’t 
know. How many members of the caucus were informed about 
this? We don’t know. But we do know that the Sask Party did 
not choose to make the public know of this incident until now, 
when they were caught, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Cannington. 
 

Ethics 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, in 1994, former NDP 
[New Democratic Party] MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] Pat Lorjé told the police that it was the intention of 
her caucus to conceal fraud. We also know that all NDP MLAs 
and staff were fully briefed on this incident in 1994 at two 
separate meetings. That means that a number of the members 
opposite were fully aware of the cover-up and chose to sweep it 
under the carpet. 
 
Who was sitting around the caucus table at that time? Well that 
would include the current Premier, the member for Moose Jaw 
North, Saskatoon Nutana, Prince Albert Northcote, Prince 
Albert Carlton, Regina Coronation Park, Regina Douglas Park, 
Saskatoon Massey Place, Regina Wascana Plains, Yorkton, 
Meadow Lake and Regina Rosemont. The member for Regina 
South was a caucus staffer at that time. 
 
Speaking of the member for Regina Rosemont, I wonder if any 
of the members opposite feel they pass her ethics test as 
outlined in her recent CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association] report. Her ethics test includes three checks: 
 

The Gut Check: Does this action feel like the right thing, 
or does it feel “funny?” 
The “Mom” Check: Could I reveal my conduct to my 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

mother or father without shame? 
The Washington Post Check: Would I be willing to have 
my conduct reported on the front page of The Washington 
Post? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think members opposite would have to answer 
no to these three checks, but being NDP perhaps not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Personnel Problem 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it turns 
out that the Saskatchewan Party caucus had a bit of a personnel 
problem. One of their members was concerned about missing 
money. This indeed is a very serious concern. We know the 
caucus Chair was involved, and we know the party leader was 
involved. We also know that the member for Canora-Pelly was 
involved in the decision on what the appropriate course was to 
deal with this incident. 
 
We know the caucus chief of staff asked for and received the 
employee’s resignation, but what happened next, Mr. Speaker? 
Was this employee turned over to the police, Mr. Speaker? No, 
this employee was turned over to a completely different group. 
This employee got a job with the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation. 
 
I wonder if the Sask Party offered a letter of reference to those 
new employers. I wonder if they informed the taxpayers 
federation that this employee may have misappropriated 
taxpayer dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Alleged Concealment of Wrongdoing 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, an editorial in today’s Leader-Post says it’s decision 
time for the Premier. And the only decision he should make is 
to accept the resignation of the NDP House Leader. Mr. 
Speaker, on Monday the Premier said the reason he had not 
accepted the minister’s resignation is that the Premier believed 
the minister was telling the truth, and he was not involved in 
covering up fraud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, 
in light of Pat Lorjé saying it was the intention of caucus to 
conceal fraud, will the Premier now accept the minister’s 
resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this. 
There are families in the province of Saskatchewan today who 
have 3 feet of water in their living rooms, Mr. Speaker. There 
are students today who are graduating from our universities and 
our colleges who are beginning their careers in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. There are seniors in this province concerned about 
their drug plan, Mr. Speaker, and their drug costs. And what do 
we get from the Saskatchewan Party opposition? We get a 
session of questions about four-year-old and 15-year-old 
personnel matters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have asked the Conflict of Interest Commissioner to look into 
all of the outstanding questions around this issue. I am not 
seeking the resignation of the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what’s going on. We’ve got an 
opposition so desperate for power they will just play politics. 
Well this is a government that cares about the people of 
Saskatchewan and that’s not going to change. Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the very first day the 
Saskatchewan Party raised the Murdoch Carriere harassment 
scandal back in 2003, you know what the NDP said? They 
criticized us for breaching confidentiality. Of course, if the 
Carriere harassment report hadn’t been leaked, he would 
probably be still working for this government and victimizing 
women. 
 
Let’s fast forward five years, Mr. Speaker, and the government 
is saying the exact same thing about the NDP fraud scandal. 
The Premier should be less concerned about how we got the 
report and more concerned about what’s in the report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the intention of the NDP to 
conceal fraud and clear evidence that the minister was part of 
that cover-up — Mr. Speaker, is the Premier going to accept the 
minister’s resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s an old 
saying that people who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw 
stones. Now what is the complaint of the opposition here? The 
complaint is that it took two years, Mr. Speaker, for the New 
Democratic Party to refer a theft to the police for investigation. 
That is their complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been revealed that a theft occurred in this 
building in their office, the Saskatchewan Party MLA offices. 
That was five years ago, Mr. Speaker, and they have never 
reported it to the police, Mr. Speaker. And I say to them 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

through you today, Mr. Speaker, have they reported it to the 
police as of today, Mr. Speaker? And if they have not, any 
fair-minded person watching this would know, Mr. Speaker, 
that they do not come to this building with clean hands. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know who leaked the police reports, but I think I can guess 
why. I think I can guess why they leaked those reports. There is, 
Mr. Speaker, there is someone in this province who saw a clear 
case of NDP covering up fraud, and they wanted to bring it to 
light. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that kind of information comes to the 
Saskatchewan Party, when there is clear evidence of the 
government concealing fraud, when there is clear evidence of 
cover-up in the NDP government, we are going to make that 
public every single time. And, Mr. Speaker, would I do it 
again? You bet I would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we did our job. Is 
the Premier going to do his job and fire that minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is this is a 
case of don’t do as I do, but do as I say. They say, Mr. Speaker, 
that wrongdoing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes . . . Order please, members. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, five years ago they obtained a 
videotape of a person stealing money from one of their 
members in their caucus office, someone who was on the public 
payroll in their office, Mr. Speaker. They did not call the police. 
They did not reveal that to the police, Mr. Speaker, now for five 
years. 
 
Their complaint is that there was a similar incident in our 
caucus office that wasn’t brought to the attention of the police 
for two years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they have never gone 
to the police. Now that same member asked this question to the 
minister, Mr. Speaker, about the NDP caucus theft. He said: 
 

. . . why didn’t they immediately go to the police? Why 
was this information withheld from the police? 

 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 

[10:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, don’t 
you find it a little more than a bit ironic that the NDP is 
criticizing us for not taking this report immediately to the 
police? If the NDP had taken the confession letter immediately 
to the police in 1992, they wouldn’t be in the mess that they’re 
in today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Pat Lorjé told police it was the 
intention of caucus to conceal fraud. She told reporters that 
there was a group in caucus who wanted to cover this up, but 
she wasn’t part of that group. Mr. Speaker, who was in that 
group? Was the Premier part of that group? Mr. Speaker, it 
sounds like there was two camps. There was the reveal camp, 
and there was the conceal camp. Which one was the Premier in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, they had a theft in their 
office. Mr. Speaker, they recorded it by videotape. What did 
they do? They concealed it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Every one of them. That member asking 
the question, what did he do? Did he go to the police? No. He 
concealed it, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he did. And every 
member sitting over there was part of an effort to conceal the 
fact that a theft had occurred in their office and it was recorded 
on videotape. And what did they do? They swept it under the 
carpet because they didn’t want to be embarrassed. 
 
And then they have the audacity, Mr. Speaker, to criticize this 
government that — we did what? — we went to the police. But 
they say it took us too long. They have never gone to the police 
to this day about the theft in their office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
obviously it wasn’t just Jim Fodey who knew about the missing 
money in 1992. The Government House Leader knew. He must 
have told other members. He must have even told the member 
from Massey Place. He must have mentioned it to the Premier. 
 
So when the Premier picked up the newspaper in 1992 and saw 
that the police were saying that there were no complaints, and 
Jim Fodey said that there was no money missing, what did he 
do? Did he talk to Jim Fodey? Did he talk to his friend, the 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

NDP House Leader? What did, what did the Premier do when 
he learned that the evidence had not been turned over to the 
police? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the evidence was 
turned over to the police in 1994. That question has been asked 
and answered. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the evidence of a theft that is recorded on 
videotape in the Saskatchewan Party office has never been 
turned over to the police to this day. And I’ve asked the 
opposition through you, Mr. Speaker. Are they now going to 
report this theft to the police, and if not, why not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
funny how no one seems to know anything about this NDP 
fraud cover-up. That’s not quite what the Premier said last year 
when he was talking about another government fraud scandal. 
The Premier said, and I quote: 
 

I am sure that anybody that works in my office has a pretty 
good idea [in] what goes on in my office. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was a member of the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order members. Order. Order. Order. I invite 
the member to continue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was a member of 
the NDP caucus in 1992. The Premier and the minister were 
quite close. They were the two members for Moose Jaw at that 
time. So based on the Premier’s own words, he should have had 
a pretty good idea about what was going on with this NDP 
fraud cover-up. So, Mr. Speaker, did the Premier know, did the 
Premier know about the NDP fraud cover-up, and is that why 
he won’t fire the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that member and his 
colleagues get on their high horse and point fingers at 
everybody else because it took two years for this caucus to go 
to the police, but we went to the police. 
 
There was a theft in their office five years ago. They’ve never 
gone to the police. They want to talk about 1992, something 
that wasn’t reported, you know, 15 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
Well a few short years before that their leader, Mr. Speaker, 
worked in this building for a minister of the Crown, and he and 
that minister ordered the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority to deliver to cabinet ministers’ offices $19,000 worth 
of booze that was paid for by taxpayers’ money. Did the Leader 
of the Opposition ever report that to the police? No, Mr. 
Speaker, he didn’t report that to the police either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, isn’t it 
funny how the NDP is always more interested in going after the 
whistle-blower than going after the people who did something 
wrong? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, on the day they sent out the 
letter praising Murdoch Carriere and transferring him to Regina, 
they sent a letter to his women victims telling them to keep their 
mouth shut. And what are they saying today? That the official 
opposition should have kept its mouth shut about this NDP 
fraud scandal. Mr. Speaker, can you imagine? They wanted us 
to be part of the cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has now had several days to review 
the overwhelming evidence that his minister took part in a fraud 
cover-up. Will the Premier do the right thing and accept his 
resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in the courts they have a 
saying that when you go to court and you ask for equity, you 
have to come in with clean hands. Mr. Speaker, they have been 
using stolen documents from the Regina police department 
which they received and did not report to the police. They have 
been violating the privacy rights of Saskatchewan citizens on 
their website. Mr. Speaker, they refused and continue to refuse 
to report a theft that occurred in their office to the police. 
 
And the point is, Mr. Speaker, that we may have made a 
mistake in not reporting the theft in our office to the police for 
two years — let’s acknowledge that — but they do not have 
clean hands, Mr. Speaker. This is a very hypocritical position 
for them to take. And what we need to know, Mr. Speaker, is 
who stole the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The members will come 
to order. Order. Order. Member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let’s just review 
this Premier’s record of scandal and cover-up. For six years 
they covered up SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] and that minister is still in cabinet. 
During the election, Mr. Speaker, the NDP covered up their 
plan to hike taxes. 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

The Speaker: — Order. Member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 
the election the NDP covered up their plan to hike taxes. The 
minister of Finance admitted it after the election, but that 
minister is still in cabinet. They are still covering up their secret 
legal opinion on the Murdoch Carriere harassment scandal, but 
that minister is still in cabinet. And now we learned the 
Government House Leader covered up fraud, and he is still in 
cabinet. Mr. Speaker, the only minister who ever got punted out 
of cabinet was the guy who questioned the Premier’s 
leadership. Mr. Speaker, if we made any mistake, it was simply 
calling for the minister to go. It’s time for the Premier to go as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, when is the Premier going to do 
the right thing and fire that minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. In this debate . . . 
Order please. Order please. Order please. On a point of order. In 
this debate members have been conducting themselves rather 
well under certain circumstances by generalizing their 
comments. However, I did pick up two comments today, the 
second one just now, where there were personal allegations — 
one against the Government House Leader just now and one 
against the opposition critic who’s making the statements. I ask 
members to be very careful and not to make personal charges. 
Let’s stick to the issues and let’s not have any more personal 
charges. 
 
The Minister for Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the difficulty here, Mr. Speaker, is we 
know that they caught somebody red-handedly with the video 
camera stealing money in their office. We know that they didn’t 
go to the police. We know that they haven’t gone to the police 
to this day. And the serious question I think is this, Mr. 
Speaker, besides the question of why they haven’t gone to the 
police. Was it because if they went to the police and the police 
interviewed the person who conducted the theft that there were 
things going on in that office that they wanted concealed, Mr. 
Speaker, that they wanted concealed? And if that isn’t the case, 
Mr. Speaker, then let them go to the police and let the police 
interview that employee and we’ll see what the employee has to 
say about what they’re trying to conceal about what’s going on 
in their office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I asked a series of questions to determine exactly how 
much taxpayers’ money was missing from the NDP caucus but, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister was in one of her moods and, you 
know, I’ll be asking the questions in this legislature. Well 
today, Mr. Speaker, I would like one member on that side of the 
House, one of the cabinet ministers . . . 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
September 1992 report by Mintz & Wallace Chartered 
Accountants places the losses at about $6,166. However page 9 
of the 1994 police report describes how a caucus employee, 
Gail Fehr, found a note in a folder from Ann Lord to then 
caucus Chair and Jim Fodey. The amount of that note was for 
$10,000 that supposedly Ann Lord had misappropriated. Mr. 
Speaker, the question is: what is the actual amount that was 
taken from the NDP caucus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
just say to the members opposite that I’m getting a bit old for 
one of those moods. But anyway I just . . . You know, he was 
talking about my mood. I’m getting a bit old; I’m moving into 
my senior years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to say this to the members opposite. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, these men and women 
believe that they are going to become the next government and 
they’re going to become the government shortly. But you know, 
Mr. Speaker, what I find most disturbing . . . According to 
them. But what I most find disturbing, Mr. Speaker, and I 
listened to the member from Canora-Pelly. You know what he 
said? He said that he would release people’s private, personal 
information if he thought it was in the public interest. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, people of this province have the right to go to the 
police. They have the right to give information to the police and 
they have a right not to find it on the Sask Party website. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the calls that are coming into our constituency offices, 
the talk on talk shows across the province is starting to be, 
actually how many dollars are we dealing with here? There’s so 
many numbers out there, Mr. Speaker, anywhere from 6 to 8 to 
10,000. And now, Mr. Speaker, in the report that we have 
received and the government has received — they’ve had time 
to go over it — Carla Douglas said the amount was almost 
$20,000. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this government owes it to the taxpayers 
and they owe it to the public to come forward and give the exact 
amount of taxpayers’ dollars that were defrauded from those 
same taxpayers. How much was it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The caucus office did a KPMG report 
that was tabled in this House. It was done in November, tabled 
. . . It was done in 1994, tabled in this legislature — $6,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, these people are serving 
to obstruct justice in this province by releasing people’s private 
information, and it makes people reluctant to go to the police 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now have read in the front page of the Leader-Post that 
they had a little problem in their caucus. Someone stole money 
in their caucus. They put in a private security system to find out 
who it was. 
 
We want to know who stole the money. Why didn’t they go to 
the police? Was it because the person who stole the money had 
something on members over there and threatened that if they 
went to the police, they’d make that information public? That’s 
what we want to know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. Okay. Order. Order please. Okay, I 
would ask . . . Order please. Order please. I would ask the two 
members to take their discussion elsewhere so we can proceed 
with the orders of the day. Order please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 68, The 
Status of the Artist Act, 2007 be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 68, The Status of the Artist 
Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Orders of the day. 
 
For what purpose does the member seek recognition? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to seek leave of the House 
to make a statement about an anticipated visit of the Princess 
Royal before Orders of the Day. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted for the Premier to make a 
statement with respect to this visit, royal visit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Princess Royal to Visit Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I am pleased to announce that a member of the royal 
family will be visiting our province. Her Royal Highness, the 
Princess Royal, is scheduled to visit Saskatchewan in June 
2007. It is an honour and a privilege to receive the Princess 
Royal in our province once again and it’s my pleasure today to 
inform you of the purpose of her visit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from June 1 to 4, the Princess Royal will be in 
Saskatchewan to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Royal 
Regina Rifles. The Princess is Colonel-in-Chief of the regiment 
which has served its city, province, and country in times of 
peace and war throughout the century. 
 
The specific details of her visit will be announced in the weeks 
to come but I know that the Princess Royal will have an 
ambitious schedule of events and activities in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, royal visits are important events that generate 
excitement in this province and provide an opportunity to 
showcase Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan, our land, on 
a national and international stage. We are very pleased that the 
Princess Royal has accepted an invitation to come to our great 
province. I know that the people of Saskatchewan will extend a 
very warm welcome to her during her visit. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,303 through 
1,306 inclusive. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,303 to 1,306 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

Government’s Performance 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly is a privilege to join in or to initiate the debate, the 
75-minute debate today on a motion that we put forward. I 
don’t think the motion could be more timely. It talks about a 
number of things, not just the fraud cover-up by this NDP 
government but it goes back a number of years and looks at 
many different issues that this government has been involved in 
that have been dealt with less than honestly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether it’s the scandals of Channel Lake. It 
doesn’t matter whether it’s the issue around SPUDCO. It 
doesn’t matter whether it’s Carriere or Ann Lord and the latest 
fraud cover-up that the NDP has found itself in. 
 
There are many different situations or scandals that this 
government has been involved in. It’s been governing for 16 
years. And I know we have been saying, and I know I hear it all 
the time out in the constituencies — I hear people tell me on a 
regular basis — it’s a tired, old, worn out government. And 
when you become tired, old, and worn out, you start to see 
scandals like this. They get, they get a little bit reckless, and 
you’ll see a number of scandals that this government hasn’t 
been involved in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we could probably put a motion forward on 
each and every one of those. We’re going to talk about them all 
as a group. But certainly the Channel Lake was an issue a 
number of years ago. But what I want to talk about more 
recently, where I have maybe a better memory of, is the 
SPUDCO scandal, the Carriere issue, and the whole issue of 
fraud that this government covered up for two years before it 
went to the police. 
 
The first one is the whole issue around SPUDCO and some of 
the problems that this government found itself in with the 
SPUDCO situation. It was interesting. It was only probably a 
couple of years in when the minister responsible at that time, 
the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, I believe, had 
to stand in this House and apologize. And why did he have to 
apologize? You don’t see that very often. But a minister 
standing in the House apologizing for simply misleading the 
public for six years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He misled the public for six years by saying that a partnership 
was struck by . . . with the government and private companies 
to build the structures — the potato sheds, for example. The 
ministers had told the public and deceived the public by saying 
that it was supposedly a 51 to 49 per cent private-public venture 
for the cost of the storage sheds. But, Mr. Speaker, that was told 
to the public, for six years, that it was a private-public 
partnership on a 51 to 49 per cent split. 
 
But the whole issue, after much questioning by the opposition, 
and finally the minister had to come clean, had to stand in the 
House and apologize for what he had been telling the people of 
Saskatchewan. But what is even more interesting is he was out 
of cabinet, I believe for a little while, but then put right back in 
the cabinet. So you can deceive the public for six years on a 
public-private partnership and the punishment is virtually 
nothing. He’s back in cabinet making decisions regarding 
public money, and there are some huge concerns with that. 

The other issue that was really interesting with this NDP 
government on that whole process of the potato sheds is how 
they got around their own Crown tendering agreement. And 
how they could get around the Crown tendering agreement was 
by deceiving the public that it was a public-private partnership, 
when we found out after it wasn’t a public-private partnership. 
The government sunk all the money in and as a consequence we 
lost, I believe, about $30 million . . . $35 million on that issue. 
It was unbelievable that we could lose $35 million after six 
years of a government telling us it was a public-private 
partnership and eventually finding out it wasn’t that way at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and that is, I guess if you could go . . . And I was 
looking at a newspaper article, a commentary that was, I believe 
in Saturday’s paper, April 27, ’07, “Why 1992 fraud case is 
now so important” and it was written by Murray Mandryk. And 
he talks about the three strikes that this government has had. 
And quite frankly after three strikes they should be out. And he 
talks about the first issue which I just finished dealing with 
briefly was the whole SPUDCO issue. 
 
The next issue that he talked about, as well as what I want to 
talk about, is the Murdoch Carriere case and the scandal that 
surrounds this government with that issue. It’s interesting when 
. . . It was during question period today and I believe it was the 
minister from Saskatoon Massey Place that stood up and talked 
about every question period has had issues around the Murdoch 
Carriere case or now this fraud cover-up. And he says, I can’t 
believe those are the issues you’d be talking about. 
 
Well I remember running in 1999 and the whole campaign of 
the government was looking back to fraud that the Conservative 
government had committed, and they were always trying to tie 
us to what had gone on 15 and 20 years ago. And then they 
have the nerve, the hypocrisy, to stand up and say, why isn’t the 
opposition talking about the future? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has been in power for 16 
years and it has had some major, major scandals and that’s why 
we’re talking about it because the public needs to know the 
record of this government, Mr. Speaker, and the Murdoch 
Carriere is just another example. 
 
On April 3, 2003 the Justice minister at that time spoke about 
the Murdoch Carriere case and I think this is just a very telling 
clip. It was said in the House: 
 
[11:00] 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of . . . [Murdoch] 
Carriere was justified. We will defend that position 
vigorously in the courts. And in due course, Mr. Speaker, 
the courts will make the determination. 

 
But they folded like a cheap tent. They absolutely folded like a 
cheap tent and paid Murdoch Carriere $275,000 of severance 
after he had been convicted of assault and charged with 
harassment, Mr. Speaker. Folded like a cheap tent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had the grounds to go against Murdoch 
Carriere. The former Justice minister said they had the grounds 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

to battle this in the court. And you know, if the judge and the 
courts determined that there was a payment to be made to Mr. 
Carriere, then we’d live with that. But to never have challenged 
him is absolutely unacceptable. And that is exactly what the 
people are saying around the province that I talked to. 
 
It was amazing with the postcards that we got back, you know 
roughly about 6 to 7,000 postcards that we have seen back. 
Now they’ve often . . . The government will say well that’s not 
very many compared to what you sent out. Well if you talk to 
any marketing company 1 per cent return is great. We were over 
2 per cent, double what most of the marketing firms would say, 
Mr. Speaker. So obviously, obviously it has been a huge 
concern with people around the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the government has had the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal, hasn’t dealt with it properly, and as a result it’s cost the 
taxpayers $275,000. But, Mr. Speaker, the SPUDCO issue is 
definitely enough — that should overthrow a government. But 
if that doesn’t, there’s the Murdoch Carriere issue. And if that is 
not enough, just the recent issue around the whole Ann Lord 
case and the fraud that was covered up in this NDP caucus is 
absolutely amazing. 
 
Now I’m not blaming any employer, which the government is. 
I’m not blaming an employer if they hire somebody and it turns 
out that they don’t . . . they have some issues and in this case 
defrauded taxpayers’ money when they were adding numbers to 
the fronts of cheques. She had the ability and the exposure to 
those cheques. I’m not faulting the government for hiring 
somebody like that. Yes, we try and do our best to make sure 
that the credit checks are done properly and the references are 
followed up and done properly, but there are times when a 
person like that will slip through the cracks. And this person has 
slipped through the cracks in many different employer 
situations. 
 
That’s not the problem. The problem is, is after they had found 
out that she had defrauded the government of what we don’t 
even know is the exact number . . . it could be 6,000. It could be 
8,000. It could be 10,000. It could be 20,000. It could be 
40,000. We’re not exactly sure. 
 
Well they keep saying read the report. They’re hollering across 
the floor, read the report. The report does not cover all of the 
issues. There are issues around computers. There are other 
issues that haven’t been addressed because what the police, the 
city police had asked this NDP caucus to do was to do a 
forensic audit of the situation, a forensic audit of what the 
situation was. And this government refused to because there . . . 
I think they really did know. I think they really did know how 
much it was going to . . . certainly 6,000 pales in comparison to 
what probably is there that they have covered up. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the issue of having a letter come forward 
admitting to fraud, admitting to fraud, and then not having the 
government act on it is absolutely unacceptable. But it is 
certainly understandable. It’s understandable by that 
government in 1991 and ’92 because right in the police 
documents it talks about the political climate of the day, and we 
need to take that into consideration. Well I think most of us that 
have any sort of memory remember what was going on in ’91, 
’92, ’93. There were many, many issues around fraud, and the 

last thing this government wanted to do is have the NDP 
anywhere in those headlines about fraud. They were quite 
happy to see what was going on with the former Conservative 
Party — the Progressive Conservative Party — and the last 
thing they could stand was to have the NDP name anywhere in 
those fraud scandals. And it should have been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the exact reason why I believe they didn’t go to the 
police immediately in 1992 and waited until it was investigated 
a little bit by other employees, and then finally went to the 
police in 1994. It was simply covered up for two years. There is 
no other way and no other explanation other than covering it up 
for two years until then maybe the political climate is a little 
more conducive to having something like this go through 
because they sure didn’t want to see it or read about it in the 
early ’90s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they absolutely covered it up because . . . And it’s 
in all the letters. It’s in all the letters . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is always 
spouting from their seat. That’s nothing unusual, and what’s 
unusual is that it doesn’t make a whole lot of sense. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it would be very interesting to sit down with 
the members that were there in 1991 and see how many said we 
should send this to the police right away because I believe there 
were a number of them. Pat Lorjé already has said, Pat Lorjé 
has already said there are two camps. There were two camps. 
 
Some people wanted to sweep it under the carpet. Some people 
just didn’t want to talk about it, but she wasn’t in that camp. So 
there must have been the conceal camp and the reveal camp. 
And I would love to know . . . And you know, quite frankly, I 
think we have a pretty good idea on this side of the House, just 
by watching the faces over the last week, on which side they 
were on. Whether it was conceal and do what the government 
did and shuffle it under the carpet so that it doesn’t come up at 
an inopportune time — those people are the conceal, along with 
the member from Moose Jaw North. There’s that camp. 
 
But I truly do believe there was another camp in that caucus in 
1991, and it was the reveal camp. I am positive that there are 
members in that NDP caucus that said in 1991 we cannot hide 
this; it needs to go to the police. But unfortunately, 
unfortunately the conceal camp won. The conceal camp won. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been very interesting to see the defence of 
the government over the last couple days. It’s been very 
interesting to see the defence of the government. They’re trying 
to do everything in their power to look over there, to try and 
distract, because they know they have been caught red-handed 
in this situation. 
 
The public sees it as nothing but a cover-up, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s exactly what it is. And I think it will be very interesting if 
the Premier screws up his courage to call a general election in 
the next few months, four or five months, and people will see 
that this government has had far too many scandals over the last 
16 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

unacceptable and improper pattern of behaviour during its 
term, exemplified by, but not limited to, the scandals of 
Channel Lake, SPUDCO, Carriere, and Ann Lord. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, seconded by the member for Cypress Hills: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government . . . 
 
Order please. Order please, members. The motion is: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 
unacceptable and improper pattern of behaviour during its 
term, exemplified by, but not limited to, the scandals of 
Channel Lake, SPUDCO, Carriere, and Ann Lord. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress Hills. Why is the 
member on his feet? Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the 75-minute debate 
rules are very clear that a member has a certain amount of time 
to move the motion. The member did not in fact have the 
motion moved within the time allocated to him, and I would 
appreciate it if you would rule as to whether the motion was in 
order or whether an additional amount of time would be 
provided to the government members to speak. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for the point of order. The 
member did initiate his motion before time was completed. He 
did use up an extra 10 seconds. That time will be charged 
against the opposition side. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is an opportunity 
today to talk about a pattern of deceit that has developed within 
the ranks of the provincial government. This is an opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to look at the nature of the deception that has 
occurred, the issues that have been hidden from public view by 
this government over its 16 years in office, and the impact that 
this has had not just on the governing party but on the attitude 
of the people of this province toward the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government took power in the early 1990s. 
And it was interesting that they came to power on the heels of 
having dealt with what they deemed corruption in a previous 
administration. And yet so soon after they came to power, this 
particular government launched on its own history of 
obfuscation and hiding. 
 
It decided that it could not afford to risk public exposure of 
certain decisions and certain issues. It had to maintain public 
credibility. So instead of dealing with issues that came to the 
forefront, that came to the attention of the government, in a 
forthright and deliberate and conscientious way, they decided to 
sweep it under the carpet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the four issues that the official 
opposition has identified in its motion today, we start with 

Channel Lake. We move to SPUDCO, later to Murdoch 
Carriere, and finally to the Ann Lord NDP caucus funds fraud. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about that is even though 
each one of those issues has come out at varying times within 
the 16-year history of this government, they all originated about 
the same time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that with some certainty, the public 
certainly and the official opposition could say that there was a 
pattern of deliberate deception as a result of issues like this that 
the government was aware of, that it was conscious and 
deliberate within the governing party that the members of 
caucus and members of cabinet decided that they just could not 
afford to allow their image or their reputation to be tarnished by 
these kinds of events. And the decision was very deliberate and 
conscious to hide these issues from the public. 
 
If you look at Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker . . . I wasn’t involved 
politically at the time. I’m not sure the genesis of this particular 
issue. But I do know that there was a report on Channel Lake 
that arose as a result of a committee of this legislature that was 
revealed in a 1997 or 1998 — I guess August 13, 1998 — when 
a report was prematurely leaked to the public. It was a version 
of a set of hearings that had been undertaken by a Crowns 
committee to look into the Channel Lake debacle. And as it 
stands, Mr. Speaker, that report was leaked to the public before 
the opposition members even had a chance to look at the report 
and evaluate it and comment on it. 
 
When a committee of the legislature undertakes an investigation 
of an issue as important as Channel Lake was, there is an 
obligation on the part of the committee to give all players and 
all participants in the committee an opportunity to look at the 
report and to sign off on it. And if there is not agreement, then 
there is an opportunity for a minority report. But nevertheless 
the report that was written was released to the public prior to 
the official opposition members having access to the report. 
And it became clear when that transpired that there was one 
reason for that happening, Mr. Speaker, and that was to give 
spin to the idea that the NDP were not responsible for the 
affairs around Channel Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if there had been a genuine interest in 
clearing the air, in seeing the truth come out, I’m sure that the 
governing members who hold the majority on that committee 
would have been happy to hear from the opposition members 
and to entertain much more rigorous recommendations. But that 
did not happen. And in fact the opposition had to release a 
whole series of recommendations of their own in order to 
address the failings of the committee process and the report put 
out by the majority of NDP members on that particular 
committee. 
 
And I don’t know if I want to take the time to go through all 
these recommendations. People who knew more about that 
affair than I do will probably spend time discussing it. But what 
I found interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that as I looked through the 
recommendations of the members of the official opposition 
who’ve sat on that committee, the names of certain individuals 
keep showing up. 
 
[11:15] 
 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

And it’s really quite interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the 
names of individuals who are related to the Channel Lake fiasco 
and the SPUDCO fiasco and some of the later issues are the 
same people. And I think that that speaks, Mr. Speaker, to the 
integrity of this government and some of the players in this 
government. I think it speaks very clearly to the will of the 
governing party to put certain people in situations where they 
can sweep issues under the carpet and who are willing to do so 
to do the bidding of the government, to protect the reputation of 
the government, and to keep the issues of the day from public 
scrutiny. 
 
So I will move from the SPUDCO affair . . . I’m sorry, from the 
Channel Lake affair to the SPUDCO affair. And once again we 
see some of the same players involved in the SPUDCO fraud 
that was perpetrated on the people of the province. It wasn’t just 
a simple potato scandal. As it stands, Mr. Speaker, the 
SPUDCO scandal turned out to be the largest, largest fraud 
perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan in the history of this 
province — $35 million at last count, and I’m not sure all the 
bills are in yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $35 million associated with that issue and we 
found the government hiding from that, hiding the true nature of 
the agreements. The public-private partnerships weren’t what 
they were proposed or announced to be. There was 
disagreement on fact. There was disagreement on reality. And 
when the truth came out — six years after this whole thing 
became public — a minister had to stand in this House and 
accept responsibility for misleading the legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, that record in itself would suggest to me a culture of 
corruption in the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we move on to the Murdoch Carriere scandal, 
which also was first brought to the attention of the government 
as early as 1993. And there were complaints by female 
employees in the public service that they were being harassed 
as early as 1993. Although those complaints were legitimate 
and were made in accordance with the procedure at the time, 
there was nothing done. And it wasn’t until almost 10 years 
later that the issue became so ugly and so debilitating to 
members of the public service who worked with this individual, 
this Murdoch Carriere, that something had to be done. 
 
But instead of coming clean on that issue, instead of standing 
up in his place and saying we have a problem within our public 
service, without identifying the individuals by name, if the 
Premier had shown leadership, we could have had this issue 
resolved. But instead it was hidden. And the only time the 
government took, the only time the government took any 
opportunity to speak about it was when the report that delved 
into those allegations and those misdeeds became public — 
when it showed up on the front page of The StarPhoenix. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here again we have an example of 
where the government could have moved more quickly, could 
have gone public, could have made the public aware of this. 
And do you know, Mr. Speaker, I would, I would assure you 
that the public would be a lot more forgiving of wrongdoing if 
there was admission of guilt. But when it’s hidden under the 
carpet, when it’s swept out of view and deliberately hid from 
the scrutiny of the public, that’s when the public begin to 
mistrust a government. And we’ve got more recently the caucus 

funds and the Ann Lord issue that has dominated this House for 
the last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that we’re all, we’re all mindful 
of the impact of the Watergate scandal on American politics. 
What started out as a two-bit, small-time robbery in a third-rate 
hotel ultimately brought down the president of the world’s 
strongest, wealthiest, most mighty nation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are similarities here. There are 
comparisons to be drawn. You can’t hide in the dark what you 
don’t want exposed in the light. And what’s happened here 
today and what’s happened over the last number of weeks in 
this session is the light of exposure has been shone on this 
government. And what the people of this province have seen is 
not very appealing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
before I speak to the resolution I just want to mention that I’m 
honoured to wear this red rose today in honour of the work of 
the MS [multiple sclerosis] Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this resolution from the Sask Party today clearly 
indicates that instead of debating the future of this great 
province they wish to have a discussion on scandal. At the end 
of my remarks, I will be moving an amendment. 
 
The Sask Party has decided that what happened 15 years ago is 
important. So I guess today will be a debate about the record. 
And, Mr. Speaker, today I am more than happy, in fact I’m 
delighted, to compare the record of our four-term NDP 
government with a record of increasing growth and prosperity 
and environmental stewardship against their record. And I’m 
going to talk about three topics: the topic of scandal, the topic 
of the Sask Party’s deviation from their ethical code of conduct, 
and our record versus their record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the opposition has amnesia. Let me help 
you recall your two-term government. GigaText, High R Doors, 
Supercart, free booze, ministers convicted of fraud — this was 
only eight years. Just think what you could have done if you’d 
had more time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I would remind the 
member to address all of her comments through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — I will make every effort, Mr. Speaker, to 
make all my remarks through the Chair. I want to review a bit 
of their code of ethics. Here’s some key words from the 
document: integrity, honesty, respect, responsibility, fairness, 
and compassion. And I don’t think I need to go any further. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to be we support these things when we 
decide it’s worth doing it, not as a matter of principle. 
 
I want to particularly mention two of these here. Disseminating 
false information — well this is a daily occurrence in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. The member from Cypress Hills did it in 
his remarks again today, and I’m confident that one of my 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

colleagues will straighten out the factual information during 
their remarks. In terms of fundraising, ethical fundraising, well 
isn’t it interesting that they accepted $10,000 from Imperial 
Tobacco in 2003 after we had already had a legislative 
committee of the House sitting since 1999 on the issue of 
reduction of tobacco use in our communities. And I would have 
to say that I’ve looked carefully at this code of ethics, and I find 
no mention of harassment anywhere in their policies. 
 
I want to refer to an article that was in The StarPhoenix, 
January 17, 1992, and the headline is “Cause for jailing,” and it 
speaks to free liquor in ministers’ offices. It speaks to false 
payment for staff and for advertising. And the commentary 
said: 
 

These cases are despicable, not just for their scale but for 
their intent [Mr. Speaker]. They were concocted, at great 
effort, to deceive the people of Saskatchewan. That makes 
them fraud and that’s why the perpetrators [and this is very 
germane to my next point, Mr. Speaker] as well as those 
who watched and did nothing, deserve to be behind bars. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, who watched and did nothing? Specialists in 
human behaviour say that the best predictor of future behaviour 
is past behaviour. And, Mr. Speaker, $19,000 is a lot of 
fraudulently attained liquor. So who could have reported it? 
Who could have reported it? Well the member for Swift 
Current, seven years working for various cabinet ministers, 
that’s a long time; the Saskatoon Silver Springs member, 
assistant to Sid Dutchak, Grant Devine, and Ray Meiklejohn; 
Melville-Saltcoats, assistant to Tory MLA Walter Johnson; 
Cannington, elected as PC [Progressive Conservative] member 
in ’91; Moosomin, elected under Devine PCs in ’86; Estevan, 
Grant Devine’s CA [constituency assistant]; Wood River, ran as 
PC in 1995; Saskatoon Southeast, PC executive organizer in the 
1980s; Thunder Creek, ran for PC nominations in 1985 and 
1986. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, $19,000 is a heck of a lot of 
fraudulently obtained booze. I can only assume from this list 
that either everybody went to work with their eyes closed and 
their ears closed or they could have reported this corruption. 
And because no one reported it, I’d like to know why. 
 
I have here a stack of bills. They have the name of the Leader of 
the Opposition on them. They are all fraudulently obtained 
liquor. There’s also excessive expenditures on Big Valley 
Jamboree and private dinners. That was all . . . well nine 
members of the current sitting opposition were there, and they 
could have told someone. But they never did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what does the leader have to say about that, of the 
conservative Sask Party? Well frankly “. . . I think it’s an asset 
that I was involved in a government that lost its way . . .” And 
what caused him to find his way? Not seven years of 
employment in the midst of fraud and corruption. What caused 
him to find his way is the desire to gain power as the leader of 
this province. 
 
And I have to just do a little bit of quotes from the media here 
because I think they’re very illuminating. Here’s Murray 
Mandryk: “How long of an occurrence was this?” Like, you 
know, this is a lot to forget. 

Stephani Langenegger says, “2-26 pound bags of ice and 3-5 lb. 
bags of ice, so I guess the Minister said in the House that . . .” 
 
The member from Swift Current: “I think . . . 60 pounds. I don’t 
know about the ice — I don’t remember the ice.” He doesn’t 
remember 60 pounds of ice. Mr. Speaker, that’s enough ice to 
go skating on. 
 
Murray Mandryk: “Do you have a personnel policy . . . [do you 
have a party] policy on disclosure?” 
 
The Leader of the Opposition: “On the what?” 
 
Murray Mandryk: “On disclosure because I’m a little foggy 
what you guys are saying . . .” Well so are we. 
 
And here we have James Wood; I’m talking “. . . about the 
Liquor Board again — in connection to them raising a 
connection to yourself to the Progressive Conservatives or Mr. 
Gerich, did you think it undercuts . . . [your party’s message]?” 
 
Stephani Langenegger: “Would you have said it was wrong to 
drink in the Minister’s office if the government hadn’t forced 
you out here [to say it] today?” 
 
Wall . . . oh sorry, excuse me, the Leader of the Opposition: “I 
have said it. I have said it. I absolutely said that, you know, I’ve 
said that that was wrong.” 
 
And last words of Mr. Murray Mandryk: “Really?” So I add 
that into the record, Mr. Speaker. It’s not very believable — not 
very believable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now to move to my third topic: our record, 
their record. The NDP government, 16 years of achievement 
with the support of Saskatchewan citizens who believe in fiscal 
accountability. The conservative Sask Party opposition, eight 
years of mismanagement ending in sustained debt which will 
still be with us long into the future. 
 
Our leader, their leader. Our leader has shown what we can do. 
We can do the impossible with huge and growing research 
parks, leading edge environmental research and technology, the 
largest wind generation per capita in Canada, legislative ethanol 
standards, and the Rolling Stones. Their leader? Well I’ll get to 
that. Our Premier is committed to a life affordable for ordinary 
families . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. For what purpose does the member 
seek recognition? The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member who currently has the floor is referring to a great 
number of documents that she is using as part of her debate. I 
believe it’s an absolutely parliamentary privilege that these 
documents be tabled with the legislature. And I would make 
that point. 
 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

The Speaker: — Is the member wishing to speak to the point 
of order? No. I’m prepared to rule on that. The Chair . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I am prepared to rule on that. It has 
been the customary practice of the Assembly that ministers 
quoting directly from documents should have the obligation to 
table them. However in the private members’ debate, no private 
member on either side of the House is obligated to table 
documents. The member may continue. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 
Premier is committed to make life affordable for ordinary 
families. 
 
I will just interrupt to say that if they would like a copy of all 
the illegally obtained liquor bills, I certainly will hand those 
over to them. I will do that after my remarks. 
 
Our Premier’s made a commitment to a green and prosperous 
economy. And he is committed to universal health care and a 
universal drug plan for seniors and enhanced support for people 
with low incomes. Their leader has a record as the handmaiden 
of corrupt, unethical, and fraud-ridden government — chief 
amongst the spin doctors of history. Well I’m not sure a spin 
doctor ever cured anything. 
 
Our Premier says that social progress depends on economic 
progress. Their leader says, please instruct your officials to send 
over 19,000 worth of free booze. Our leader says, we support a 
green and prosperous economy. Their leader says, no policy 
debate because we don’t want to be embarrassed with our 
policies. 
 
Look at the record. We have seen what’s happened, and in 
Saskatchewan we’ve been criticized for promoting the province. 
Well the Think Regina campaign has shown that they support 
the Premier’s actions to promote our province. And I have to 
say that the future is here, Mr. Speaker. We have done the work 
that the ministers purport to do. We have a successful and 
growing economy. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move an amendment: 
 

That all the words after “That this Assembly condemn” be 
struck out and replaced with: 
 
opposition members for their unacceptable and improper 
pattern of behaviour exemplified by, but not limited to, 
their many documented breaches of their own code of 
ethics. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting against the motion and for the 
amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Rosemont, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Greystone: 
 

That all the words after “That this Assembly condemn” be 
struck out and replaced with: 
 

opposition members for their unacceptable and improper 
pattern of behaviour exemplified by, but not limited to, 
their many documented breaches of their own code of 
ethics. 

 
Debate on the amendment and the main motion will occur 
concurrently. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’m pleased to enter into this debate, pleased 
to compare the record of our government with the record of the 
PC government when it was in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just speak first to the question of debt. And let me put 
this in the context of the fact that the PC Party was forced to 
change its name to the Saskatchewan Party after 12 of its MLAs 
were convicted in the courts for fraud. Let’s put that in context. 
That happened during the second term of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, when members of the opposition could no longer hold 
up their heads with any dignity under the name of Progressive 
Conservative and had to change their names. And every one of 
them knows that’s the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s compare the record, a record of debt by the Devine 
government — $12 billion of additional debt. Well what’s the 
record of our government, Mr. Speaker? We’ve paid down $3 
billion of that debt, 1 billion in the last four years. It’s a long, 
hard, tough process, and we’re going to work at it for many 
years to come, but we’re making headway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — What’s the record of members opposite with 
respect to the Crowns, Mr. Speaker? They sold off Crown 
corporation after Crown corporation, and the ones that they 
didn’t sell off, they drove into massive debt. 
 
It took us years to repair the damage, Mr. Speaker, but we have. 
And what’s the record today, Mr. Speaker? A profitable set of 
Crown corporations all operating in the public interest and, Mr. 
Speaker, the lowest-cost utility bundle anywhere in Canada as a 
result of the fact that our Crown corporations are publicly 
owned. That’s the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was the record with respect to social 
programs? Well it was a record by members opposite of tearing 
up social program after social program. I recall sitting here in 
1987 on the opposition side while I watched members of the PC 
government dismantle the children’s dental plan. Four hundred 
dental nurses stood in the galleries protesting that decision by 
the Devine government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m proud to say that now we are rebuilding the children’s 
dental program in this province and, Mr. Speaker, we are 
re-establishing a seniors’ drug plan in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are on record as implementing many, many 
new progressive social initiatives like a KidsFirst program in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

It’s a great record, our record with respect to community 
schools and the establishment of community schools. Our 
initiatives in terms of new training spaces in this province — 
more than 6,000, Mr. Speaker, in the last term alone. Mr. 
Speaker, our record with respect to improving youth 
employment in this province — 11,000 new jobs for young 
people between 15 and 24 years of age in the last year alone, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Speaker, a new family holiday for 
all people in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our record with 
respect to tax cuts, personal tax cuts — one-third of the 
personal income tax load for the people of Saskatchewan has 
been eliminated under this government over the last eight years 
alone, Mr. Speaker. Our cuts to the PST [provincial sales tax] 
until now finally we have the PST down to 5 per cent again. Of 
all provinces that have a PST, the lowest rate in all of Canada 
— not as low as Alberta, of course, but in Alberta they have 
health care premiums which we don’t have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a record that I’m proud of. When I look 
at the position of members opposite on the critical question of 
greenhouse gas emissions today, and I recall how in 2002 the 
only thing that their party wanted to debate at their convention 
was opposition to the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be associated with a group of 
men and women that recognize that climate change has to be 
addressed and are committed to reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions in this province and have done it, to begin with, with 
a major residential conservation program — the best in Canada 
— and, Mr. Speaker, on a per capita basis, the best wind power 
program in all of Canada. I’m proud of that record, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll put it up against the record of their 
government any time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s turn to the other element of this motion 
because of course what they don’t want to talk about, Mr. 
Speaker, is their record. And what they want to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is divert public attention from our record by talking 
about shortcomings during the government years, 16 years, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve got four items that they’ve picked. Four 
items. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about those four items, 
and I want to talk about their record. 
 
Their most recent issue that they have raised is the so-called 
scandal — and I’m putting that in hypothesis — that is 
associated with a member of staff of our caucus, Mr. Speaker, 
having stolen $6,000 worth of funds. That’s the issue. And the 
issue is, Mr. Speaker, that we weren’t prompt enough about 
reporting it to police although it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, that 
we fully reported it to police by 1994. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s compare that record with their record, 
with their record, Mr. Speaker. Twelve MLAs, not staff 
members — 12 MLAs convicted of fraud, Mr. Speaker, and, 
Mr. Speaker, in some cases, for a large, large sums of money. 
Let’s just review the public record. 
 
Their caucus Chair, Mr. Speaker, the PC caucus Chair, 
convicted, Mr. Speaker, of a fraud charge for $837,000 of 

public money; for breach of trust of $125,000; charge of 
stealing of 114,200, Mr. Speaker. Let’s recall what their PC 
caucus communications director was convicted of — charge of 
defrauding the government of $837,000. That was the record. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to their caucus Chair, 11 other 
PC members, most of whom were cabinet ministers, convicted 
of defrauding taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s not a shred of evidence; they don’t have a 
shred of evidence that any member of this caucus stole money, 
Mr. Speaker, not a shred of evidence, and they know it. They 
won’t admit it, but they know it. And if they have evidence, let 
them bring it forward. What we’re talking about here is one 
staff member who stole $6,000 and the matter was reported to 
police in 1994. And you put that up against their record, Mr. 
Speaker, 12 members of the PC Party convicted of fraud and in 
many cases, large, large amounts of money involved, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the comparison. And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you I 
am proud of our record compared to theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the member for Cypress Hills accuse our 
government of fraud with respect to SPUDCO. I would ask him 
to withdraw those remarks because they have no foundation. 
Was SPUDCO mismanaged? You bet it was mismanaged, Mr. 
Speaker. Did the government lose money on it? Yes they did, 
Mr. Speaker. Did we have a legal bill associated with it? Yes 
there was, Mr. Speaker. Did that cost $35 million? Yes it did, 
Mr. Speaker. It was not well handled. It was a mistake by our 
government. You have to put it in the context, Mr. Speaker, of 
us having rebuilt our Crowns, and having made hundreds of 
millions of dollars for the people of Saskatchewan off of the 
investments that we made, but that was not a good investment. 
 
But the member for Cypress Hills does not have a shred of 
evidence that fraud was involved with SPUDCO, and if he has 
that evidence let him put it forward now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And if he doesn’t, let him withdraw it, Mr. 
Speaker. Because it’s an example, if he does not withdraw it, is 
it another example of the PC — or sorry the Sask Party — 
violating their own code of ethics? One element of that code is 
not disseminating false information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this government’s record and 
I will put it up against the record of the PC Party, now renamed 
the Saskatchewan Party, any time, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — . . . supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Cannington on his 
feet? Order. The Chair recognizes the member for Cannington 
on a point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. You have 
clearly outlined in the past that members are to refer to the 
political parties as their proper name. Clearly the member 
opposite a number of times has called the members of the 
opposition by the wrong political name, and I would ask that 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

you ask him to withdraw those remarks and correct his 
statements. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s point of order is . . . On a point 
of order the Chair recognizes the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On the 
point of order, clearly the issue before the House and the 
statement by the member is a point of debate. The point of 
debate is we’re debating issues in this House, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is part of the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I am prepared to rule on this 
matter. The member’s from Cannington point is well taken, that 
we have established a protocol with respect to reference to 
political parties by their correct name. I did hear one reference 
by the member for Regina Greystone, which he corrected. If 
there were other references that the member for Greystone used 
with respect to the party, Saskatchewan Party, then I would ask 
him to withdraw it. If he . . . wasn’t any, I’d just offer him this 
opportunity. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I intended to correct the mistake 
I made and, if I didn’t, I want to withdraw it. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Debate proceeds. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today and take part in the 75-minute debate, one 
that deals with a succession of NDP scandals that the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan have been forced to pay for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from . . . As I begin, I just want 
to note that the member from Regina Rosemont wants to put 
things on the record, and so I will put things on the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
August 26, 1992, Ann Lord suddenly left the NDP caucus 
office, leaving behind a note indicating that her brother had 
been in a serious accident in Seattle. This was later to be found 
untrue. She never returned. August 31, 1992, NDP caucus chief 
of staff Jim Fodey found a two-page letter from Ann Lord 
addressed to himself and to the member from Moose Jaw North. 
She confessed to defrauding the caucus office in this letter. She 
promised to make restitution. She never did. 
 
September 5, 1992, Ann Lord’s vehicle, while still parked in 
front of the legislature, catches fire. Police begin an arson 
investigation. September 8, 1992, police question Jim Fodey in 
their attempt to locate Ann Lord. Fodey says nothing about the 
fraud confession letter. September 9, ’92, Lord is arrested in 
Winnipeg for extradition to the United States on 85 counts of 
embezzlement. Police advise Fodey of this, but Fodey does not 
say anything about the confession letter. He indicates that he 
will have his auditors go over the books. 
 

September 14, 1992, Fodey is again questioned by police. So by 
my count that’s about three times, Mr. Speaker. He still does 
not say anything about the confession letter, but indicates that 
an audit was under way and he would share results with the 
police. September 22, 1992, Fodey received the audit report 
from Mintz & Wallace. They identified unauthorized cheques 
totalling $6,000. 
 
September 22, 1992, on the same day that he received the audit 
report, Jim Fodey tells the police he has spoken to the auditor 
and says, quote, “everything is in order.” He promised to 
contact them again after speaking with the administration 
committee, but he never does. October 25, ’92, police close the 
file. 
 
September 14, 1994, police open a new file with new 
information received from Pat Lorjé and Wil Olive. Allegations 
were put forward by NDP caucus director of administration, 
Carla Douglas, saying that Lord had defrauded caucus and 
Fodey had concealed relevant information about her activities. 
 
[11:45] 
 
September 20, 1994, police questioned Pat Lorjé. She advises 
them, and I quote, “that it was the intention of Caucus to 
conceal the fact that LORD had committed fraud,” Mr. Speaker. 
So I think it’s important that the chronology, the record of 
events is put on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I won’t speak very much about Channel Lake 
or SPUDCO because I wasn’t in the building at those times. Or 
towards the end of the SPUDCO debacle I came to this building 
but I won’t speak on those. But, Mr. Speaker, the two latest 
scandals that we’re talking about in this House, the one 
regarding the Ann Lord — the NDP caucus fraud cover-up — 
and the Carriere scandal, they’re fairly different events. But 
there are two, in my mind, two disturbing commonalities 
between these events which go to the heart of a cancer within 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the first, in the Carriere scandal, what was the 
end result? The person who was in the wrong, Murdoch 
Carriere, was rewarded to the tune of $275,000 while his 
victims, those who spent years fighting for justice, were given 
each $15,000. All they wanted to do was work in a 
harassment-free workplace. They wanted justice and it took 
several years, too many years, for them to receive justice and 
they were given nowhere anywhere near what Mr. Carriere was 
given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the NDP caucus fraud cover-up, those at the 
heart of this scandal, most assuredly it’s Mr. Fodey and the 
member for Moose Jaw North, but there is now some debate as 
to who knew what, who knew it when, back in 1992 to 1994. 
There seems to be two camps within that caucus, those 
members that wanted to come clean and those that wanted to 
cover it up, Mr. Speaker. But the two individuals that we know 
about that the letter from Ann Lord was addressed to, those two 
individuals, one was able to keep his position as chief of staff 
for 15 years. 
 
Even in 1994 when caucus became aware of what was going 
on, that they became aware that what they were told — and this 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

is what they’re leading us to believe — that what they were told 
was not congruent, not congruent with what they had been told 
by Mr. Fodey . . . And that’s a point that we’ll continue to 
debate in this House but, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose 
Jaw North, what happened to him? He went into cabinet. 
 
And what about the person that tried to do the right thing, the 
person that tried to blow the whistle? It’s my understanding that 
Carla Douglas was eventually suspended and then fired by the 
NDP caucus. The person in the right was penalized, both in the 
Carriere case and in this case. The person in the wrong was 
ultimately rewarded. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — deputy deputy deputy speaker — the 
other point I want to talk about is the similarity between these 
two cases, is the NDP they have a pattern of not coming clean 
until they are caught. Carriere would still have been working in 
the Government of Saskatchewan had the Gillies report not 
been leaked. The NDP only became outraged over the handling 
of his suspension and he was transferred and then red circled 
and demoted and . . . I have trouble following it all. They were 
only outraged when that became public. In the NDP fraud 
cover-up, again only after the information comes out do they try 
to come clean. But, Mr. Speaker, over the last week or so they 
keep digging a hole and keep digging that hole deeper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, things don’t add up. In my mind things are not 
congruent with this story of this government. It’s not congruent. 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North, he tries to tell 
the people of this province that it wasn’t until the Regina city 
police chief, Cal Johnston, commented last Friday in a 
late-called news conference that the story that Mr. Fodey had 
been telling, that this was the first time that he was hearing 
about the fact that it didn’t go to police. But we know that there 
were several caucus meetings in 1994 where this matter came 
up again. 
 
Didn’t he ask any questions? Did he not ask Mr. Fodey, didn’t 
this go to the police in 1992? Why didn’t it go to the police? 
When he realized and when that caucus realized that if their 
story is correct that Mr. Fodey didn’t take it to the police in 
1992, why was he still the chief of staff in 1994 and ’95 and ’96 
and all the way up until this weekend? It just doesn’t add up, 
Mr. Speaker. In my mind the story is not congruent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the height of hypocrisy from this 
NDP government can be found watching the CTV News last 
night. In what must have been the eighth consecutive night that 
the NDP fraud cover-up scandal was covered on the CTV News, 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana had the audacity to lecture 
members of the opposition for not immediately turning 
documents over to the police. The same member that sat in the 
caucus, that sat on relevant information to a fraud investigation 
for two years, and did she say we should turn this over to the 
police in 1992? I don’t think so. What camp was she in? Was 
she a concealer or was she a revealer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m running out of time. But I want to say 
that the member for Regina Rosemont, in her questions she 
wanted to talk about who knew what, who watched and did 
nothing. Those were her comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk a lot about tabled documents in this 

House, and yesterday a document was tabled. It was the CPA 
annual report. She said — and I’m interested in this because 
I’m going to the Bowhay Institute retreat this summer; she was 
there last year — the highlights for her were legislative ethics. 
She says, and I quote: 
 

I will finish with the three tests for the question “is this 
ethical?” 
 
1. The Gut Check: Does this action feel like the right thing 
or does it feel “funny?” 
2. The “Mom” Check: Could I reveal my conduct to my 
mother or father without shame? [and] 
3. The Washington Post Check: Would I be willing to have 
my conduct reported on the front page of The Washington 
Post? 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are very good questions. And it’s 
unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan that members on 
that side didn’t ask those questions 15 years ago of themselves 
and their conduct because their story is not congruent, Mr. 
Speaker. It doesn’t add up. Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate — and 
I’ll be supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker, put forward by the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone — but it’s unfortunate for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest for members opposite, those who will be 
retiring this year and who have had honourable careers, and 
now they’re going out, Mr. Speaker, under a cloud, Mr. 
Speaker, with this sorry scandal hanging over their heads. It’s 
unfortunate. And it’s unfortunate that those members didn’t ask 
these questions of themselves, and they preferred instead to take 
the political expedient road. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, you know I’ve got 10 short minutes in which to make 
some points today and . . . Aw, five minutes; aw, it’s even 
worse. That makes it even tougher, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could have talked about the member from Swift 
Current in his comments that he made after the invoices for the 
free alcohol when he was in charge of that and ordering it for 
the minister’s office. His kind of contrite interview and scrum 
that he did where he made the comment, quite clearly: 
 

You look back . . . on that time . . . [and] . . . think that it’s 
an asset that I was involved in a government that lost its 
way on these issues. 
 

It’s an asset. Mr. Speaker, it calls into mind many questions 
about early learning, the portfolio I’m in now, and how our 
early patterns really set our patterns for life. So it calls to mind 
many things — the $19,000 that has gone missing from the 
Liquor Board and the accounting that was done after in Public 
Accounts. 
 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

Then we kind of scoot up to the time where the Sask Party 
made a big hurrah about their code of ethics and how they were 
following this code of ethics. And, Mr. Speaker, if the 
opposition hasn’t read it, I would gladly table it because I 
would question whether many have read it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we make our minds up about what 
we’re going to speak about, mine was really changed today with 
the article that was in the paper, and it was brought up about the 
theft that happened in the Sask Party office. Over these last 
number of months we have seen over and over where the Sask 
Party has said to be accountable you need to report this to the 
police. It should be reported right away. Now they’re saying, oh 
well, it was private money. 
 
Well how do they know? Have they done, have they done a 
forensic audit of their caucus office? No, I don’t think they 
have. Have they reported it to the police? No, they haven’t. Mr. 
Speaker, absolutely nothing was said about this until it was 
reported in the paper. So you know, we ask why? Well what 
was the timing? 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know 2002 this Saskatchewan Party said, 
we’re winning the next election. So there was no way they 
wanted a theft in their caucus office reported to the police. They 
buried it. They buried it, Mr. Speaker, until it was reported in 
the paper today. They never would have said a thing. So they’re 
a clear example of do as I say and not as I do, coming from that 
Saskatchewan Party caucus. 
 
This theft was not . . . or the police were not notified of this 
theft. There was no forensic audit done. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t know if it went beyond what’s reported in the paper or 
not. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why? Because this opposition couldn’t risk 
public scrutiny, especially with their close connection with the 
former Conservative government of the ’80s. That was the 
worst thing they could have happen to them at that point in time 
— pre-election 2003. There was a conscious and a deliberate 
decision to hide this from the public. 
 
Did they report it to police? No. Did they do a forensic audit? 
No. And if the truth were known this Sask Party caucus, they 
were afraid that right before the 2003 election, they feared that 
that connection of the former Progressive Conservative and the 
current Sask Party opposition, people in this province would 
have connected the dots and said, oh no, here we go. It’s the 
same old cast of characters starting to do the same old thing, 
Mr. Speaker. And people would not have voted for them. 
 
So here they were, 2003, ready for the election. They had buried 
this behind, hadn’t reported it to the police, hadn’t done a 
forensic audit as they expect everyone else to do, Mr. Speaker. 
Anyway the balloons are all blown up, the party halls all rented, 
the bands all ready to play. They even had a transition team in 
from outside of the province to help with their transition into 
government. 
 
You know what? They buried it all. They did all that. And all 
that proved to the people of Saskatchewan, there is a connection 
with the former Conservative government. And they are one in 
the same. They act the same. They try and hide things the same. 

And do you know what? They had to let those balloons just 
fade away because they didn’t win the last election, Mr. 
Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan know that 
connection. And they’ve proved by this incident in the paper 
today that they are the same. They’re absolutely the same. And 
for the sake of political expediency to save their behinds during 
the last election and to avoid that connection to the former 
Conservative government, they buried this whole incident in 
their caucus office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the light of exposure has been shone on this 
opposition, and clearly it’s do as I say and not as I do. And the 
people of Saskatchewan expect better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The 65-minute portion of the debate is over, 
and we will now start the oral question period. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Cypress Hills. I would like to 
know if the member thinks it’s appropriate for a member of the 
legislature to have in their possession and to use documents 
they know were obtained illegally, in the process of question 
period to table those documents, and to put them on a website. 
These documents clearly were taken from the city police. They 
are documents that are not public documents and they’re not 
allowed to be made public. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be 
able to respond to the question. I can do so quite honestly. I 
have no idea where the documents came from. They were 
delivered to our office, as far as I know, in a brown paper 
envelope — anonymously. It’s not illegal to be in possession of 
those documents. When we were notified by the police that they 
wanted to have those documents removed from our website and 
returned, we promptly did so, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in my time in the House since 1991, the first sitting 
MLA to be charged and convicted was NDP MLA and former 
cabinet minister Murray Koskie of taking kickbacks and fraud, 
Mr. Speaker. The member of Regina Rosemont was a member 
of the NDP caucus in 1992. Was she also a part of the NDP 
caucus administration committee and did she support 
concealing the caucus fraud in 1992? 
 
Did she also support concealing the fraud in 1994 when it was 
discussed at caucus meetings? Was the member for Regina 
Rosemont a member of the NDP caucus administration 
committee in 1992 and/or 1994? What did she know of the 
fraud, when did she know it, and what did she do about it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I can firmly convey that I’ve 
never been a member of the administration committee. And I 
can also convey that I am aware of at least nine currently sitting 
members of the opposition who have had information that 
should have been turned over to the police 17 years ago, 18 
years ago, 19 years ago, and they’ve never done it. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I think I’ve discharged my duties appropriately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Jim 
Fodey was the chief of staff for the NDP caucus office for a 
number of years. He served in the public service of 
Saskatchewan for a great many years. And my question is to the 
member for Regina Rosemont, who would have worked with 
Mr. Fodey for a number of years, I believe starting back in 
1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post from earlier this week says that a 
source, a source, unnamed source says that Fodey is, quote, “a 
very good guy” and efforts will be made to exonerate him. Mr. 
Speaker, my question for the member for Regina Rosemont — 
and considering that he may hear the debate today; in fact he 
may be watching right now — does she think that Jim Fodey 
was treated properly by this caucus in asking for his 
resignation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that Mr. 
Fodey was not asked for his resignation. He did that out of a 
personal sense of honour. And I think that reflects on the kind 
of person that Jim Fodey is and I believe that’s all I have to say 
about that. 
 
But I do wonder why the members opposite, particularly the 
member from Weyburn, would not insist that an audit be done 
when there’s a theft in their office. And do they recommend 
that employees who have committed theft go then into another 
workplace? Did you warn that other workplace that they might 
be taking on an employee that may steal from them? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Ann 
Lord wrote a letter confessing to defrauding taxpayer money 
from NDP caucus funds, a total of at least $6,000. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP administrative committee, according to Pat Lorjé, 
concealed, concealed the theft of that money for at least two 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to ask the member from Saskatoon Greystone, who 
I believe is an honourable man, can he stand in his place today 
and still say that he supports the NDP Government House 
Leader, or does he believe that he should resign because of this 
scandal? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I do support the NDP Government House 
Leader, and I don’t think there’s any scandal involved here. The 
word is completely inappropriate and, of course, manufactured 
by members of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Let’s be clear about what happened, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear in 
1992, within a month of the alleged incident having taken place, 
that Regina city police knew about it. Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjections] . . . Well it’s clear from the police 
report. Members opposite say, how? And it’s clear from the 
police reports that they illegally obtained and then filed with 
this legislature, it’s clear in those reports that the Regina city 
police knew about this in 1992. And it’s also clear in those 
reports that in 1994 full and complete information — 
everything — was filed with the Regina city police. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. And I would ask that when the theft within their caucus 
office was discovered on the eve of the 2003 election, was there 
a report to the police notifying them of the theft? Was there a 
forensic audit done to make sure that the extent of the theft was 
as limited as what they are now stating? Was there further 
investigation and a forensic audit done and was there a report to 
the police? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think this is the first time in the 
history of the province that the government is demanding a 
forensic audit of somebody’s purse. It’s unbelievable. I really, I 
really can’t answer this question because I didn’t work in the 
building. So, you know, they want to talk about forensic audits, 
obviously that wasn’t done by that government. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the hon. member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like the hon. member for Weyburn-Big Muddy to 
explain to the Assembly how it is that his leader, the hon. 
member for Swift Current, on June 17, 1991, asked to have 
delivered to his minister a list of liquor that was not paid for by 
his minister’s office, in a memo dated June 17, 1991. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to put that in context, the Provincial Auditor 
reported that during the PC years, $19,285 of liquor to supplied 
to ministers’ offices without any invoices being provided. Can 
the member explain how his leader was part of this process and 
why — how that can be justified? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member’s coming from on that. I didn’t have the pleasure of 
knowing the Leader of the Opposition when I was 12 years old. 
We didn’t meet till several years later. 
 
I can tell you though, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, you know, in 1991, 
I was getting pretty good grades and I liked to play a little 
hockey and a little baseball. And, but you know, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting that the members opposite don’t want to talk 
about the fraud that they concealed in 1992. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
past number of years we have witnessed on numerous occasions 
this NDP government’s intentions to try and cover up its 
inability to appropriately run the province of Saskatchewan. 
You know the SPUDCO scandal. And now over the past 
number of days, we see how this government has worked so 
deliberately to try and cover up a fraudulent action that took 
place within their caucus in regards to public funds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one would have to ask, how long would 
members have allowed this to continue? And my question and 
more specifically is to the member of Saskatoon Greystone: 
does the member of Saskatoon agree that the actions taken by 
this NDP government to cover up an issue of fraud in their 
caucus was appropriate? Does the member agree with that? 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Equalization and an Energy Accord 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Trew.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m very pleased to rise today to continue debate 
on the motion of the government members which, Mr. Speaker, 
is on the subject of equalization. 
 
And specifically what the motion calls for is for the 12 
Conservative members of parliament from Saskatchewan to 
apologize to the people of the province for the fact that the 
Conservative Party has failed to live up to a very clear promise 
that was made to the people of this province during the last 
federal election and in fact the one before, that they would fix 

the equalization situation that has unfairly treated 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m going to read the motion once again. It is: 
 

That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
parliament provide an apology to the people of this 
province for breaking their election promise on the issue 
of equalization; and further, that this Legislative Assembly 
call upon the federal government to immediately negotiate 
a Saskatchewan energy accord. 

 
And I want to report to the House, Mr. Speaker, through you 
and also to the people of the province who may be watching 
this or reading this, just to set the record straight. In the 2006 
federal election, the Conservative Party of Canada made a 
promise. And the promise was this, it said: 
 

Work to achieve with the provinces permanent changes to 
the equalization formula which would ensure that 
non-renewable natural resource revenue is removed from 
the equalization formula to encourage economic growth. 
We will ensure that no province is adversely affected from 
changes to the equalization formula. 

 
Now I want to repeat part of that, Mr. Speaker. The promise 
was very specific, made by Stephen Harper who then was the 
Leader of the Conservative Party of Canada, now is the Prime 
Minister of Canada, Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister of Canada 
and he promised that non-renewable natural resource revenue 
would be removed from the equalization formula to encourage 
economic growth. And then at the same time the Conservative 
candidates in Saskatchewan — who I might add were supported 
by the members of the opposition, the Saskatchewan Party here 
— promised that if elected they would remove natural resource 
revenue from the equalization formula. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they made that promise and 12 of the seats in 
Saskatchewan, 12 of the 14 seats went to the Conservative 
Party. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan who elected 12 Conservatives voted for them on 
the basis that they would keep their promises. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, do you know what the Prime Minister, Stephen 
Harper, said in the election about keeping promises? He said — 
I don’t have the exact words in front of me although I have 
them here — but he said words to the effect that the worst thing 
that anyone could do was to break an election promise. 
 
The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador had the exact 
words in an advertisement they took out in the newspapers 
demonstrating that the Prime Minister made a promise that he 
did not keep. That, that isn’t an allegation I’m making, Mr. 
Speaker. This is just a simple fact. It’s a fact. The Prime 
Minister made a promise. The Prime Minister broke his 
promise. The Conservative members of parliament made a 
promise to the people of the province that they would make a 
change, to treat the province of Saskatchewan fairly. They 
broke that promise. 
 
Now interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, not only did they break 
the promise but one of the local Regina members of parliament 
for the Conservative Party admitted that they broke the promise. 
That was Mr. Lukiwski and he said this quoted in the 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

Leader-Post of April 3. He said, quote, “If you want to say we 
didn’t fulfil the commitment or keep the promise, fair enough,” 
he said. Well but the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, do 
not think it is fair enough to make a promise that’s important as 
a promise on equalization and then not keep the promise. That’s 
wrong. That’s not fair. 
 
And, you know, the Conservative Party and their supporters 
over there in the Saskatchewan Party were very big when the 
former government, the Liberal government, was in power, 
pointing out all of the things that they thought that the Liberal 
government had done wrong. And they said that one of the 
things that should be done was to change equalization. And they 
went in — they got a lot of support, they elected members of 
parliament from Saskatchewan; they take the support of the 
people of Saskatchewan for granted — but when they got into 
parliament, Mr. Speaker, the 12 Conservative members of 
parliament turned their backs on the people of this province. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And I know that our Premier and our government has made a 
point about the fact that the Conservatives have broken their 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan, and sometimes the 
opposition says, well you know, who cares how they treat the 
Government of Saskatchewan? Well that’s not what I’m talking 
about, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking about the fact that the 
Conservative members of parliament have turned their backs on 
the people of this province. Because that promise that was made 
by the Prime Minister and the 12 Conservative MPs [Member 
of Parliament] to the people of this province was a promise, Mr. 
Speaker, that amounts to $842 million per year approximately 
to the coffers of the Saskatchewan government. Now some will 
say, well who cares about the Saskatchewan government? Well 
again, it’s not the Saskatchewan government; it’s the people of 
this province. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, if you had that $842 million you could 
do many things with it. For example, many people, even though 
the business taxes and the personal taxes and the sales taxes are 
lower in Saskatchewan than they used to be, many people have 
a complaint that they feel that property taxes are too high in 
Saskatchewan — property taxes to support education mainly. 
Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, if the Conservatives 
kept to their promise — and it’s still not too late — you could 
fix that problem because you could get rid of education 
property taxes on farm land and on people’s houses in towns 
and cities. 
 
So that’s why it’s important that the Conservatives should keep 
their promise. But Mr. Lukiwski says, well if you want to say 
we didn’t keep our promise, well I guess we didn’t, he says, and 
that’s fair enough. Well it is, somebody says well it’s a shame 
and it is a shame, Mr. Speaker. Because what it indicates is that 
the Conservative government, Prime Minister Harper, 
supported by the opposition over there, hasn’t kept the promise 
and, Mr. Speaker, they may as well have said they’re never 
going to keep the promise. They’re never going to keep the 
promise and the people that are going to pay for that are the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know at election time when the Conservatives come 
around looking for votes, they are going to do all these 

wonderful things for everybody including Saskatchewan. In 
fact, I’ve got some quotes here, Mr. Speaker, on what they said. 
They said this. Dave Batters who’s now a Conservative 
Member of Parliament for Regina and Moose Jaw — I think it’s 
Regina-Palliser or Moose Jaw-Palliser — said this. He said: 
 

Saskatchewan cannot afford to wait, [he said] yet the 
finance minister [referring to the Liberal government] has 
delayed any deal until next year. This will cost the people 
of Saskatchewan over $750 million in lost revenue. 

 
That’s what he said. 
 
Carol Skelton who is now the Conservative cabinet minister 
from Saskatchewan said this on March 22, 2005. In opposition 
she said: 
 

Saskatchewan doesn’t want a free ride. We want a fair 
ride. We don’t want a special deal, we want a fair deal. We 
don’t want extra money, we just want our money — our 
fair share [she said]. 

 
She now is at the federal cabinet table, from Saskatchewan. 
Now it’s interesting to look at what she said then in opposition 
and what she says now in the Conservative government. In 
opposition she said, quote: “Saskatchewan is simply not getting 
its fair share out of equalization.” Now once she was elected, 
she said this or it’s quoted in The StarPhoenix: “Carol Skeleton 
says that she rarely hears about it . . . in her conversations with 
her constituents.” That was September 9, 2006. And then on 
September 13 she was quoted this way. It says: 
 

Skelton doesn’t see equalization as a politically critical 
issue for her Saskatchewan caucus colleagues. In fact, she 
doesn’t even see it as an issue of much import to 
Saskatchewan people because [and these are Carol 
Skelton’s words] “the average person on the street doesn’t 
understand it,” she said. 

 
And I think that what the Conservatives are kind of banking on, 
Mr. Speaker, is that they think that equalization is a complex 
problem that the average person can’t understand. But they can 
understand this, Mr. Speaker. We all can understand this, that 
when you make a promise in an election that is as important as 
delivering another 750 million or $800 million per year to the 
people of the province, you should keep your promise. That’s 
not a difficult concept to understand. 
 
Now our federal minister says that people don’t understand that, 
but I think they do. I think they do understand that. Now before 
the election, she also said this: 
 

We need our NDP government in Saskatchewan to be 
supportive of our efforts to get a better deal for 
Saskatchewan . . . At the very least we need a provincial 
government that will hold the federal government to its 
constitutional obligations. 

 
That’s what she said before the election. Now after the election 
she said, quote, and this is from The StarPhoenix of September 
9, 2006. She says, quote: 
 

I don’t know. I guess I haven’t thought about it that much. 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

I haven’t heard anything about equalization. 
 
Maybe I should send her a copy of my speech. She says, “I get 
piles of e-mail and it’s just not a big issue.” 
 
So before the election she says it’s a big issue and the 
Government of Saskatchewan should support the Conservatives 
who supposedly are going to fix this problem. After the election 
she says, oh people don’t understand this, and nobody cares 
about it anyway. Well I think they do. 
 
Now Brian Fitzpatrick, who’s now the Conservative MP for 
Prince Albert, said this before the election. He said: 
 

Saskatchewan will continue to lose approximately 
$800-million per year in equalization clawbacks on its 
non-renewable resource revenues. An additional 
$800-million per year could have been allocated towards 
Saskatchewan’s ailing health care system [he said]. 
 

Now he’s a Conservative Member of Parliament, Mr. Speaker. 
And what does he do? He votes for a budget put forward by the 
government of Prime Minister Harper, the Conservative 
government supported by the members opposite, that not only 
denies the people of Saskatchewan what they were promised in 
the election, but that budget at the same time delivered another 
$700 million to the province of Quebec so that the Premier of 
Quebec could reduce taxes during the election campaign in 
Quebec. 
 
So in other words, it’s not much of a stretch, and I’m not the 
first one to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that really what the federal 
government did was make a decision because they want to get 
more votes and more seats in Quebec. And let’s be honest about 
it. And they take for granted the 12 Conservative seats they 
have in Saskatchewan. They think people will just continue to 
trot out and support the Conservatives here. And they take $700 
million out of the pockets of people in Saskatchewan, and they 
give it to the government of Quebec. 
 
That’s kind of a familiar story to a lot of people. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, the problem that the Conservatives are going to 
have . . . and they don’t quite realize it yet because they’re still 
basking in the glory of being ahead in the polls federally and 
provincially I guess, so they think everything’s a free ride. But 
they should remember that we had another government under 
Brian Mulroney that had tendencies that were very, very similar 
to this government of Stephen Harper insofar as turning their 
backs on Saskatchewan and the West and catering to Quebec 
went, Mr. Speaker. And you know what happened to that 
government? The right wing vote split, and the Reform Party 
came up, and Brian Mulroney ended up with only three seats. 
He rode high for a while too. But when he turned his back on 
the people of the province, eventually that came back to haunt 
him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to talk about how we are being treated compared to 
the other provinces of Canada because I think one way to judge 
whether you’re getting fair treatment is to ask, what are the 
rules for the other provinces, and then what are the rules that the 
Conservatives apply to Saskatchewan? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when Alberta became a have province as a 

result of their oil and gas and they were not eligible for 
equalization anymore, the federal government made an 
arrangement with the province of Alberta whereby they could 
keep their non-renewable resource revenues — which the 
Conservatives promised to the people of Saskatchewan also — 
but they let Alberta keep those for a period of eight years so that 
they could use that money to build up their infrastructure and 
grow their economy. 
 
Now the simple question is, if that was a fair arrangement for 
the people of Alberta, why does the Conservative government 
not think that the people of Saskatchewan should have the same 
arrangement? Why does the Conservative government, 
supported by the Saskatchewan Party, treat the people of 
Saskatchewan differently than the people of Alberta in that 
regard? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just Alberta. The Government of 
Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government of Nova 
Scotia made a special deal with the former prime minister, Paul 
Martin, which deal has been continued with the present 
government of Prime Minister Harper. And that deal says that 
Newfoundland and Labrador, and Nova Scotia can keep 100 per 
cent of the non-renewable resource revenue that they take in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the same revenue for Saskatchewan is 
confiscated by the federal government. It’s taken away by 
deducting it as an offset against our transfer payments from 
Ottawa. That is not done in Newfoundland and Labrador, and it 
not done in Nova Scotia. And any fair-minded person . . . and I 
don’t care if you’re Conservative, if you’re Liberal, if you’re 
New Democrat, or if you’re Green. I don’t care if you’re man or 
woman; old or young; live in rural Saskatchewan or urban 
Saskatchewan; whether you’re black, white, yellow or red. I 
don’t care who you are. How can anybody think that it’s fair 
that there’s one rule for Newfoundland and Labrador and 
another rule for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s not fair and it’s not right. Mr. Speaker, 
there was an arrangement made with Alberta that was not 
extended to Saskatchewan. There was an arrangement made 
with Newfoundland and Labrador that is not extended to 
Saskatchewan. There was an arrangement made with Nova 
Scotia that was not extended to Saskatchewan. How can anyone 
explain that? It can’t be explained. 
 
And that’s why, before the election, all of these Conservative 
politicians who then didn’t have responsibility . . . And by the 
way, watch out for Conservative politicians who get into 
government because what they do in government is completely 
the opposite of what they say in opposition. That may be a good 
thing for the people of Saskatchewan to bear in mind when they 
make a choice in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the question is, Mr. Speaker, again, why do the 
Conservatives have one rule for Alberta, for Newfoundland and 
Labrador, for Nova Scotia, and a different rule for the people of 
the province who elected 12 of them? It doesn’t make any 
sense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can move on to Manitoba and Quebec, 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

where what do they do there? The federal government looks at 
the revenue that Manitoba and Quebec have from 
hydroelectricity, which is a fully renewable resource, and they 
don’t take that revenue into account in the calculation of 
equalization for Manitoba and Quebec, even though it’s a 
renewable resource. And yet when Saskatchewan sells a barrel 
of oil or a cubic metre of natural gas or a pound of uranium, 
which is non-renewable so when you sell it it’s gone, whatever 
we get is confiscated by Ottawa. But what Manitoba and 
Quebec get is not. Why do the Conservatives have one rule for 
Manitoba and Quebec and a different rule for Saskatchewan? 
How can that be right? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what illustrates this more than anything else 
I think is that next year the province of Manitoba which has a 
similar economy and a similar population to the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . And bear in mind these are fairly similar 
Prairie provinces which are side by side. Manitoba will receive 
$2 billion — billion with a “b,” Mr. Speaker — in equalization 
transfer payments from Ottawa. Manitoba will receive $2 
billion next year. Saskatchewan will receive zero. I’m going to 
repeat that. Manitoba will get $2 billion. Saskatchewan will 
receive zero under the Conservative budget. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, is there anyone — I don’t care if they’re 
Liberal, Conservative, NDP, Green, old, young, whatever — is 
there anyone that can say that’s fair? Well of course not because 
it’s not fair. So the Conservatives have one rule for Alberta, a 
different rule for Saskatchewan. One rule for Manitoba, a 
different rule for Saskatchewan. One rule for Quebec, a 
different rule for Saskatchewan. One rule for Newfoundland 
and Labrador, a different rule for Saskatchewan. One rule for 
Nova Scotia, a different rule for Saskatchewan. 
 
And you might ask, well where’s Ontario in all this? Well you 
know what? They’re not an equalization-recipient province, but 
do you know what the federal Conservative Finance minister 
said when he introduced his budget and was talking about this 
issue? He said, we don’t want to give any more money to 
Saskatchewan in the same way that the other provinces would 
get it because if you did that, Saskatchewan on a per capita 
basis would have more revenue than the people in Ontario. 
 
So in other words — again catering to central Canada, Ontario 
and Quebec, and trying to get a majority government —. 
they’re actually saying to the people of this province we never 
want to see a situation in Canada where Saskatchewan could 
become more wealthy per capita than Ontario. And what I’m 
saying, Mr. Speaker, is that as we go out in Saskatchewan and 
elect Conservative members of parliament and as we believe 
that they have the interests of the West and Saskatchewan at 
heart, they don’t. They don’t. They have the interests of 
themselves getting power and catering to central Canada to do 
so at heart, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are going to have to recognize that fact and start 
speaking honestly about who the Conservative Party of Canada 
represents. And it is not the ordinary families of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. That is clearly illustrated by the response — or 
non-response if you will — of the Conservative Party, 
supported by those members over there, on this equalization 

question, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve demonstrated how the 
Conservatives treat Saskatchewan differently than the other 
provinces. And you know sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it does take 
on a slightly humorous aspect to it because as they try to run 
away from their promise that they would fix this and bring 
fairness to the equalization formula, the problem is of course 
when you’re in government and you have to answer for issues, 
the media want to talk to you. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, you know, I’ve been a minister 
for 12 years and I’ve had to deal with difficult scrum situations 
with the media. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I have never 
run away from the media. If it’s difficult, Mr. Speaker, you 
stand there and you take the heat and you answer the questions, 
Mr. Speaker, because that’s your responsibility. 
 
And when they asked Mr. Batters, one of the Conservative 
MPs, why didn’t you keep your promise on equalization, Mr. 
Speaker, do you know what his answer was? His answer was, I 
have to go and get a doughnut now, he said. I’m not making this 
up. His answer was, I have to go and get a doughnut, when they 
asked him why the Conservatives hadn’t kept their promise on 
equalization. 
 
And you know what? In a humorous aside, that even wasn’t 
true because he didn’t then get a doughnut. He really got a 
muffin, Mr. Speaker, but that’s a minor point. But I think the 
doughnut was more appropriate. The doughnut was more 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you why, because 
doughnuts are shaped like this. And if we want to really look at 
the political situation, ask ourselves what are we going to get 
out of the Conservative Party of Canada and our 12 MPs, that’s 
what we’re going to get. And I think maybe, maybe that’s why 
Mr. Batters had doughnuts on his mind when he was thinking 
about the equalization issue. I don’t know. I’m just asking, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But you know, the other thing that was going on as Mr. Batters 
was eating his muffin instead of answering questions about 
equalization, is he and the other two Conservative members 
from Regina were running ads on the radio. And what I found 
— if it wasn’t so galling I’d find it amusing, Mr. Speaker — but 
what they were doing is on the same day that Mr. Lukiwski was 
saying in the Leader-Post, we didn’t keep our promise, he and 
Mr. Batters and Mr. Scheer, the other Conservative MP from 
Regina, were paying for ads on the radio that said, we have kept 
our promise to Saskatchewan. 
 
Well how can that be, that you have somebody as a Member of 
Parliament who’s saying, we didn’t keep our promise and 
they’re saying, we did keep our promise and they’re using 
taxpayers’ money to run that kind of advertising on the radio? 
And I think what it shows, Mr. Speaker, is that you have to be a 
little bit wary about what certain politicians say in opposition, 
and think about what they might do in government. 
 
And you know, I’m just asking, Mr. Speaker. It does seem to 
me that the members of the Saskatchewan Party who want to be 
the government here were very supportive of Prime Minister 
Harper and the Conservatives in the federal election and helped 
elect them. 
 
And I think in fact one of the things that they did . . . This is 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

kind of an interesting aside. I have a lot of quotes here on 
equalization and these are from Saskatchewan Party news 
releases, Mr. Speaker. And I think the member from Thunder 
Creek wants to get into the debate. And I’m looking forward to 
his comments and I’m sure he’ll have a lot to say because he 
always does. You know, I’ve travelled with the member. And, 
you know, well I’m not going to go into the situation where we 
. . . The member was telling me one day that he thought the 
NDP government over here was old and tired. He was saying 
that in the legislature. 
 
And I have to relate this story, which I’m only relating because 
I think it’s humorous. But the member and I were visiting 
Capitol Hill. And this is relevant to equalization, Mr. Speaker, 
because there recently was a seminar in Washington about 
equalization. But we were visiting the Co-Chair of the 
Canada-US [United States] friendly relations committee, who 
was Congressman Brown. 
 
And as we were sitting there visiting Congressman Brown, this 
member who says that we’re old and tired . . . I said to 
Congressman Brown, you know, Congressman Brown, you 
have had a very distinguished career. You’ve been in the 
Georgia state legislature for 16 years and now you’ve been in 
congress for seven years. That’s a very impressive political 
career. And for reasons I can’t quite explain, Congressman 
Brown then turned to my good friend, the member from 
Thunder Creek, and said, you must be getting just about ready 
to retire, he said. But I assured Congressman Brown that that 
wasn’t the case, that even though I would wish the member well 
in retirement, I don’t think he wants to retire quite yet. 
 
But I know that when the member gets up he will have plenty to 
say about the equalization issue, but what I wanted to say 
before the member for Thunder Creek interjected, Mr. Speaker, 
is before the federal election the Sask Party worked with the 
federal Conservatives by putting out a series of press releases, 
and I have them here. 
 
For example, on March 16, 2004, they put out a press release 
that says, “Saskatchewan Party Supports Provincial Lobby to 
address Equalization Shortfall.” And they say, “It is . . . unfair 
for the federal government to continue an equalization formula 
that punishes Saskatchewan for collecting increasing oil and gas 
revenues.” 
 
Now they put out a release in March ’04, in June ’04, where 
they said they needed a new federal government that would, 
quote, “pay a lot closer attention to the needs of Saskatchewan 
and Western Canada,” and I agree with that. And then again on 
October 22, ’04, then February 4, ’05, they said the new 
government, the Conservatives would, they thought if they got 
in would keep this promise. 
 
February 17, ’05, “Sask Party Offers Short and Long Term 
Solutions to Equalization Mess.” February 25, ’05, 
“Equalization Reform Must Be First Order of Business in 
Spring Session: Sask Party.” And then they said the 
Saskatchewan Party wants an emergency debate on equalization 
on opening day, they said. 
 
Now my point is this. When the Liberals were in, for some 
reason the Sask Party was all over the Liberals saying, we need 

a fair deal for Saskatchewan here, we need a change of 
government to get the Conservatives in so that we get the 
equalization matter fixed. And they worked with the 
Conservative Party to make that promise and supported them 
and gave them money and all kinds of other support. 
 
And yet when they got the Conservatives in, they stopped 
sending out all these press releases saying that the federal 
government had to be fair to the people of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And why is that? Why was there all this activity 
against the Liberals when they didn’t keep the equalization 
promise, but silence about the Conservatives not keeping the 
equalization promise, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I guess what is really disturbing to me is that this party 
over there, they want to get power. And they’re not saying very 
much, but they’re suggesting that they would do all kinds of 
things for the ordinary people in the province. And yet we know 
that they have supported people in the federal government that 
broke their promises to the people of Saskatchewan. And they 
have been silent about that, Mr. Speaker, relative to what they 
did before the election, and so we have to be very concerned. 
And I’m trying to speak in a non-partisan way here, Mr. 
Speaker, about this, but just as a citizen. We have to be 
concerned and ask the question: what would they do if they 
were in power, Mr. Speaker? Would they keep their promises? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this relates to the equalization 
question, because getting back specifically to equalization, 
when the promise was made by the Conservative candidates — 
12 of whom were elected from Saskatchewan — to keep the 
equalization promise, those candidates were supported, Mr. 
Speaker, by and large by the members of the Saskatchewan 
Party. That’s a well-known fact. 
 
And yet that promise has not been kept. So what has happened 
is you get articles in places like the Toronto Star newspaper 
which have, I think, headlines that we don’t like to see as 
Canadians. And this headline in the Toronto Star of January 18 
of this year says, “A year later, PM’s promises not worth 
much.” And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a headline that we should 
never have to see in any of our newspapers, that the promises of 
our leaders don’t mean much. But it goes on to point out that 
. . . well I’ll quote it. It says, quote: 
 

A year into this government’s life, Harper can’t credibly 
claim take-it-to-the-bank honesty as a Conservative virtue. 
 
Instead of “promise kept,” it would be more candid to 
laugh off the record as “Just kidding.” 
 
Perversely, it’s in the national interest to take this Prime 
Minister with a lump of salt. 

 
This is in a newspaper, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unfortunate when 
that kind of thing is said, but I have to say this statement that 
the attitude toward keeping the promise is, well maybe we were 
just kidding, is kind of like our federal Conservative minister 
saying, well I don’t think people care about the issue, or I don’t 
think they understand the issue. Or Mr. Lukiwski brushes it off 
by saying, oh well, if you want to say we broke our promise, go 
ahead, in that way. Or Mr. Batters saying, I can’t talk to you 
about equalization right now because I have to go and get a 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

doughnut. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is a serious matter when a matter as 
important as equalization is to the people of this province is 
laughed off by our federal ministers and MPs and that a 
doughnut becomes more important than seriously addressing 
the issue. 
 
[12:45] 
 
And I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I do have to say that when you 
enter a public life and you are responsible to your electors or 
the people, and the media want to ask you questions so that they 
can report to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, you 
cannot duck those questions. You must stand there and answer 
the questions because in a democracy the media helps keep 
governments accountable. And on this issue there’s general 
agreement, I think, in the media that there’s a need to keep the 
government accountable. 
 
And I want to quote from the Leader-Post of March 29, 2007 
where the headline is “Province tries to negotiate equalization 
deal.” And I referred to a quote of the Prime Minister earlier in 
my remarks, and this quote from our Prime Minister is repeated 
in this article by Angela Hall. And, Mr. Speaker, what the 
Prime Minister said in the federal election was this, and I’m 
quoting, “There’s no greater fraud than a promise not kept.” 
 
So not only did he promise to the people of the province — 
along with his Conservative candidates here and their 
supporters in the Saskatchewan Party supporting them — not 
only did they promise that they would keep the equalization 
promise, but their leader, Stephen Harper, said to the people, 
and you can count on me because “There’s no greater fraud 
than a promise not kept.” He said, this is my promise and I 
would never break my promise. That’s what we heard before 
the election, Mr. Speaker. After the election, what do we hear? 
They say nobody cares. Nobody understands it and we don’t 
have to keep that promise. And I have to say I don’t think that’s 
acceptable. 
 
Another journalist quoted on the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] had this to say. He said: 
 

. . . the fundamental dishonesty, the fundamental 
justification, the complete untruths that we are hearing 
from the federal Conservatives right now . . . my 
goodness, like, I mean, this is just absolutely horrendous 
. . . 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is horrendous and it has direct implications 
for the people of the province. I think I mentioned earlier but I 
want to repeat it. It has implications, Mr. Speaker, of revenue to 
the people of Saskatchewan of approximately $800 million per 
year. 
 
And I think we should think about that number for a minute, 
Mr. Speaker, because $800 million per year is, to state the 
obvious, about $800 per person in Saskatchewan — now each 
and every year $800 million per person. 
 
But think about a family, Mr. Speaker, a family of four in 
Saskatchewan. That’s $3,200 per year that the federal 

Conservatives promised to deliver to the people of 
Saskatchewan — $3,200 per year per family, each and every 
year — before the election. But after the election they said in 
effect, no, we were only kidding, and it’s time to eat a 
doughnut. 
 
And think about that, Mr. Speaker, for a minute — $3,200 per 
family. As I said earlier, it’s a lot of money. You could fix the 
problem of the higher-than-wanted education property taxes 
with that. You could . . . yes I think you could eliminate 
education property taxes. Gone. Mr. Speaker, you could abolish 
the provincial sales tax altogether. We could have no PST like 
Alberta has no PST, although they have a health care premium. 
You could abolish the PST and pay no sales tax if the 
Conservatives kept their promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, imagine what you could do for transportation, to 
fix all the highways in Saskatchewan more quickly. 
 
Imagine what you could do to increase educational 
opportunities for young people in Saskatchewan. And I want to 
say that it is a well-known fact that we have in this province a 
very young population coming up that needs education and 
training, and this government has been putting a lot more 
resources into that, in fact I think in the last two budgets a total 
of about 6,000 more training spaces. But imagine what you 
could do if you had another $3,200 per family. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, the opposition likes to say, 
you know, oh well, you know, they don’t want the Premier to 
have the money. They don’t want the government to have the 
money. It’s not the government’s money. It’s not the Premier’s 
money, Mr. Speaker. It’s the money of the citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s whose money it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And a promise was made to the people of Saskatchewan by the 
Conservatives in the last federal election and the previous one 
that that equalization problem would be fixed — that we would 
have the same type of treatment that Alberta received, that 
Nova Scotia has, that Newfoundland and Labrador has; that we 
would have the same type of treatment Quebec and Manitoba 
have with respect to their hydroelectricity renewable resource. 
 
That’s the promise that was made. And if that promise was 
kept, Mr. Speaker, that would have profound implications for 
the people of the province. And I . . . you know, one of my 
colleagues says, Mr. Speaker, it might help develop more 
industry in Saskatchewan. And industry has been developing at 
a rapid rate in Saskatchewan, but we could do even more. 
 
We could have strategic tax plans in addition to the ones we 
have for manufacturing and processing and that we brought in 
to encourage oil and gas and encourage mining even in addition 
to that and build even more to create jobs and opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people because, bear in mind, that in the federal 
election and leading up to that the Conservatives, supported by 
the Saskatchewan Party, promised that they would fix 
equalization in order to encourage economic development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So they knew that we could build an even stronger economy if 
that promise was kept. They knew that it would mean about 



May 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

$3,200 per family if that promise was kept. They promised that 
they would do that. And, Mr. Speaker, they said that they would 
never break a promise, that that’s the last thing they would do. 
And yet they did break the promise so . . . 
 
Getting back to the words of the motion, when we say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you have any new material . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, and one of the members says, 
do I have any new material? I think, Mr. Speaker, this subject is 
so important that many of the things that have happened bear 
repeating. And it does bother me a bit, Mr. Speaker. It does 
bother me a bit — and I wasn’t going to say it, but I will say it 
because I’ve said it on other occasions — but it bothers me, Mr. 
Speaker, that every time I get up to point out that the 
Conservative Party of Canada, with the support of the 
Saskatchewan Party here, got into office on a promise that 
they’re not keeping, the members opposite seem to be disturbed 
and annoyed that I’m pointing that out. And I find that 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The inconvenient truth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the inconvenient truth that they don’t 
want to hear. They do not want to hear. And it’s a simple fact, 
and everybody knows what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a simple fact that they have encouraged people to be duped. 
They have encouraged people to elect Conservative members of 
Parliament on the bogus promise that they’re going to fix 
equalization for Saskatchewan. And they themselves may have 
been duped; I don’t know. 
 
And they’re uncomfortable, and they don’t want to hear about it 
because they know that their Prime Minister Harper in Ottawa, 
their Conservative friends are catering, are catering to Quebec, 
and they’re catering to Ontario, and that interferes with their 
basic world view, Mr. Speaker. It interferes with their basic 
world view because their view of the world is that the 
Conservative Party of Canada — getting rid of the Liberals — 
is going to stand up for the West and support Saskatchewan, 
and they know that’s not the case. 
 
But for them to go . . . It must interesting at meetings of 
Saskatchewan Party supporters. I mean do they sit around and 
look each other in the eye and say gee I don’t, I didn’t think that 
the Conservative government was going to do this to 
Saskatchewan. What did you think? Or do they sort of treat it 
like the elephant in the room and not really talk about what’s 
going on? And I think that is it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think when they get together, they know in their heart of 
hearts that we have a Conservative government in Ottawa that 
has turned its back on Saskatchewan. But they will not admit it 
because, to admit it, they’d have to admit how fooled they were, 
along with the people of Saskatchewan, about believing that 
you could believe this promise on equalization. And I think it’s 
difficult for them, Mr. Speaker. It’s difficult for them to make 
that admission. So that’s why we’ve made this motion, and I 
want to see how they’re going to vote on this motion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the motion is . . . I’ll read it again. I think it’s a good 

motion. It says: 
 

That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
Parliament provide an apology to the people of this 
province for breaking their election promise on the issue 
of equalization; and further, that this Legislative Assembly 
call upon the federal government to immediately negotiate 
a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 

And that’s what we need to do, Mr. Speaker. We need to hold 
the Conservatives’ feet to the fire. And I’m interested to see 
whether the members of the opposition will support us on this 
motion because — as I’ve said when their arch enemies, the 
Liberals, were in office — they went after the Liberals, 
repeatedly saying we had to get rid of them because they hadn’t 
done anything on equalization. Will they do the same thing with 
respect to the Conservative government that made this promise 
but hasn’t kept the promise to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
And I don’t like to say it, Mr. Speaker, but I’m beginning to 
think that the silence of the Saskatchewan Party means that 
they’re not going to support this. 
 
And you know what I find interesting? Perhaps there’s some 
explanation, but you know I look at the website of the member 
for Saskatoon Northwest, and this is interesting. At one point 
until recently, Mr. Speaker, he had on his website, 
“Saskatchewan Party proposal for equalization reform,” and he 
referred to the equalization issue. Last time I looked at his 
website, Mr. Speaker, he had removed that from the website — 
removed it, removed reference to equalization. And the question 
is why. Why? Was it swept under the carpet, Mr. Speaker? 
Because I think we’ve seen in the media these days that if 
something’s embarrassing to the Saskatchewan Party — even 
though they complain about other people supposedly delaying 
reporting matters to the police — they sweep it under the 
carpet. 
 
Then there was one of their candidates, Brad Farquhar, who 
used to be the assistant to the former leader of the Sask Party. 
He had on his website: “How about an equalization deal for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Martin?” I’m told that’s now gone from the 
website . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member says, do 
you want to conceal? They do want to conceal. They’re 
removing this issue from the website, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
trying to sweep the equalization issue under the carpet just like 
some other issues have been swept under the carpet going on in 
the Sask Party office, including, Mr. Speaker, a theft that 
occurred. 
 
But I’m talking about equalization. I’m not talking about a theft 
in their office. But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s important 
to have truth in advertising. And when we see messages about 
equalization appearing on the website one day and disappearing 
the next day, when we see the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 1 p.m., I just want to take a 
minute before adjourning the Assembly to make note that the 
members have been working very hard, and I would like to 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2007 

wish everyone a weekend of sweetness and good humour, 
especially now because the first Sunday in May is World 
Laughter Day. 
 
House stands adjourned until Monday 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1490 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1490 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Possession of Confidential Reports 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
 Fundraising Event for Sofia House 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
 Confidential Document 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
 Humboldt Broncos Give Their All for the Anavet Cup 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
 Theft From Saskatchewan Party 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1492 
 Ethics 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1492 
 Personnel Problem 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Alleged Concealment of Wrongdoing 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 68 — The Status of the Artist Act, 2007 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Princess Royal to Visit Saskatchewan 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government’s Performance 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1498 
  Thomson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................1500 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1500 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1500 
  Crofford .........................................................................................................................................................................1501, 1508 
  Gantefoer (point of order)......................................................................................................................................................1502 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Prebble ...........................................................................................................................................................................1503, 1508 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................1504 
  Yates (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................1505 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1505 



 

  Duncan ...........................................................................................................................................................................1505, 1508 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1508 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 — Equalization and an Energy Accord 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


