






















































Hansard: March 21, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 34A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 21, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 913 
 March 21, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise members of the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present today to open today’s sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Let us begin our day with prayer. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to present another petition to the Assembly today on 
behalf of residents from the communities of, basically 
communities of Broadview and Cowessess in regards to dialysis 
in their area. And I’ll read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition again today on behalf of constituents from 
Cypress Hills, those concerned about the impending closure of 
the SaskPower office in Shaunavon. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to cause the government to take the 
necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, today’s three pages of petitions are 
signed by individuals from the communities of Shaunavon, 
Climax, Claydon, Frontier, and Val Marie. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding a dialysis machine in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary actions to implement a strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Broadview and Fenwood. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people 
of Saskatchewan are speaking out through a petition. This 
petition is signed by residents who are concerned that without a 
SaskPower office, submission of electrical and gas permits will 
be more difficult to obtain and cause delays in customer 
hook-ups. Madam Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Madam Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
fine community of Rosetown and I am pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased today to rise and read a petition of citizens concerned of 
the safety when driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Madam Deputy Speaker, are from 
Muenster, Saskatoon, Humboldt, Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition today from citizens of this province who are very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 18. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the signatures on this are from 
people in Lake Alma, Gladmar, and Radville. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to present another petition opposed to possible reduction of 
health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least the 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today on behalf of people across 
Saskatchewan who for the past eight years have been lobbying 
this government for a dedicated children’s hospital within a 
hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today the petitioners come from the constituencies of 
Saskatoon Sutherland, Saskatoon Greystone, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Once again I rise with a petition from citizens that are very 
concerned that the withdrawal of lab services from the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre would cause undue hardships, 
especially to senior citizens. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of 
Lafleche, Mankota, Aneroid, and Kincaid. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to bring 
forth a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the condition of some of our highways in the 
province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, signatures to this petition are from 
North Battleford, Livelong, and Calgary. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I rise to read a petition from citizens in my 
constituency that are concerned with the cellular coverage done 
by SaskTel. And in a lot of cases it is unreliable or, in most 
cases, non-existent. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassing the constituency of Batoche. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is signed by the citizens of 
Muenster, Humboldt, Annaheim, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis and Lockwood. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise in 
the House today to present a petition regarding the widening of 
Highway No. 5, a highway that travels through the width of my 
constituency. I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good 
citizens from Saskatoon and surrounding area. I so present on 
their behalf. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the chairperson 
of the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 
report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
eighth report. I move, seconded by the member from Cypress 
Hills: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Chair, 
seconded by the member for Cypress Hills: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of 
Human Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 27, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, as the Minister 
for Culture, Youth and Recreation, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
asked for leave to waive consideration of this Bill. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. When shall the Bill be read a 
third time? Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 25, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2006 without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move the 
consideration for Committee of the Whole be now waived. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that consideration of the Committee 
of the Whole on the Bill be waived. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et 

le Conseil exécutif 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 25 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 26, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration of this Bill in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 26. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 26 be now read for the third time and passed under 
its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 30, The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 30, 
The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment 
Act, 2006. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third 
time? The Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional 
Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
30 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its eighth report. 
 
I move, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair and 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I have a number of questions to lay before the 
Assembly today. And I give notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many harassment-related complaints were filed in the 
fiscal year 2000-2001, for ’01-02, ’02-03, ’03-04, ’04-05, 
’05-06, and ’06-07? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: of the 
harassment complaints filed in the 2001 fiscal year, how 
many were verified? 

 
And I have the same questions for the years ’01-02, ’03-04, 

’04-05, and ’05-06 and ’06-07. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many department employees were charged with 
harassment for the fiscal year 2000-200l? 

 
And I have the same questions for the years ’01-02, ’02-03, 
’03-04, ’04-05, ’05-06, ’06-07. 
 
As well I give notice on day no. 39 to ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many department employee harassment cases resulted in 
convictions, disciplinary action, or firings in the fiscal year 
2000-2001, ’01-02, ’02-03, ’03-04, ’04-05, ’05-06, 
’06-07? 

 
Finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
much money was paid out as a result of firings related to 
department employee harassment in the fiscal year 
2000-2001, ’01-02, ’02-03, ’03-04, ’04-05, ’05-06, 
’06-07? 

 
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
has Investment Saskatchewan financed in any way the 
purchase of L & M Wood Products by Beauval Forest 
Industries? And if so, how much money was invested? 

 
In addition: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
to date how much money has Investment Saskatchewan 
invested in Beauval Forest Industries? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to the members of the Legislative Assembly a group that is 
seated in your gallery. It’s a group that’s accompanied by two 
staff from the Department of Government Relations. And this is 
a group of nine new foreign service officers at Foreign Affairs 
and International Trade Canada and they are here as part of a 
cross-Canada study tour. 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

This tour is an important part of the training program for 
entry-level officers in order to familiarize themselves with 
different areas of Canada. They are meeting with a variety of 
community groups, organizations, businesses, and government 
while they’re here. I look forward to meeting with them after 
the question period. 
 
We’re very pleased to have the cross-Canada study tour visit us 
in Saskatchewan for a two-day program. I look forward to the 
opportunity to tell them about the wonderful opportunities that 
Canada presents to the rest of the world. Look forward to 
. . .Well I don’t think I have to tell them about the wonderful 
weather that we’re experiencing on the first day of spring — a 
beautiful, brilliant, sunshine day. 
 
And as to the warmth of the people of Saskatchewan, well 
there, Madam Speaker, I’m going to have to call on the 
representatives of the people of Saskatchewan to ensure that 
these people when they go out to be ambassadors for not just 
Canada but for Saskatchewan, that they are well aware of the 
warmth of the people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask my colleagues to join with me in extending them a very 
warm welcome today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Madam Speaker. I would 
like to join with the minister, and on behalf of the official 
opposition, in welcoming the nine new foreign service officers 
to our Assembly. We’re very proud of Saskatchewan. We’re 
very proud of our country. And we’re also very proud of the 
work that our foreign service does. 
 
I believe many of the members in this House, including yours 
truly, have had the benefit of being helped by our foreign 
service when visiting other countries. So we wish you well as 
you represent our country. Do remember Saskatchewan — the 
greatest province in the Confederation. And best wishes from 
the official opposition. 
 
Congratulations on your new work. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — With the patience of the Assembly, 
Madam Deputy Chair would like to also recognize an important 
date for a constituent of mine. Be it noted that today is the 49th 
birthday of one Ken Ring, who is our Law Clerk and 
Parliamentary Counsel at the Table. I’d ask all members to join 
me in congratulating him on this important milestone in his life. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Today is International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. Madam Speaker, this special day was 
designated by the United Nations following a terrible incident 
in 1960 when police opened fire and killed 69 people and 
injured many others during a peaceful demonstration in South 
Africa. The demonstration was in opposition to the South 
African system of apartheid. 
 
A lot of progress has been made since that time, Madam 
Speaker. However the impact of racism continues to be felt by 
too many people and is a serious social problem around the 
world and unfortunately yet in our province. 
 
In Saskatchewan we share a vision where all people are treated 
equitably, and I’m proud to say that the provincial government 
continues to work hard on initiatives to fulfill this vision. We 
believe that all people have the right to realize their full 
potential, regardless of race, colour, and national or ethnic 
origin. As such it is important that we all reject racism and 
stand together with those people who have been and continue to 
be discriminated against. 
 
Madam Speaker, I urge all members of this Assembly and all 
the people of Saskatchewan to recognize the significance of 
today, and work in our own daily lives to promote mutual 
respect and honour the human rights of all of our citizens. 
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to join with the member opposite in recognizing March 21 as 
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. 
 
Unfortunately racism is just as much a problem in 
Saskatchewan as it is in other parts of the world. Racism is 
nasty and it’s insidious. It has the power to divide friends and 
families. I’m frustrated. In Saskatchewan today, as we enter our 
second century as a province, racism continues to hover in our 
communities. It’s time for all of us to stand up and say, it’s 
enough. It’s time to see everyone as human beings, not just 
from being from one race or another. 
 
I think we have come a long way in celebrating different 
cultures and races in Saskatchewan, but we still have a long 
way to go. Our differences must be what unite us and make us 
stronger, not what divide us. Combined as a people, we are 
indeed stronger than the sum of the individuals. That’s why it is 
important that we make an effort every day — not just on 
March 21 — to stamp out stereotypes and increase 
understanding. 
 
Understanding is a powerful tool. It enables us to see the world 
through another’s eyes and gives us a new perspective. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we need to work so that eventually, perhaps 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

not in my lifetime, there will be no longer a need to have a day 
for the elimination of racial discrimination. Racial 
discrimination will be gone forever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Regina Team in Senior Men’s Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. We should all let 
loose once in a while. It can be good for the spirit. 
 
Picture a world where even grown-up men are actually 
encouraged to yell at each other, to throw stones repeatedly at 
the guy some distance away. Picture a world where one man is 
not ridiculed for sweeping or cleaning the house. Picture a 
world where after much yelling and throwing rocks, the men 
with the losing record tell the winners to travel far and fast, and 
the winners do. In Canada this is our national sport; in 
Saskatchewan of course it’s curling. 
 
Madam Speaker, the best senior curling team in Saskatchewan 
this year are Bill Weppler, Brad Gellner, Stan Rowe, and John 
Grundy. These four curlers are the toast of the Highland Curling 
Club in north Regina. Our team is in Trois-Rivières, Quebec at 
this moment at the Canadian senior men’s championship. As of 
Tuesday evening, we are at two and four. I’m confident our 
team are representing Saskatchewan well and will continue 
doing what they do best — throw rocks, yell at each other, 
sweep, and have fun. 
 
The Highland club president, Roy Dorwart, is joined by other 
Highland members and all Saskatchewan people in wishing our 
Saskatchewan foursome — Bill Weppler, Brad Gellner, Stan 
Rowe, and John Grundy — good curling, good sportsmanship, 
and good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, I had the good fortune last night to attend a 
banquet in Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. And, Madam 
Speaker, the Leader of the Official Opposition got to speak to a 
very enthusiastic crowd out there last night. 
 
But one of the things we found out very quickly last night, a 
number of my colleagues, Madam Speaker, was that the new 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy is even more popular now 
than he was at the time of the by-election. We were told by 
many people last night that they appreciate the work that he’s 
doing in and out of the legislature. 
 
Madam Speaker, people from all walks of life attended last 
night. There were city representatives, chamber of commerce 

members, business people, ranchers, farmers, blue-collar 
workers, and even, Madam Speaker, there was a number of 
provincial employees and that’s always a good sign of things to 
come. 
 
Madam Speaker, 200 people filled that hall last night and the 
only reason there wasn’t more is the hall wouldn’t hold any 
more. Madam Speaker, the people we talked to last night see 
the possibility of a bright, bright future for the province of 
Saskatchewan, but everyone is coming to the realization for that 
to happen changes have to be made. 
 
The number one question that every one of us were asked is 
when will the next election be called — we can’t wait; we’ve 
done our job; we’ve elected a vibrant, energetic, young MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for the Sask Party. Now 
we hope the rest of the province follows suit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

World Water Day 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
blessed with abundant water resources — nearly one and a half 
per cent of all the fresh water in the world — but we’ll need to 
manage this precious resource carefully to safeguard it for the 
future. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, tomorrow is World Water Day, a 
special day set aside to celebrate its importance in our lives and 
to promote awareness of water-related issues. Here in 
Saskatchewan we are already taking significant steps to address 
those issues. 
 
Just last week Saskatchewan’s first report card on the health of 
the province’s watersheds was released. This is an important 
milestone in the implementation of the safe drinking water 
strategy, our comprehensive action plan to deal with risks that 
affect drinking water. The report will be the benchmark for 
future comparisons and provide the basis for decision makers to 
act in the interests of long-term environmental sustainability. 
 
In November of last year we released the Saskatchewan water 
conservation plan. The primary objective of this plan is to raise 
awareness about how much water we use and how we can use it 
more carefully and efficiently. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we can make big gains by making 
simple changes to the way we use water, and each drop saved 
will be another small gift to future generations. Thank you, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Columnist’s Views 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

Well it’s not often that question period is called the most 
interesting television in Saskatchewan, but that’s what it’s being 
called by one political commentator in the province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to share the thoughts of that 
columnist and his take on the Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
According to Rawlco Radio’s Murray Wood, and I quote: 
 

The most interesting television in Saskatchewan has to be 
question period at the legislature. You may be watching a 
government in its death throes. The Saskatchewan Party 
has been launching a daily volley of broadsides against the 
NDP over the Murdoch Carriere case and it is scoring hits. 
 

Mr. Wood, like all of us on this side of the House, has seen 
through the member from Nutana’s failed attempts to deflect 
the issue by raising complaints about the federal government. 
And I continue with the quote from Murray Wood: 
 

Now you may wonder what Stephen Harper has to do with 
all of this. Good question. The answer, nothing. But it’s as 
useful an answer as almost any other we’re hearing from 
the government as to why giving a man fired after 
complaints from female employees [gets] $275,000. 
 
The government’s refusal to say more is hurting it 
politically. Admittedly a lot can happen between now and 
an election call but just as the federal Liberals couldn’t 
shake the damage done by Gomery, it’s started to seem the 
taint around the Carriere case may . . . [put] the last nail in 
the . . . coffin [of the NDP]. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Opposition Stand on Equalization 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Last year 
when the federal Conservatives were elected, the Leader of the 
Opposition put out a press release saying he was confident that 
negotiations on equalization would now make, quote, 
“significant and timely progress.” 
 
And according to The StarPhoenix, the Leader of the 
Opposition said, quote, “. . . he was reassured there was a 
commitment to the Conservative platform on equalization.” 
 
In fact the Leader of the Opposition was so taken with the 
Prime Minister that the Prince Albert Daily Herald claimed the 
Leader of the Opposition was, quote, “. . . sounding like an 
absolutely Stephen Harper sycophant.” 
 
When talking about the Saskatchewan Party position on 
equalization the member from Cypress Hills has this to say, 
quote, “. . . we can be a little more patient, [and] take the Prime 
Minister at his word.” 
 
Now the members opposite are supposedly outraged by 
Harper’s broken promise. And yet yesterday they refused to 
even debate a motion calling for their buddies, Saskatchewan 
Conservative MPs, to vote against the federal budget. Madam 

Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are crying crocodile 
tears. They are clearly still on the side with their pals on the 
equalization issue. In other words, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
along with the Harper Conservatives, the Saskatchewan Party is 
implementing another plan — this one called penalize 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Government Response to Harassment Complaints 
Regarding Murdoch Carriere 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Earlier 
this week, the former minister for the Environment downplayed 
his relationship with Murdoch Carriere. Today I have a letter 
signed by one of the victims in the Murdoch Carriere case 
which paints a somewhat different picture. The statement reads, 
and I quote: 
 

When I complained . . . about his behaviour, Carriere 
would respond with several points. He would say I was 
lucky to have my job. He would say he had friends in high 
places, while pointing to a picture of the Environment 
Minister, Buckley Belanger. That picture was always in 
Carriere’s office. 

 
Can the former minister of the Environment explain why 
Murdoch Carriere used his relationship with the minister to 
further intimidate his victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The former minister of the Environment has already indicated 
that he knew Mr. Carriere. It was a professional relationship. He 
indicated very clearly that they were not friends as the members 
opposite have insinuated time and time again. The member 
opposite knows that the minister of the Environment clearly 
stated that he knew Mr. Carriere. They were acquaintances. It 
was through their professional relationship from minister to 
employee in the department, but they were not friends. 
 
Now if Mr. Carriere wanted to portray the relationship in some 
other way, obviously that was how Mr. Carriere chose to 
portray the relationship. But I think the member from the North 
has clearly indicated that he was not a good friend of Mr. 
Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The 
statement goes on to say, and I quote: 
 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

Some people tried to do the right thing but were shut 
down. Most people in high places just turned a blind eye to 
Murdoch Carriere’s behaviour. 

 
Because this NDP [New Democratic Party] government turned 
a blind eye to complaints, women lived in a culture of fear. Is 
the NDP government investigating how long Murdoch Carriere 
was allowed to continue his harassment of women, both 
regarding the nine women involved in this settlement and 
regarding any prior complaints filed against Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Madam Speaker, I’d just like to 
say this to the members opposite. This really does speak to the 
members opposite credibility. And let me say why. Mr. 
Speaker, on more than one occasion they have portrayed — and 
they’re doing it right now on an advertising campaign — 
they’ve portrayed the $275,000 settlement with Mr. Carriere as 
payment for harassment. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that totally 
incredible. 
 
Secondly, they accused the government of wiping the hard 
drive, and we’ve been able to dispel that myth. And once again 
it goes to their credibility. The third thing that they said was that 
there was a gag order on the women. And clearly we’ve been 
able to dispel that myth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then they said in this House that Justice Laing had made a 
statement regarding the nature of the harassment and how it had 
gone on for years and had done nothing. Yet the document they 
tabled in the House had absolutely nothing to say on that 
matter. It’s their credibility, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I thought that was a 
pretty easy question. All I asked was if the NDP government 
was investigating how long Murdoch Carriere was allowed to 
carry on. The victim ends her statement with these words, and I 
quote: 
 

Murdoch Carriere should not have been rewarded for his 
repeated harassment of women in the workplace. It is 
wrong. 

 
And it is wrong. That’s how the victims feel. That’s how 
women in the workplace feel, and that’s how people of this 
province feel. Why didn’t the NDP government deal with 
Murdoch Carriere long before he harassed the nine women in 
this settlement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the 

complaints from the nine women who still work in various 
departments of government came to the attention of the 
Department of the Environment in September 2002 when they 
were formally lodged. An investigation occurred, and a report 
was provided to the deputy minister. The deputy minister did 
three things — he demoted Mr. Carriere; he red circled him, 
and he put him on leave without pay. 
 
When the Government of Saskatchewan — the politicians — 
found out the nature of the discipline, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and the nature of the allegations, we made a decision to 
terminate Mr. Carriere’s employment. As a result of that 
termination, there are a number of legal issues that were filed by 
Mr. Carriere in a civil action against the province, and we 
settled with Mr. Carriere for $275,000. That was to settle 
defamation of character, as well as all kinds of other 
negligences, abuse of power and lost income, Mr. Speaker . 
 
There are two different issues. We settled with him not for the 
harassment, but for the way we handled the situation, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the government 
continues to be incredibly defensive about this issue, and at the 
very least, these women deserve somebody in this NDP 
government to stand up and take responsibility for what 
happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — The very first step could be that the minister 
could apologize to these women for not having dealt with 
Murdoch Carriere long ago. It’s a very small step, but all of the 
women harassed by Murdoch Carriere deserve to hear it. Will 
the minister apologize to the victims of Murdoch Carriere and 
make a commitment today to undertake an investigation into 
any prior harassment complaints that were brought before these 
nine women came forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I think we 
sent a very strong signal that harassment is not acceptable in the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy Speaker. He was 
fired. He lost his livelihood, Madam Deputy Speaker. He was 
fired. He was put on leave without pay. He was demoted three 
levels. He was red-circled. He was sent to Regina without any 
staff. He lost his large budget. And when it came to light in 
terms of the political people, we made a decision to fire him. 
 
He no longer works for the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
he is no longer in any workplace in the Government of 
Saskatchewan in this province, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Property Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Speaker, Saskatchewan 
homeowners pay some of the highest property taxes in Canada. 
Since the 2003 election, this Premier and this government have 
been promising a long-term plan to reduce the educational 
property tax portion. Time after time, he has betrayed the 
promise of Saskatchewan by breaking that promise. And now, 
the Minister of Finance is saying the NDP is going to betray 
Saskatchewan people once again because there is no long-term 
plan for property tax relief in tomorrow’s budget. 
 
Madam Speaker, why has the NDP broken this promise and 
betrayed the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we made a 
commitment to Saskatchewan people that 30 per cent of all new 
equalization money flowing into this province would go to 
property tax relief. Tomorrow I will table a budget that will 
keep that promise. 
 
My question, my question, is why is it the Prime Minister of 
Canada had money for tax cuts in Quebec but not money for tax 
cuts for Canadians? And why is the Sask Party supporting that 
position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Speaker, this Premier was 
promising property tax relief long before there was any talk of a 
new equalization deal. This Premier made the promise in the 
2003 SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention when he said, “the status quo is not 
on.” He made, Madam Speaker, he made the promise again 
during the 2003 election campaign when he said there was 
room to accept the recommendations of the Boughen 
Commission within the fiscal capacity of this government. 
 
The Minister of Finance himself made the promise again when 
he started amalgamating school divisions. In a November 12, 
2004, news release, the current Minister of Finance said, when 
he was then the Learning minister, and I quote, “These changes 
are necessary . . . to provide long-term sustainable property tax 
relief.” Madam Speaker, where is this sustainable property tax 
relief? Why have they betrayed the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That long-term sustainable property 
tax relief for farm families is contained in last year’s budget. 
It’ll be contained in next year’s budget. It’ll be contained in the 

budget the year after. 
 
The question I have is, the question I want to know is, why is 
that right wing Saskatchewan Party allowing Stephen Harper to 
break his promise to Saskatchewan people? Why is it they’re 
supporting a tax cut for Quebecers, but not a tax cut for 
Canadians? Why is it they won’t stand in this Assembly and 
call on Saskatchewan MPs [Member of Parliament] to vote 
against this betrayal by the Conservative government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this opposition 
will stand proudly in this House and call the attention . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask all members to come to 
order. The minister was able to give his response. I’d ask now 
the member from Melfort the ability to place his question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Deputy Speaker, this opposition 
will stand proudly in this House and hold the government to 
account for the betrayal they are perpetrating on this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — This government said they would cut 
property taxes after the Boughen Commission report. They got 
the report and they didn’t cut the taxes. They said they would 
cut property taxes if they raised the PST [provincial sales tax], 
and then they just raised the PST and didn’t cut property taxes. 
Then they say they were going to cut property taxes if they 
amalgamated schools. Well we got the school amalgamations 
with no cuts in property taxes. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s 
excuse after excuse after excuse by this government for 
breaking their promises and betraying this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I was the minister of Education when 
we rejected the Boughen report, and I continue to reject it. We 
will not increase sales taxes to balance off against property 
taxes. That is why today we’ve got the lowest sales tax we’ve 
had in 25 years, thanks to this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And let me say this, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we made a commitment to 30 per cent of new, 
ongoing equalization money would go to cut property taxes. 
Even before we got that money, we changed the formula to 
protect farm families. Let me tell these members on the 
opposite side, Stephen Harper broke his promise to 
Saskatchewan people. This New Democratic government will 
keep its. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

Business Competition 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Many 
of my constituents in the constituency of Indian Head are upset 
with this NDP government, but none more than Don Williams 
who is the co-owner of Mission Ridge ski hill. This ski hill is 
100 per cent privately funded. In fact these people have taken 
out mortgages to put up a used chairlift on this ski hill. 
 
In the meantime, Madam Deputy Speaker, this government has 
gone ahead and made a decision to compete directly against 
business owners in this province by putting $900,000 into 
Blackstrap ski hill, Madam Deputy Speaker. Can the minister 
explain why he is competing against Saskatchewan business 
owners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the simple answer is 
that we have a provincial park system and a couple of them 
include ski hills that we’re responsible for, and we provide 
funding for that equipment. It’s a part of providing winter 
recreation for people across Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what really surprises me, Madam Speaker, is that member 
opposite knew that this issue has been there for a while, and 
he’s now been prodded by his local constituent because he has 
not raised this issue when it’s been here in this House. I have 
responded and provided that information. I’m very surprised 
that he now raises this in this context. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the real issues relate to what the 
federal government has done to Saskatchewan people. And I 
think that that member does a disservice to the whole of the 
province when he raises this issue in this context. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the disservice that 
has been done in this province is that NDP government that has 
awarded somebody for being charged with common assault 
under the Murdoch Carriere case, and that has dominated 
question period for a darn good reason, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these business owners simply want 
fairness. This ski resort has put up a used chair lift, and now 
they’ve been charged $11,000 on PST. Don Williams is asking 
this government directly, should he just write the cheque to 
Mount Blackstrap instead of putting it into the provincial 
coffers? Because that’s where it’s going to compete against his 
own tax dollar. How is that fair? How can the minister justify 
that in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Speaker, this member asks a 
question about the basic taxation that we provide in this 
province that provide for all of our services. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we use those funds appropriately. The minister is going to show 
the province tomorrow how that money is going to be spent 
right across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work to make sure that 
businesses can operate in this province, that there’s fair 
taxation, that the dollars are used for the responsibilities of this 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, I am totally disappointed in that 
member and those members opposite that they go on this type 
of question when we are dealing with the national issues around 
how Saskatchewan has been treated. And they don’t even raise 
those issues here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
not only that this businessman has to compete against his own 
tax dollar. What really irates Mr. Williams is that when he 
called Blackstrap hill after this government has given them 
$900,000, what did he find out when he called them? What did 
he find out on a voice mail? 
 
Well this is what he found out — that Blackstrap was closed for 
a week to take the staff skiing on a vacation in Sunshine Village 
in Alberta. This ski hill opened in February. It is now March, 
and they’ve taken a week’s holiday paid by this government 
from $900,000. My question to the minister is: how much of the 
$900,000 went to pay for their holiday at Sunshine Village? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Speaker, the member should get 
his facts straight. And I’ll say once again, as I’ve said for 
almost 12 years now, that unfortunately the research capacity in 
that backroom over there hasn’t lived up to its responsibility. 
Even now when the member from Weyburn is no longer there, 
it’s even gotten worse. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, the issue here is exactly what I answered 
the reporters last week. The ski hill is not open on Monday, 
Tuesday normally. Last Wednesday there was a storm, and 
some of the members were caught in the mountains. They were 
closed on Wednesday. They were there Thursday and Friday, 
and that answer is what I gave to the press last week. 
 
Madam Speaker, this member is raising these questions today 
because the owner of the Mission Ridge ski hill was very 
disappointed and told this member that he was not going to 
support him any more if he didn’t raise it in the House. 
 
Madam Speaker, I am totally disappointed that this particular 
issue is being brought and not being dealt with on the national 
level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Highway 32 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Madam Deputy Speaker, today is a very 
memorable day in the province of Saskatchewan. For the first 
time ever there is a highway being named after a current elected 
official. I’m pleased to announce, Madam Speaker, that today 
Highway 32 from Leader to Swift Current is now known as 
Eldon Lautermilch way. Madam Speaker, surely the minister is 
overwhelmed by this latest honour . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I call the member to order and would 
ask that he not refer to members sitting in the Assembly by their 
names. It’s pretty loose for quotation unless the member has 
things that . . . Anyway as the Speaker, I’m asking him to 
refrain from doing that within the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the question really 
goes to the minister. How does he feel about this great and once 
in a lifetime honour that’s been bestowed on him by the people 
of Saskatchewan? Madam Deputy Speaker, I present this 
picture for the minister himself. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I call the members to order. I 
would remind all members, I remind all members that exhibits 
are not allowed in the Assembly for presentation purposes or 
otherwise. I call the member to order. I think the member 
should go directly to his question within the bounds of what 
I’ve declared appropriate. Next question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — How does the minister feel about this great 
honour that’s been bestowed on him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what I know, 
that this government is committed to improving this highway 
system. And we have shown that in the budgets that have been 
allocating more dollars — last year a record amount of money 
— into our highway system. We’ve just announced a 10-year, 
$5 billion commitment, a long-term commitment to the 
highway system. 
 
Now that member asks about naming and tagging titles. Well I 
want to tell that member that he is part of an administration that 
is led by someone who was part of a government under Grant 
Devine that was titled to be the most corrupt government in the 
history of Saskatchewan, in the history of this country. Mr. 
Speaker, now that’s a title that the member from Swift Current 
holds, and that’s a title that he might want to be proud of. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if that member had any 
courage he’d stand up to his cousins in Ottawa who just took 
$700 million out of the pockets of the families in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s his record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 

Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t think 
the minister’s going to be in any shape to come visit the 
highway. I was going to offer an invitation to him. I’d like to 
have him come and see his highway, and I’d like to extend that 
invitation to the Premier as well. But before the minister comes 
out, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of things that he 
should bring with him to facilitate a better overall experience. 
 
First the minister should bring a map so that he can see the 
importance of this highway to the region it serves. Secondly the 
minister should bring a copy of the budget so that he can see 
how much royalty revenue is generated to the province’s coffers 
from that region. And finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, a pair of 
orange rubber boots would help keep his feet dry from all the 
water in those potholes. And we can even arrange to get him a 
pair of those boots. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when does the minister plan to join me 
to tour his new highway? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what I’ll 
commit to. I’ll commit to joining that member and his leader in 
a debate on equalization, one which they hid from yesterday. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a substantive issue that’s facing 
Saskatchewan today, a national government who gives 
hundreds of millions of dollars of Saskatchewan’s people’s 
royalty dollars to Quebec — to Quebec, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. That’s the issue. And where was he yesterday? 
 
This Leader of the Opposition can’t even tell the media whether 
or not he would support the federal budget or whether he 
wouldn’t. He won’t tell them who bullied him from Stephen 
Harper’s office. Deputy Speaker, that is the issue facing the 
people of Saskatchewan today. You’ve got a spineless 
opposition led by Stephen Harper in Ottawa, who will not stand 
up for the families they represent in that area of the province — 
in that area of the province and every other area that they 
represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people will see through them very, very 
clearly. I ask them today, will they join us in the debate on that 
issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, maybe I should 
take the minister’s challenge for a debate on equalization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Deputy Speaker, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, well my colleagues have a better idea. I was going to 
say I take the offer if he would have the nerve to drive to Leader 
on Highway 32. I don’t think he’s willing to take my challenge, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, no more so than I should have to take 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

his. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, having a highway named after you is a 
great privilege. Madam Deputy Speaker, this minister is in a 
whole new league, part of the greats. His counterparts include 
Mark Messier and Wayne Gretzky. But, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, they only received their honour after they retired 
which, Madam Deputy Speaker, is what the people of 
Saskatchewan must want of this minister. They simply want 
him retired. Madam Deputy Speaker, will the minister comply 
with the wishes of Saskatchewan’s people? Will he take this 
honour and move aside so someone else can take over and get 
to fixing the highways in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I will say 
to that member unequivocally that no one on this side will step 
aside for any of them, and I want to tell you why. Because we 
all remember — the people of Saskatchewan remember very 
well — when the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was 
delivering liquor to cabinet ministers around this building, when 
they were selling off our highways equipment at 15 cents on the 
dollar, Madam Deputy Speaker, the memories run deep and 
they run hard. And we remember having to pay down debt. A 
billion dollars after a billion dollars after a billion dollars that 
was amassed by a right-wing government with no ideology 
other than to fill their own pockets and, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that will never happen again. People know who these 
people are. They won’t be forgotten. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 

Funding for Environmental Stewardship 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This 
morning the Premier and I were at the Saskatchewan Science 
Centre where we took a major step forward in fulfilling this 
government’s commitment to protecting the environment and 
addressing the effects of climate change. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have the privilege of living in one of the 
best places in the world. Our healthy environment and bountiful 
natural resources make life better for Saskatchewan families by 
creating jobs and economic growth and contributing to our 
social and physical well-being. It is no secret that we face some 
real challenges. Climate change and global warming, air and 
water pollution, finite supplies of non-renewable natural 
resources, each of these can and does threaten the health of our 
environment and the sustainability of our economy and of our 
society. 
 
Our government is committed to taking action to deal with 
climate change and ensuring future generations enjoy the 
benefits of a clean and healthy environment. That is why today 
we announced almost $5 million in funding for 20 innovative 

organizations and projects. The projects that will receive 
funding will help us reduce our dependence on coal-fired 
electricity and conserve our water supplies. They will help 
communities rid themselves of hazardous household wastes and 
promote the consumption of Saskatchewan-grown organic 
foods. 
 
These projects represent the wide range of work being done 
here in this province to protect our environment and build an 
economy that is both green and prosperous. They include rebate 
programs for customers who install solar water heating systems 
and replace old toilets with new water-efficient, low-flow 
models. They include support to over 200 communities to assist 
with municipal recycling systems. 
 
They include a number of important projects in the area of 
ecotourism, public awareness, and education which will 
contribute to our collective understanding of our environment 
and the challenges we face in protecting and enhancing it — 
projects such as the Saskatchewan Science Centre’s own Wild 
Saskatchewan exhibit that explores the importance of 
ecosystems and the implications of biodiversity loss. 
 
It takes the commitment of everyone to address the issues we 
face as a result of climate change and the degradation of our 
natural environment. With this funding, we are delivering on 
our commitment as a government and we are supporting the 
work of many dedicated people, organizations, and 
communities across the province. The funding we announced 
today is just the start of our support for this work. In the coming 
weeks we will unveil our full green strategy and our long-term 
response to climate change. 
 
The green strategy will strengthen the links between economic 
development, opportunities for environmental stewardship, and 
social well-being. It will recognize that a healthy, clean 
environment and a vibrant economy support the things we value 
such as schools, jobs, health care, and parks. I am looking 
forward to bringing you more information about our long-term 
plans in the days ahead. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. While I 
appreciate the money that’s being spent on environmental 
initiatives today — and these are steps in the right direction — 
but the question must be asked, why now at the end of a budget 
year on the eve of an election? 
 
As the minister stated, the funding announced today is just the 
start of the government’s support for this work, while the NDP 
has been in government for 16 years. So my question would be, 
where has this money been for the last 16 years, and why are 
we only starting now? 
 
While we do appreciate this announcement, I do have concerns 
as this appears to be a year-end, one-off funding with no 
long-term plan or vision. The NDP is doing these things 
because it’s the right thing to do, or because it’s a politically 
advantageous thing to do. Is the funding here now because we 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

are in an election year and the people know the NDP’s dismal 
environment record, so this government is trying to buy the 
votes of Saskatchewan voters? 
 
Greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan are the highest of 
any province or territory on a per GDP [gross domestic product] 
basis. Greenhouse gas emissions have grown more in this 
province since 1990 than every other province and territory. 
Where has this NDP government been for the last 16 years? 
Despite this funding announcement, it’s easy to see that this 
NDP government has actually been a detriment to the state of 
the environment in our province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I do look forward to the promised 
green plan from the NDP. Considering that they’ve had 16 
years to prepare it, I’m sure it’s going to be a good read. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Labour that Bill No. 54, The Labour Standards Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. I recognize 
the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Pursuant to a sessional order adopted by 
the Assembly on October 30, 2006, I hereby designate Bill No. 
54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 as a specified 
Bill subject to rules 31 to 33. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — At the request of the minister and 
pursuant to a sessional order adopted by this Assembly, Bill No. 
54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 is hereby 
designated as a specified Bill subject to rules 31 to 33. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the 
government I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 
540 through 637 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 
2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
give second reading of The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we have the privilege of living in one of the 
most unique and naturally gifted places in the world. Our 
healthy environment and bountiful natural resources make life 
better for Saskatchewan families by creating jobs and economic 
growth and contributing to our social and physical well-being. 
 
Our hunting and fishing opportunities are not only world-class, 
they are major contributors to Saskatchewan’s economy. That is 
why it is so important to ensure that we are doing our utmost to 
protect our resources. Madam Deputy Speaker, we do that 
through laws, regulations, quotas, limits, licences, education, 
and enforcement. And thus, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 
2007 will clarify the rules that allow conservation officers to 
stop vehicles in order to carry out roadside inspections. 
 
The amendments also draw a clear distinction between a power 
to inspect and a power to search. The proposed amendments 
repeal the current inspection and investigation provisions and 
replace them with provisions that improve the constitutional 
integrity of our legislation regarding the inspection and 
investigation of vehicles for compliance with environmental 
and natural resource laws. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, along with protecting our environment 
and our resources, we are also committed to protecting 
constitutional rights. These amendments are a balance between 
those rights and resource protection. I now move second 
reading of The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister’s moved second reading 
of Bill No. 52, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007. I recognize 
the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 52, 
An Act to amend The Wildlife Act, 1998. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister has correctly outlined that 
the wildlife resource and our natural resources in our province 
are very much a tremendous asset to both our citizens and to 
people who come to visit our province from many places in 
North America and indeed the world that enjoy the natural flora 
and fauna in our part of the world. 
 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

Madam Deputy Speaker, we also recognize that in order to 
protect these valuable resources, we need wildlife officers that 
are so important to make sure that the proper balance between 
use and enjoyment of our wildlife resources and sustainable 
development are also important. We must ensure that our 
wildlife officers are given all of the tools that they need to 
properly dispense their duties and I know that this Bill is 
intended to provide those tools to these wildlife officers in the 
discharge of their duty. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to have our critic have the 
opportunity to discuss this with the affected individuals, 
particularly wildlife officers in this province, at this stage — to 
allow that discussion to occur at this stage — I’d move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes 
(Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
give second reading to The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes 
(Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the proposed amendments are similar 
to those I described for The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007 in 
relation to the authority given to conservation officers to 
conduct roadside inspections. The Acts proposed for 
amendment in this Bill include The Fisheries Act 
(Saskatchewan), 1994, The Forest Resources Management Act, 
and The Natural Resources Act. The amendments to The 
Wildlife Act are being advanced separately because of the need 
for a French version of that Bill. 
 
I now move second reading of The Miscellaneous Environment 
Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 
2007. Thank you. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 53, The Miscellaneous Environment 
Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 
2007. I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 53, an Act to 
amend certain environmental statutes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in looking at this Bill very briefly, it 
strikes me as it’s very much as a housekeeping Bill that allows 
for standardization of terms and wording changes across a 
number of Bills. And it also would allow for additional 

inspection powers for wildlife officers in various Bills. 
 
We think this is important to make it consistent with the intent 
of this Bill and previous Bill introduced to make sure that our 
wildlife officers have all the tools they need, both in regulation 
and in statute. And I assume that this is the intent of this Bill as 
the minister has indicated. And in order for the discussion with 
wildlife officers to occur between ourselves, our environmental 
critic, and these officers, at this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 24 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 
boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I want to make a few comments in regards to 
Bill No. 24, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 
 
As we look at the Act and the intent of the Act and the reason 
for the Bill, one has to question some of the motives the 
government has in bringing forward the changes in the Bill, 
which I think as we look at the Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
are certainly changes that I think are appropriate. However in 
some cases, they’re long overdue. In other cases, one has to 
question what consultation process was entered into before the 
changes to the legislation were brought forward. 
 
And first of all, I would like to comment on the fact that the Bill 
gives the minister responsible for parks and regional parks the 
ability to ban alcohol in our provincial or regional parks. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, while I’m not an avid camper, I know 
that there are many people — not only in my constituency but 
across the province — that look forward to getting away from a 
hectic and busy week and going to one of our parks and 
enjoying just a weekend of leisure, in many cases taking their 
family members with them. 
 
But the challenge, Madam Deputy Speaker, that these people 
face as they go out to the parks to enjoy our parks is the fact 
that there are individuals as well who unfortunately don’t 
understand what it is to show respect to other campers. And 
when I talk about showing respect, I’m not talking about the 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

individuals who may have a drink or two around the campfire. 
I’m talking about individuals who abuse the privilege and then 
become obnoxious and very boisterous and destroy the 
tranquility in the campgrounds, and taking away from the 
abilities of families to enjoy those camps . . . camping 
opportunities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, for example, I think of some of our 
provincial parks, and unfortunately I happen to live 30 minutes 
north of one of the most beautiful parks in the province, in 
Kenosee provincial park . . . And while it’s a beautiful park — 
it’s got beautiful golf courses; it’s got tremendous business 
opportunity and individuals who have established excellent 
businesses to provide services to people who would come out to 
the parks — the May long weekend has been one weekend that 
over the past number of years we’ve seen situations where 
individuals have come in and actually undertaken very 
destructive practices within the parks, destroying picnic tables, 
destroying camping areas. 
 
And as a result of those situations, I believe, the park authorities 
have decided that maybe there is a place for limiting the 
possession of alcohol. And I agree with them, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And over the last couple of years we’ve seen in the 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park that it actually has become a 
place where families can feel comfortable to come out on long 
weekends and again enjoy the amenities of the park while not 
having to have to put up with the obscene involvement of other 
campers who might feel it’s their right to establish a 
campground and then abuse the use of alcohol. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly important for us to 
recognize that people have a right to enjoy camping without 
being interfered in by other individuals. The concern we do 
have is whether or not proper notice is made available, what 
consultation may have taken place with the business people 
within the parks. I know I’ve had calls from businessmen and 
women who felt that their businesses were . . . or they’d lost 
business. 
 
But at the same time, I guess my comment has always been as 
well, what have you done to ensure that people treat their time 
in the park and other people’s time responsibly? And if you 
happen to have a business where you’re selling liquor and 
alcohol, what have you done to ensure that people — if they are 
purchasing these products — are respecting the rights of other 
families to just enjoy a good time in the park? 
 
So I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, this part of the Bill will be 
welcomed in many cases. It should create a better camping 
environment for families, and I think as people are aware of the 
fact that the parks have the ability to ban the possession of 
alcohol if people abuse their responsibilities, that may keep 
people from going in or carrying excessive amounts and 
becoming abusive in those situations. And people may begin to 
realize that everyone, and families in particular, have the right 
to enjoy a sound camping experience and have the right to be 
able to do it without obnoxious and abusive neighbours who 
may be in the camping site next to them. 
 
So that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think will be seen as a 
positive move. And I somehow suspect that people are more 
aware of the fact that we want to ensure a good family camping 

experience, that in the long run people will begin to realize they 
have a responsibility as well to not abuse the alcohol in our 
campsites. And I think that, Madam Deputy Speaker, will be a 
positive move. 
 
The other point in this piece of legislation, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is the move for Liquor and Gaming to grant additional 
dollars to community-based organizations who raise funds, 
whether it’s through bingos or whether it’s through the 
break-opens or even raffles, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a number of years ago when this 
government moved into and allowed gambling in the province 
of Saskatchewan — and I remember even prior to the move to 
allow gambling — the current Premier, back in 1987 when 
there was some discussion about opening up gambling in the 
province, indicated that he was, and he said, and I quote from 
Hansard, September 21, 1987, “I am not particularly happy 
when we fund [our] valuable social programs on the funds of 
gambling.” And that came from the current Premier of the 
province. 
 
But since 1992 — and the Premier was a minister in the NDP 
government in ’92 when gambling was allowed into the 
province — we have found, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
sure that all MLAs across this province have had complaints 
come into their offices from volunteer organizations who have 
raised monies in so many different ways to actually help fund 
volunteer organizations — whether it’s your Scout club, 
whether it’s a 4-H organization, whether it’s a local church 
group raising funds to help someone in need. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, over the years many of these organizations have, since 
the advent of gambling and VLTs [video lottery terminal] 
across this province, have seen the resources or their 
opportunity to raise the funds they need diminish. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when the province moved 
forward with gambling and placing more VLTs into 
establishments across the province, they had kind of indicated 
that they would — number one, they would set aside money to 
address the issues of problem gambling. But they would also set 
aside funds to ensure that volunteer groups would be able to 
continue to sustain their ability to support many worthwhile 
endeavours within their communities or within the area that 
they represented. And it’s been something like 12 to 14 years 
since gambling came into the province that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, many of these organizations have been waiting for 
some funding to replace the funding that they have lost. 
 
And I know, Madam Deputy Speaker, that when we talk about 
funding, I’ve had children that have been involved in many 
organizations that have used a means of . . . whether it’s bingos, 
working at bingos to raise money, whether it’s for a ball team 
so that they could participate in out-of-province activities, 
whether it’s . . . Even our grade 12 classes over the years have 
raised funds for a grade 12 graduation trip, which I think, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, has been certainly welcomed in many 
cases because it’s . . . as some of the grade 12 classes I’ve 
talked to have said, it gave them a better opportunity to get to 
know their classmates through the 12 years, just by spending 
this meaningful weekend, whether it was at Edmonton or 
wherever they may have gone, rather than having an 
alcohol-related party after their graduation class. 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

But, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the challenges everyone 
has found over the years is it’s become more difficult to raise 
the funds. However I might add that even though it’s more 
difficult, even though the province has reneged on its 
commitment to help fund or replace some of those dollars from 
gambling, Madam Deputy Speaker, I have found, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that people across this province have tended to 
continue to support through their giving in so many different 
ways to assist others who have needs. 
 
And I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the prime ways we 
have seen Saskatchewan people reach into their pockets was 
witnessed about two weeks ago through the Telemiracle 
program. And I believe this year Telemiracle raised the highest 
amount of monies that it’s ever raised, something like over $5 
million. And I would have to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, well done, well done. 
 
People across this province have realized that there are people 
with special needs, people that need the assistance, whether it’s 
wheelchairs or whether it’s special respiratory equipment or 
whatever the circumstances. And the people of Saskatchewan 
have realized, well here’s a way that we can help people 
whether it’s Telemiracle or even through our local 
organizations. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill also does expand the 
funding of community-based or charitable organizations by 
providing more funding from liquor and gaming to assist them 
in that matter. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think in view of 
what the government had indicated back in 1991, it’s certainly 
important that we finally move forward in that matter although 
it’s unfortunate that we have to prey upon individuals who 
through gambling have created an awful delicate situation for 
their family members. And when I say that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we all have, and I’m sure all members have had family 
members who have called their offices because of the lack of 
the financial resources that have been wasted by another family 
member either at a VLT — whether wasted or lost — have been 
lost by a family member at a VLT machine or in a gambling 
facility. 
 
So maybe we can feel better by sharing some of the resources 
that have been generated through gambling and putting them 
back into communities, giving them back to charitable 
organizations so that they can continue to provide the excellent 
support mechanisms in our communities to ensure that the 
Scout program or the cadet program can continue to move 
forward or that 4-H programs — which provide such a positive 
educational opportunity for young people — can be enhanced, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Or one other association that over the years has relied on local 
funding and local support is our agricultural societies. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this last weekend the Moosomin 
Agricultural Society, in conjunction with the Fairmede 
Agricultural Society, was able to host a provincial association 
of agricultural societies and exhibitions as they gathered for 
their annual meeting. And it was certainly a pleasure for the 
group in Moosomin. And it was a pleasure for myself to join 
with the representatives from across the province for a 
wonderful luncheon, as well as just sitting down and talking to 
many agricultural society representatives as they gathered in 

Moosomin and talked about the many fair days that they’ve had 
through the years and the different ways that they have 
continued to promote agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, what was also interesting is to 
note the number of communities or societies that have been 
around for periods of years. In fact there were a couple 
recognized on the weekend that had been in existence for more 
than 100 years. And that speaks loudly and speaks well of the 
volunteer people across our province — the many men and 
women who volunteer their time to organize these programs. 
And then to, on an annual basis, to ensure that they move 
forward very smoothly and are a means by which we can 
communicate in the agricultural community and to the larger 
urban community, the issues of agriculture and the importance 
that agricultural plays in our community. 
 
And one of the things that SAASE [The Saskatchewan 
Association of Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions] had — 
and I guess they have had the last couple of years — is they’ve 
been creating an educational fund whereby young people can 
apply and receive funding towards furthering their education. 
And while I’m not exactly sure of the amount of money that’s 
been created over the past number of years, I want to just 
mention that one gentleman who was very instrumental in our 
agricultural societies in the Moosomin and Fairmede area, Mr. 
Clark Lewis, had a scholarship named in his honour. And I 
think, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is certainly commendable, 
because Mr. Lewis over the years has been a very strong 
proponent — or was prior to his passing a couple of years ago 
— was a very strong proponent of the agriculture community in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, the two amendments that are 
before us, we trust that as the government moves forward that 
community-based organizations will indeed be able to provide 
some of the services that they’ve always looked forward to 
through the additional grant money that should be available as 
has been indicated in the legislation. And as well, we trust that 
people who are looking forward to enjoying a very wonderful 
and peaceful and enjoyable family camping opportunity, that, as 
a result of this legislation, that will be available to them. Having 
said that, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re more than prepared to 
let this move on to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Liquor and Gaming that Bill No. 
24, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Liquor and Gaming. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Madam Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
24, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Liquor and Gaming that Bill No. 24, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. We’ve called Committee of Finance. Committee of 
Finance is called. I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Deputy Chair: — We’ll just pause for a moment while we 
wait for the officials to come in for Committee of Finance. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates — March 

Executive Council 
Vote 10 

 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee will come to 
order now. The business before the committee is the 
supplementary estimates for Executive Council. And the 
resolution before the committee is: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sum for 
Executive Council, $263,000. 

 
I recognize the Deputy Leader for the Official Opposition. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and good 
afternoon to you, Mr. Premier, and to your staff. 
 
Mr. Premier there isn’t a lot of change to Executive Council in 
the supplementary estimates, but I’m going to ask a few specific 
questions and what the document of course that I’m looking at 
is page 8 of the Supplementary Estimates. And the explanation 
given, Mr. Premier, is that for executive management and 
central services, there are two amounts of money that have been 
added to the totals of the previous budget that was delivered 
over a year ago, and that being for executive management, 
132,000 additional dollars. Could you explain why that 
additional money was needed in executive management of vote 
no. 10? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, before I speak to the 
member’s question, let me welcome to the Assembly, Ms. 
Bonita Cairns who is director of corporate services for 

Executive Council, the one official who has joined us this 
afternoon to provide information if needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member asks very specifically about the 
$132,000 amount. This was an amount of money resulting into 
a contract that Executive Council . . . or a project, Mr. Chair, 
that Executive Council entered into with ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] and CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] which is described 
as a citizen service improvement project. 
 
And what we’re doing here, Mr. Chair, is seeking ways to 
provide better access to public services — the public services of 
the province of Saskatchewan — to citizens of Saskatchewan to 
make those access points more citizen friendly as opposed to 
being government friendly. And we engaged in this work, as I 
say, with both CIC, utilizing the expertise of ISC, and Exec 
Council’s share of the cost of this project $132,000 in this 
budget year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, thank you to the Premier for that 
answer. Mr. Premier, you mentioned that ISC was responsible 
for delivering this project and that there are additional costs. 
Could you indicate whether or not the project itself started 
before the fiscal year, and is this additional monies to a project 
that was already under way? Or was this a new project that was 
created after the fiscal year began? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct. Or in 
fact, yes, what happened is the project started after the budget 
year started. We undertook this work after the last budget was 
delivered in the House, and therefore it becomes a 
supplementary estimate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, could 
you outline what circumstances necessitated the creation of a 
project in mid-year? You mentioned that there was some 
collaboration between two departments, etc. What was the need 
to actually begin this in mid-year rather than waiting until, for 
instance, the new fiscal budget which will be in a matter a few 
days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in fact the project began 
shortly after the budget was tabled last year. We could have 
waited until now to begin that project, but this project in my 
view was important to get under way. Building on the variety of 
approaches we’ve taken to try and improve citizen access to 
government services, our motivation is to ensure as best we can 
that the citizens of our province accessing government services 
whether it be through the Crowns or through executive 
government — and these range the whole, the whole gamut of 
land titles registries to vital statistics to applying and receiving a 
fishing licence to drivers’ licences, all of that very practical 
day-to-day activity that government is engaged in with our 
citizens — to make that access simpler, to make it more 
convenient for the citizens as opposed to for government. 
 
This seems to me a project that’s . . . there’s much work been 
done, but we wanted to focus on it. We believe that . . . let’s get 
the work done. We’ve got a significant agency in ISC that can 
bring about some real expertise here. And so the project was 
initiated, not waiting for the extra year, or 10 or 11 or 12 
months till now. 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, then, a follow-up question. Mr. 
Premier, in light of the work that’s being done, when do you 
anticipate that the project will be completed and that, as you’ve 
indicated, the public will be able to now access information 
easier? Is there a completion date that the project manager has 
given to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have a hard 
completion date. My sense is that completion will be a 
phased-in process. We’re already making improvements. We’ve 
seen the tremendous improvements through ISC in terms of 
access to land titles registries and so on. It will be, I hope, a 
continuum of progress. So we haven’t set a hard finish date for 
the work and it will be ongoing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for those answers, Mr. Premier. 
Mr. Premier, also in vote no. 10, the category identified as 
central services is being listed as requiring an additional 
$131,000. And I note in the commentary in the same line it 
refers to accrued liability on leave entitlement. And I notice, 
Mr. Premier, also that the supplementary estimates that we dealt 
with last year at this time also indicated that there was a need to 
add additional monies for accrued liability on leave entitlements 
for that fiscal year. Could you explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan the process that is involved in leave entitlement, 
the number of people that are involved, and how the 
Government of Saskatchewan is now required to spend money 
for an accrued liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the total amount here, to be 
very clear, is 131. Just to clear up one small item, 11,000 of that 
is as a result of the tentative agreement with SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union]. 
So 11,000 is anticipated by Executive Council to be the costs 
for the new agreement. So on the accrued liabilities, the 
120,000, this tells a very interesting, a very interesting story, 
Mr. Chair, both last year and this. This represents vacation time 
owing to employees of Executive Council and scheduled days 
off owing to Executive Council. 
 
[15:30] 
 
What I am in some ways proud to report is that we have a team 
of people who work in Executive Council, who have not taken 
many of their scheduled days off, have not in fact taken 
vacation time. And therefore it accrues, and we have to account 
for it. We have to account a dollar value for that in our 
estimates. And this is now two years running where many of the 
people in Executive Council simply are not taking the holidays 
that perhaps they should be taking or their scheduled days off. 
And so we end up at the end of the year having to account for 
this dollar value, and again this year it represents $120,000 of 
accrued time off that we need to account for. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier and Mr. Chair. The 
number of people that are affected . . . And I know you’ve 
indicated of course that your explanation is that these are 
dedicated individuals who are working above and beyond and 
in fact are not taking holidays. And, Mr. Premier, I’m sure that 
you understand that when you talk to people in the HR [human 
resources] sector who give advice about people and about 
keeping a good work environment, that the one explanation 
that’ll be given is that people should take holidays, that indeed 

they deserve holidays. They deserve the opportunity to, you 
know, regroup and to rejuvenate. And I know, Mr. Premier, I 
think those were the words that you used when we talked about 
Family Day and the opportunity for people to have that kind of 
break. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question is, how many people are affected by 
this 120,000 in terms of the number? And is this a trend that is 
escalating or is it declining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I was consulting with our 
official. We do not have here specific numbers of whose 
vacation time or whose SDOs [scheduled day off] are included 
here. We could get that although this may change. These 
numbers are put together in January in anticipation of 
supplementary estimates. 
 
And we do know, and in fact I have encouraged in days of late, 
that before we get to the end of the fiscal year that some of 
those folks who do have holiday time banked or accruing, have 
SDOs, that they should try and utilize some of that, and some of 
that is happening. 
 
And so when we finally total the books this year, the difference 
between January and now may show in fact a decrease here, but 
in January you have to predict where you’re at. And that’s 
where we were at and it shows 120. So it may change. 
 
This, according to our official, is somewhat stable in terms of 
other years, last year and this, that we come to January and this 
kind of accrual has mounted up. Some of it may shrink as we 
get to the end of the year. I share the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition’s observation though, it is important that we try and 
encourage people who work so hard for the public service in 
many of our departments to exercise those opportunities to take 
holidays and take their SDOs because a rested person is 
contributing even more than someone who’s really been worn 
by the work. 
 
So in direct answer to the member’s question, this is about par. 
In fact this number may come down once we finish the books 
this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Chair, in light 
of the fact that the number . . . and it’s difficult to tell from the 
supplementary estimates of a year ago because at that time the 
executive management was looking at a $290,000 increase for 
. . . and it had about three or four components to it, so it’s 
difficult to tell. But if your official is indicating that that degree 
of leave entitlement is in that 100 to $120,000 per year, is that 
something that you are prepared to build into the estimates for 
the next fiscal year knowing full well that you will have 
approximately that amount of money? Or is this a circumstance 
that is always left until January so that then you can ask for 
supplementary estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our official explains to me — and I’ll 
try and explain to the members of the House — that in many, 
many years when we do the estimate in January and we finally 
come to the year-end, the department’s budget is able to absorb 
it. This has not been the case in the past year and two years on 
this liability. And I believe the explanation for the last year is 
we dedicated some significant new resources from Executive 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

Council to rebuilding our government website, again another 
mechanism by which we believe we’re providing better citizen 
access to government. 
 
And so this year within the existing budget there wasn’t the 
capacity to absorb it. As I say it may not be 120, but at that 
point in time the sense was that wouldn’t be available to budget. 
We needed to come to the legislature and seek the legislature’s 
approval for this expenditure. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, also in 
the Supplementary Estimates . . . we’ll move to a different topic 
on page number 5. Besides the two amounts that are listed in 
Supplementary Estimates that we’ve just discussed — the 
132,000 for executive management and the 131,000 for central 
services, which makes up the total of 263,000 as the Chair has 
indicated — I also note that there is a column entitled not only 
March supplementary of 263,000 for Executive Council, but 
there is also a column that indicates March adjustments 
estimated for ’06-07. And for ’06-07 it indicates that your 
department, the Executive Council, will require an additional 
$142,000. 
 
So could you explain to us and to the people of Saskatchewan 
why this amount is not an expenditure under the March 
supplementaries. Is this a statutory amount? Why is your 
department requiring an additional $142,000 that’s not listed in 
supplementary estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this is a statutory funding. It 
relates to the funding of ministers — I haven’t got the whole list 
in front of me — ministers, legislative secretaries, and so on. It 
is statutory and therefore automatically comes into the budget 
document. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, to you or to your official. Where 
will that amount of $142,000 be described in terms of the 
budget document that we were presented with a year ago, or the 
supplementary estimate? I mean, that’s the only place that I 
noticed it was in the column on page 5. I do not see any other 
explanation as to where the $142,000 is being described as a 
statutory vote. 
 
And I know that in many departments there are statutory votes, 
and they appear in the estimates; yet this one did not. So that’s 
my question, Mr. Premier, as to why that does not show up 
somewhere in the supplementary estimates or for that matter 
within the budget that was delivered back a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I think, Mr. Chair, I understand 
this. And I guess I bear some responsibility for it as Premier. 
 
The department traditionally has budgeted a fixed amount for 
the costs of cabinet ministers, legislative secretaries, and so on. 
On any given year the cabinet may be smaller or larger. There 
may be a legislative secretary at work or there may not be a 
legislative secretary at work. And so the budgeting process is 
very difficult because it is difficult, I understand that, to guess 
the mind of the Premier in making some of these appointments. 
 
And so what the department traditionally has done is set the 
base amount, understanding that if for instance a legislative 
secretary is appointed to do work, that it will simply be covered 

by statutory expense and will appear in this fashion. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, maybe your official could 
clarify. In the budget document that includes all of the 
expenditures for Executive Council — and with capital I 
understand that there are about seven estimates, series of votes 
— I do not see a statutory amount unless I’m misreading this, 
other than under vote no. (EX06). 
 
So is that what your official is indicating, that the amount that 
was described in vote (EX06) of $690,000 is in fact going to be 
increased by $142,000? Is that where the additional dollars will 
be spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, that is correct. The 690 is 
statutory; the 140 is added thereon. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Then, Mr. Premier, 
I’m wondering, for better understanding of people outside of 
the House, when they see supplementary estimates and they see 
this document . . . Would it not be better for us in this Assembly 
to receive an amended statutory vote (EX06) that would say in 
fact your estimate, your best guess at this moment, is that 
$142,000 is actually needed. Because as your explanation is of 
course, your request of $690,000 was a best guess and therefore 
now it’s been adjusted. 
 
Because if those questions that I’m asking are not on the record, 
I dare say that there would not be too many people who would 
understand where $142,000 was being spent. Is that something 
that can improve the documents that we receive? 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, our official informs me that 
the 690 figure in fact has been a consistent figure now over a 
number of years, and that included in this 140 then will be the 
annual increases that have accrued over this period of time. 
 
Size of cabinet has not changed, but there have been increases 
as all members will be aware and the public are aware. And 
over this period of time we have been very well served by a 
number of legislative secretaries in a variety of public policy 
areas. And so it is not in essence 20 over 1, but a 20 over a 
number of years now because they’ve kept the 690 figure 
consistent for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I’ll just make a 
comment. As I said before, I think the 690 then is maybe not an 
accurate figure. If each and every year now we’re going to be 
adjusting it by 120 or $125,000, then maybe for the upcoming 
budget 690 isn’t accurate and maybe it has to be amended. 
 
Mr. Premier, a couple of final questions. On page 5 of the 
supplementary documents, Executive Council estimates now 
with the additional 263,000, the additional 142,000, the total 
amount that is required for Executive Council is $9.314 million. 
That’s what I’m seeing in the supplementary. 
 
Mr. Premier, the estimates for ’05-06 . . . And I’m looking at 
the budget document that was distributed about a year ago. The 
budget document indicated that the estimate for ’05-06 was 
8.303 million, and now we’ve moved to the point where your 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

expenditures for Executive Council are 9.314 million. That’s an 
increase in estimate of ’05-06 to now your projected costs for 
’06-07 to be $1 million more. That’s well over a 12 per cent 
increase in Executive Council. 
 
And I dare say, Mr. Premier, that when I looked at all of the 
other departments, Health included, I don’t believe there’s any 
other department that has been increased by 12 per cent, 
estimate of ’05-06 to estimate of what we will see by March 31, 
’07. That is pretty significant. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Premier, if you could explain why the 
Executive Council budget required such a significant increase 
of over $1 million on an $8 million expenditure to be where you 
are today, which is requesting that this Assembly pass $9.314 
million as an additional requirement for supplementary 
estimates for Executive Council? It just seems that the 
expenditures in Executive Council have skyrocketed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the change in Executive 
Council spending has been created by several issues. The 
largest of them actually is the change in the class plan that has 
affected the employees of Executive Council. And so with the 
new class plan that meant changes in classifications, made 
increased costs, increased benefits to people whose class plans 
were amended. And that according to our official today is the 
largest chunk of the increase. 
 
We’ve also had an increase in accommodation costs that we pay 
to SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation] 
. . . or SPM [Saskatchewan Property Management] of about 
$100,000 in that. There’s been, well a little reduction in House 
business. We’ve held the members of Executive Council the 
same, although the member makes an interesting point about 
perhaps that number should be amended given that we’ve run it 
for several years. 
 
There has been some increase in communications, gone from 
1.5 to 1.8, so a $300,000 increase there. I think that is in some 
ways explainable simply by the cost of communications. And 
within that, our official reminds me, that 100,000 was expended 
for the new website development process. 
 
And in my own office there has been an increase of 24 and 32, 
about 50 to $60,000. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, this in fact may be my final 
question. In light of your explanation about the additional 
requirement of $1 million, you’ve indicated that 100,000 . . . 
your officials indicated 100,000 was the actual cost of 
establishing a new website. Are there costs that are included in 
that additional $1 million for this year that will not be required 
next year? And in fact will we be seeing significant reductions 
in some of these categories, based on the fact that I notice that 
your full-time equivalent positions did not change? So it’s not 
like there’s been a significant increase in the numbers of people. 
You’ve pointed out that, you know, reclassification took place. 
That’s already there. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, do you anticipate that there will be reductions 
in any of the votes for the upcoming budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not anticipate 

significant, if any, reduction. Obviously the $100,000 portion 
for website development, that will be expended out. 
 
But as our director of corporate services reminds me, with 
performance plans, with a new SGEU contract, with the 
unfolding of the class plan, with not likely to diminish inflation 
in communications cost and so on, that we don’t anticipate any 
significant reductions. I may say, we may not anticipate the 
same level of increase because some of this was one time and 
we wouldn’t be doing that again. But it’s not likely we’ll see a 
decrease. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for those responses. 
And I want to thank you and your officials for . . . your official 
— singular — for answering the questions that I have put 
forward today. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee, we’ll deal 
with first the motion and then the resolution. 
 
The motion before the committee is Executive Council vote 10, 
central management and services (EX01) for $263,000. Is it the 
pleasure of the committee to approve that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That’s carried. Now we’ll turn to the 
resolution. The resolution in this case is very similar to the 
motion: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2007, the following sum for 
Executive Council, $263,000. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members, we’ll now go to the 
supplementary estimates, the General Revenue Fund, and the 
motion from the Minister of Finance. And I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I move motion no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $191,428,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved the 
following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2007 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $191,428,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the vote on that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — And so I put this motion before the 
committee. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. So I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
move that the committee now rise and that the Chair report the 
committee has agreed to a certain resolution and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved this 
motion and asked for leave for the committee to sit again. Is it 
the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The 
Committee of Finance has agreed to a certain resolution, has 
instructed me to report the same, and to ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the 
first time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
move that the resolution be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First and second reading of this resolution. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Later this day, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, by leave of 
the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 55, The Appropriation Act, 
2007 (No. 1) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, by leave of 
the Assembly and under rule 69(2), I move the Bill be now read 
a second and third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. Moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 55, The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 1) 
be now read a second time and third time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — We are awaiting the arrival of the 
Administrator, and so we’ll have a short recess until the 
Administrator arrives, at this time. 
 
[16:00] 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 16:19 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 



March 21, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

The Deputy Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this 
Legislative Assembly in its present session has passed several 
Bills which in the name of the Assembly I present to Your 
Honour, and to which Bills I respectfully request Your 
Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 20 - The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory 

Reporting Act 
Bill No. 12 - The Planning and Development Act, 2006 
Bill No. 5 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 

2006 
Bill No. 33 - The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 7 - The Public Health Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 11 - The International Interests in Mobile Aircraft 

Equipment Act/Loi sur les garanties 
internationales portant sur des matériels 
d’équipement aéronautiques mobiles 

Bill No. 18 - The Court Security Act 
Bill No. 22 - The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 27 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 

Act, 2006 
Bill No. 25 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée 
législative et le Conseil exécutif 

Bill No. 26 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 

Bill No. 30 - The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this 
Legislative Assembly has accorded the supplies required to 
enable the government to defray the expenses of the public 
service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 55 - The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 1) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:22.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Madam Speaker, I request leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Coronation 
Park has asked for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank all hon. 
members. No surprise, in your gallery, Madam Speaker, we 
have a friend of many but certainly a friend of the Legislative 
Assembly in the name of Grant Whitmore who served in this 
legislature from 1991 to 1999, first representing the 
constituency of Biggar and then the second term, after 
redistribution of the boundaries, represented the constituency 
called Saskatoon Northwest. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming back to the Legislative Assembly a friend of ours, 
Grant Whitmore. Welcome back. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:24.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................914 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................915 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................915 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................915 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 27 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................915 
 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................916 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................916 
 Bill No. 30 — The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................916 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................917 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................917 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  The Deputy Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................935 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................918 
 Regina Team in Senior Men’s Curling Championship 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Saskatchewan Party Dinner in Weyburn-Big Muddy 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 World Water Day 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Columnist’s Views 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................919 
 Opposition Stand on Equalization 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................920 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government Response to Harassment Complaints Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................920 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................920 
 Property Tax Relief 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................922 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................922 
 Business Competition 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................923 



 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................923 
 Highway 32 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................924 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................924 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Funding for Environmental Stewardship 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................925 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................925 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................926 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................926 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................926 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................926 
 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................927 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................927 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................927 
  Higgins (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................930 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — March — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................930 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................930 
 Motions for Supply 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................933 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................934 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 55 — The Appropriation Act, 2007 (No. 1) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................934 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................935 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


