






















































Hansard: March 26, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 36B  MONDAY, MARCH 26, 2007, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 991 
 March 26, 2007 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Debate resumes on the special order of 
the motion by the Minister of Finance, seconded by the Minister 
of Public Service Commission: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

And the amendment to the main motion by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the member for 
Martensville: 

 
That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging the province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 
addressing the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased this evening to stand and actually debate deficit 2007. 
And one of the things, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start with is 
congratulating our newest member from Martensville. I think 
the outstanding win and the dramatic win of 77 per cent 
plurality in the Martensville by-election is kind of indicative of 
what this budget is all about: the people of the province realize 
that the NDP [New Democratic Party] have betrayed them once 
again. And at the polls it’s showing up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is just, it’s mind-boggling 
. . . The documents that are presented to us on budget day are 
presented by the government of the day, which happens to be 
the NDP. And yet members on the other side, the members 
opposite will stand up one after the another and tout about the 
balanced budget. This is in their own document. I don’t know if 
the people have a hard time reading over there, or if they’re 
really just trying to put a spin on for themselves. The people of 
the province are not buying it. But each one will stand up over 
there and they will say, they will say, it’s a balanced budget. 
 
In their own document on page 58: $8.049 billion estimated 
2006; 8.751, 2007-08. That is a $701 million deficit. It doesn’t 
matter how they want to spin it on that side of the House. It is a 

deficit. If you take in, you spend more money than you take in, 
it is called a deficit. 
 
And it was very interesting to hear the Minister of Agriculture 
yip from his seat because he talked about the actual revenues 
for, or the money for agriculture going up too. This seems to be 
another little problem with the people on that side of the House, 
understanding their own document. $369 million forecast for 
2006-2007; estimated for 2007-2008, 301. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
$68 million deficit in the agricultural budget and yet people on 
the other side have the audacity to stand up and say, we’re 
putting more money into it. 
 
They cannot even read and understand their own document. No 
wonder, no wonder the commentary that’s coming out is very, 
very much enlightening the people on that side of the House as 
to what is really contained in this budget — even the Minister 
of Finance himself. Now I don’t know if his colleagues on that 
side of the House are even listening to the minister, but when 
the minister actually says — he actually says this in an 
interview — well it’s a surplus actually on GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] but on the summary financial it is a deficit. 
 
Now how can they stand up and say it’s a balanced budget 
when even the Minister of Finance is calling it a deficit budget? 
The NDP have really blown the boom. We were in a boom, 
according to them, and now it is totally blown. They’ve gone on 
a reckless spending spree, maximum spending, the most 
spending that’s ever been done in the province. They talk about, 
oh boy, look how much we’re spending. But if you’re spending 
in a deficit situation I don’t think it’s very beneficial to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan — a $700 million 
deficit. 
 
Now what do we have to show for it? Are people better off? 
Are the waiting lists shorter? Are the highways getting better? 
Mr. Speaker, the answer to all of those is no. Yet the 
government’s got bigger. Isn’t it ironic? Here we have people 
on that side of the House standing up and saying, oh how good 
this budget is for Saskatchewan; the people really think this is a 
great budget. But we’ve got less people in the province. Since 
the current Premier took office we’ve got 10,000 fewer people 
in the province — 10,000 fewer. That’s 10,000 less taxpayers, 
most likely. And yet we’re on a more spending spree. 
 
But we did grow something in this province. We grew the 
government — 1,459 more government positions since the 
current Premier took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about how this budget 
deals with issues and concerns around the province. The people 
on that side that operate with blinders, I think have to come to a 
realization that there are other people in this province. There’s 
people that live in the rural areas. There’s people that live in 
urban areas that have issues and problems. These people walk 
around with huge blinders on, oblivious to what the issues and 
the problems are in this province. And they’re more tunnelled 
into, how can we buy a vote? 
 
I think they should start listening to the people of the province. 
I’m going to give you an example. One is the southwest drought 
disaster that’s going on. How many times have these people 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

came to the legislature? How many times have they talked to 
the Minister of Agriculture, pleading, pleading for help? Not 
only just help, Mr. Speaker. They are pleading for fairness — 
fairness. And I think we’ve heard in this Assembly numerous 
times, the people that had the disaster situation in the Northeast, 
the flooding, received $25 an acre — 15 from the federal 
government, 10 from the province. 
 
The Southwest is hit with a drought two years in a row, 
sometimes three in some places. And what does this 
government stand up and do for them? Absolutely nothing. 
Nothing. It is a shame. It is a shame. They cannot even be fair 
within the province of Saskatchewan. They should be totally 
ashamed of that. Are they? No. No, they didn’t think they were 
going to buy many votes down in that area anyway. 
 
What has this budget done to grow the province? Just look 
through that budget document as one of my colleagues did 
earlier. He went through it. If anybody on that side of the House 
can point out what this has actually done to grow the province, I 
don’t mean grow government, I mean grow the province. 
 
And I want to talk about, which I do on throne speeches and 
budget speeches over the last number of years and I wish to use 
an example: still, after all of these years, we still ship 750,000 
head of cattle out of this province to Alberta to be fed. Where 
do they get the grain and the barley to feed these cattle? From 
Saskatchewan, the biggest part of it. Where do they get the 
young men and women to feed this resource to the cattle? Out 
of Saskatchewan. Three resources, three valuable resources we 
ship from this province: 750,000 head of cattle, the barley, and 
the young men and women. And can anybody on that side of 
the House stand up and say this is right? Why would it be right? 
 
Oh sure, we have Mr. SPUDCO saying it’s right. He has the 
potatoes going out of the province maybe. Oh no, no, they’re 
gone now. So is the $35 million gone — 35 million in 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] which was a very bad investment. He knows it. So 
do people on that side of the House know it. 
 
But was there anything in this budget, was there anything in this 
budget to help retain the 750,000 head of cattle we ship out? 
Does anybody think that’s an issue and a problem? Let me 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if we had those three valuable 
resources in this province to provide some value-added industry 
in agriculture, there would be people coming back. There would 
be people working here. 
 
I want to continue on the cattle issue also because one of the 
things that has happened in my area, we do have a feedlot that 
started up. We have a feedlot that started up. But I want to tell 
you how business friendly this NDP socialist government is. 
When they started this feedlot, they were phoning me on a 
regular basis with issues, problems in establishing a business in 
this province. Do you know who the problems were with? The 
government and government agencies. If it wasn’t SaskTel, it 
was Sask Highways, SaskWater, Sask Environment. 
 
There are stories that were just absolutely unbelievable. We 
even had the NDP explaining to the feedlot operators down in 
my area that started the feedlot, that water rolled uphill. And 
this had to come about from the NDP because they would not 

give a sanction to the feedlot until the high side of the feedlot 
was bermed. Well that’s the first I’d ever heard of water rolling 
uphill. Only, only from the NDP government could this 
possibly happen. 
 
Let’s talk about the value-added and the lack thereof. If we had 
a business-friendly organization from that side of the House that 
would do something for business, what about value-added? 
Even in those 750,000 head of cattle that I’m talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, 750,000 head of cattle, would we not need, would we 
not need some value-added industry in the cattle business like 
maybe a feedlot, maybe a feed processing plant? 
 
Oh boy, they don’t want to see that, because you know what? 
That would give entrepreneurial jobs in the province and they 
don’t want to see entrepreneurial jobs. The reason is because 
entrepreneurs aren’t normally socialists and they’re not going to 
support that group of men and women over there. So why can’t 
we do something in this province in a budget? The minister had 
an ideal situation to promote something in the budget to 
value-added industry. My colleague talked about biofuel and 
ethanol. Nothing in there. Now wouldn’t that be something that 
would be kind of nice to put a business-friendly clause or two in 
the budget to add some value-added to our industries? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk a little bit about the rural areas 
and the problems that they’re facing with the lack of vision that 
these men and women have over there — a lack of vision. 
 
We talk about health care. We talk that it’s so good, this health 
care. They talk about how great it is. Well we do have issues in 
health care. We know hospitals that have been closed. Every 
year it seems like something else is closing. They’ll nickel and 
dime a facility. And the one recently in my area . . . and it’s 
very, very cautious of how they do this. They sent out one of 
the board of directors to the workers of the facility and said, 
we’re going to close you; we’re closing you out. When they 
called me, I said, give me a copy of their letter. Oh, we won’t 
send a letter because if we send a letter it can be used against 
us. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So I want to read a letter into the record, Mr. Speaker, from one 
of the people that work at this hospital: 
 

I am writing to let you know how disappointed we are 
feeling in Lafleche since we heard that Five Hills Health 
Region is planning on closing our Lab in the Health [Care] 
Centre in Lafleche. 
 

They’re starting to get a little quiet on that side of the House. 
Maybe they are listening, and they do realize that stuff is 
happening out there even if they don’t know about it: 
 

This closure will have a HUGE impact on the residents in 
this town and will mean a big imposition on all of its 
residents. I live with my 88 year old Mother who uses 
these services a great deal. Does this mean that we will 
have to go to Gravelbourg to have this service at our 
disposal? 

 
And the minister thinks it’s funny that somebody 88 years old 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

would have to go a long ways to have some health care. I don’t 
think it’s funny. When you live in rural Saskatchewan, it is 
definitely not funny to have to travel an extended distance, as 
an 88-year-old, to have some lab work done: 
 

Is this the first of many nails in the coffin of Health care in 
this town? Will the doctor be next to leave . . . 

 
And speaking to the medical people down there, if the lab 
closes, what keeps the doctor there? And the doctor’s there only 
part-time now. So if the lab closes, he really doesn’t have a 
reason to be there. So that could spell the next step, is the doctor 
leaving: 
 

Will the doctor be next to leave and when no prescriptions 
are needed to be filled in this town then will it be our 
druggist that needs to leave? And what about our Health 
[Care] Centre here, which serves as a long-term care 
facility. Is it also on the chopping blocks to be eliminated 
from the system soon [by the NDP government]? 
 
I implore you to send this message to the people who are 
making these decisions . . . 
 

Well I don’t think it should go to the people making the 
decisions because the decision makers on that side of the House 
are just thumping rural Saskatchewan: 
 

We ARE as important as the city folk who have these 
services at their fingertips . . . [at all times]. 
 
We need this Lab service left intact in our town and want 
you to take this up with those who try to make the 
decisions for those of us in the outlying districts . . . from 
the cities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an example of what this NDP government 
thinks of rural Saskatchewan, what it thinks of health care in 
rural Saskatchewan. We know the hospitals that have closed. 
They’ve closed a couple more last year. They’re getting doctors 
away. We’ve known where there are signs, signs on hospitals 
that say our health facility’s closed. We’re lacking nurses. We 
don’t have doctors. Do they care on that side of the House? Not 
one little bit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the destruction of rural 
Saskatchewan, the betrayal of rural Saskatchewan by this NDP 
government, it is absolutely amazing. 
 
I’d also like to talk, touch base on the schools. This is the next 
step — school closures. Well are they really going to look at 
anything and address the school closures, the proposed school 
closures? The minister says there isn’t 52. There’s only 39 plus 
11 plus 4 or something like that, what actually adds up to more 
than 52. One is this year. One is next year. I don’t even know if 
she knows how many schools are really being planned on being 
closed. I know there’s some in my constituency and there’s 
some in the area. 
 
Now how much thought was given to this whole school 
closure? We know that they betrayed the people on the property 
tax promise. Betrayal on promises is old hat for these people — 
back from promising tax reductions in the last election to 

actually raising taxes — and there is a list of betrayals. 
 
But on the schools, where was the negotiations going on with 
these schools? And I go back to when the Finance minister was 
minister of Education or he attempted to be minister of 
Education, talked about the amalgamation, forced 
amalgamation of school districts and how this was going to be 
so much better. Well, is it? Was it? 
 
Where is the tax savings? He actually said the money saved 
from the amalgamation of health districts would go to the 
saving education portion of property tax. Well I think if he 
looks at his budget — and if you can believe, if you can believe 
what’s in there — you’ll find that it cost money to amalgamate 
the school divisions. And now we’re getting to the point where 
schools are closing. They say oh we don’t control that. I don’t 
know what they control from that side of the House, but the fact 
is there’s schools that are on the chopping block. And it’s not 
fair to the communities. It’s not fair to the people that are 
involved. And why won’t they listen to a proposal about having 
a school of opportunity or a school of necessity? 
 
How far do any of those people on that side of the House want 
our children to ride a school bus? With classes and school bus, 
is 10 hours a day acceptable or 11 hours a day? We know 
people right now that are riding the school bus for quite a long 
period of time, and you start closing these schools, it’s going to 
be longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, highways, highways are absolutely deplorable. 
Now we’ve got school buses going over highways. And if they 
close schools, it’s going to be for a longer distance, and it’s 
actually atrocious. I can’t believe, I can’t believe the lack of 
effort on the part of the people on that side of the House to do 
anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could talk for another hour, but I guess we’re 
limited in time. So I just want to close by advising the members 
on that side of the House, they can spend all the money they 
want in trying to buy votes, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s not one of them there, no matter how many dollars they 
wish to spend, they can’t buy imagination — they can’t. They 
can spend all the money they want trying to buy votes, but I’ll 
tell everyone of them they cannot buy credibility. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they can spend all the money they want on votes but I 
can assure you they cannot buy integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment to the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice, 
the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise today, this evening and speak to the 
budget for 2007-2008 and for the government motion in support 
of that budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a budget that works at keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
This is a budget that works on building on the prosperity of this 
province, building prosperity with a purpose. This is a budget 
that works to make this Saskatchewan the best place to live, 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

work, and raise a family in Canada. 
 
And in respect to making it the best place to live in Canada, 
there is a substantial commitment in this budget on the part of 
this government, on the part of this NDP government to 
improve the health care system in this province. There is, in the 
budget, funding for access and wait-time strategies, for new 
initiatives to reduce wait times including up to 160 additional 
hip and knee surgeries per year; 3,117 additional MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging] scans per year; 5,455 additional 
bone mineral density tests per year; and improved patient 
scheduling, remote patient monitoring, and the cath lab in 
Saskatoon. The budget continues to provide $8.9 million to 
address high priority wait-list capacity and surgical 
management issues in order to reduce wait times. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there is, in this budget, new money for 
the recruitment and training of health care professionals. And 
what have we heard from the opposition in respect to health 
care funding? The Saskatchewan Party opposition would cut, 
would cut funding, would cut funding to health care. The 
Saskatchewan Party opposition would fund programs out of 
efficiencies. They’re sending in the accountants and the 
auditors. 
 
Now this is a cover, Mr. Speaker, from an opposition that has 
said they will put no new money into health care because the 
Saskatchewan health care system, when you look at the 
proportion of administration costs to services provided, is one 
of the most efficient if not the most efficient health care system 
on the continent, Mr. Speaker. There is no money to be found in 
efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition come close to 
being honest, come close to integrity when they say — as they 
have said in respect to this budget — they would cut the health 
care spending in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And specifically 
what they would cut, Mr. Speaker, is the seniors’ drug plan. 
 
Now drugs are increasing in price at approximately 13 per cent 
per year, Mr. Speaker, way above, way above general inflation. 
Eighty-seven per cent of seniors have a drug prescription that 
costs $15 or more. Mr. Speaker, the enhanced seniors’ drug 
program, which the opposition has opposed, which they have 
said they would cut, will provide a cap on that $15 drug cost 
starting July 1, 2007. This will benefit approximately 115,000 
senior citizens in the province of Saskatchewan and an average 
benefit to them of $400 a year. 
 
And I want to make an argument because the opposition, both 
inside this House and outside the House, have argued against 
the universality of this program, Mr. Speaker. And a program 
that applies to every senior citizen, Mr. Speaker, today is much 
more likely to apply to every senior citizen tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker. A program that is means tested as the opposition has 
suggested and will apply we don’t know to who they think is 
worthy of this program, who will be covered by it, but the 
number will shrink, Mr. Speaker. The number will shrink either 
because of inflation or the number will shrink because of 
program redesign. And if the program is to be affected and if 
it’s to be a basis for an expanded drug program, Mr. Speaker, it 
has to be as we have designed it — a program that applies for 
every senior citizen, for every prescription on the drug plan 
over $15. 
 

But this budget’s also designed to help fulfill our commitment 
to make Saskatchewan the best place to work in, Saskatchewan. 
And at the centre of that is the graduate tax exemption, Mr. 
Speaker, the graduate tax exemption which will provide a 
$10,000 deduction for all graduates — not just university 
graduates but graduates into trades — who start their careers in 
Saskatchewan for those five years, those first five years while 
they start their careers, start their homes, start their families in 
Saskatchewan, sheltering the first $20,000 of their income, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now Saskatchewan, it’s almost certainly the most affordable 
place to start your career, start your family in this country. We 
have a labour shortage, there are more jobs than people. 
Certainly the lowest insurance, car insurance rates for young 
people in the country. An insurance company, a Crown 
corporation that is sending a rebate out to drivers in the 
province. Housing is relatively low. The government has made 
a commitment to the lowest priced utility bundle in the country 
and has kept that commitment. So certainly on a wide front, a 
place where there is much opportunity for employment and an 
affordable place to live. And now, now for young people, now 
for recent graduates for the first five years of their working life, 
no tax advantage to moving to Alberta whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker, with the graduate tax exemption. And why the 
opposition opposes this particular plan, I don’t know. I 
understand their philosophical opposition to the seniors’ drug 
plan, Mr. Speaker, but why they oppose this plan, I’m not so 
sure — but I’ll return to that. 
 
And we are also committed to making Saskatchewan the best 
place to raise a family, Mr. Speaker. And this budget adds 500 
new child care spaces. It adds 15 new pre-kindergarten 
programs from vulnerable children in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It makes possible dental sealants for students, 
two grades in the community schools in the province. And I 
have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that the dental sealant program is a 
modest part of the government programming in this budget — a 
very modest part. It will have a significant effect on the lives of 
those children and their future dental health, but it’s a modestly 
cost program, and the opposition to this program to me seems 
particularly surprising and particularly mean-spirited. I have 
one comment here talking about not benefiting very many 
people, and I guess you can understand the circles that that 
commentator travels in, and his opposition to this program 
seemed to me particularly mean-spirited. 
 
And this budget also continues the freezing of undergraduate 
tuition at universities for a third year, 2004-2005 levels. 
 
[19:30] 
 
So the argument that this budget doesn’t address the concerns 
of the average family . . . well I suppose perhaps not the average 
family without a grandparent, without a child, without a 
student. Perhaps if we can find such an average family, perhaps 
the deepening of the property tax rebate, the money being spent 
on highways and making economic development possible, and 
improving economic development across the province, none of 
these things will affect, in the view of the opposition, or benefit 
average families. 
 
So as I said, I understand the opposition of the Saskatchewan 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

Party opposite to the seniors’ drug plan. I mean they’re 
philosophically opposed to it. I appreciate that. And they have 
other priorities. I appreciate that, although I would appreciate 
them coming clean on what those other priorities are. I 
understand their opposition to the minimum wage. I understand 
to a certain extent the member from Silver Springs, Finance 
critic, when he says the minimum wage, who does that benefit? 
His infamous words. I understand that. They’re philosophically 
opposed to the minimum wage. I can understand that too. And I 
understand their opposition to Family Day which John 
Gormley, the voice of the Saskatchewan Party, called churlish, 
called churlish their opposition to Family Day. But I understand 
their opposition to that as well, Mr. Speaker. That again is 
philosophical. 
 
But there are two positions that the Saskatchewan Party have 
taken, Mr. Speaker, that I have difficulty understanding. One is 
the claim or the proposition made by the Finance critic, the 
member from Saskatoon Silver Springs, that the SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] rebate should be clawed 
back and paid into the General Revenue Fund. That was a 
dandy. 
 
This is both unlawful and unfair. The surplus in the Auto Fund 
belongs to the drivers of the province and needs to be returned 
to them, and Saskatchewan Government Insurance is doing that. 
And this idea that somehow this is taxpayer money and could 
go into the General Revenue Fund and fund other programs is 
almost as silly a proposition as the Finance critic’s proposition 
that we take the PST [provincial sales tax] off groceries which 
they’ve never been on. And it’s this misunderstanding of what 
the PST applies to and what the Auto Fund is all about that 
really makes one wonder about the criticism of the lead critic on 
the budget from the opposition. 
 
The idea that the SGI . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Regina 
Rosemont on her feet? 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I just wanted to see, Mr. Speaker, if the 
member could keep his flow. But no . . . With leave to introduce 
guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont wishes to 
make introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Well imagine how surprised I was, Mr. 
Speaker, to look up in your gallery and see one of our Cathedral 
Arts Festival committee members, GerriAnn Siwek, sitting in 
the gallery tonight. So I’ll just ask the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming GerriAnn. She’s an artist and has for many years 
worked at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology] as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The idea that 
the opposition had that they would expropriate the money being 
paid to Saskatchewan drivers from the Auto Fund — and is in 
any case their money, whether it’s paid in rebate or kept as a 
surplus — that they would expropriate this and put this into the 
General Revenue Fund is an idea that actually I don’t think 
even ever occurred to the Devine administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When they equity stripped SaskPower and they equity stripped 
SaskEnergy, they did . . . I don’t think it ever occurred to them 
to actually take money from the Auto Fund and pay it into the 
General Revenue Fund to finance any project or any program. 
And so this is, I would say, for the opposition, a new low, a new 
low on how to misuse the Crowns to finance the province. And 
this suggestion, I think, actually makes the suggestion about 
taking the PST [provincial sales tax] off groceries — where it’s 
never been — almost sound sensible on the part of the Finance 
critic from the opposition. 
 
The second position of the opposition that I don’t understand 
. . . And as I said, I understand why they’re opposed to the 
seniors’ drug plan. I don’t agree with them, but I understand 
why they’re opposed to that. I understand where they’re coming 
from when they oppose a minimum wage. I don’t agree with 
them but I understand that. And I kind of understand where they 
are coming from when they opposed Family Day. I didn’t agree 
with them but I sort of understood that. 
 
But I don’t understand their opposition to the graduate tax 
exemption, Mr. Speaker, and their possible support for an 
alternative that would be tied to tuition and the amount of 
tuition paid. And the rebate would be there. I don’t understand 
why that opposition would put up as an alternative a program 
biased against the trades. I don’t understand in this province 
with this skill shortage, this labour shortage around skills, why 
they would oppose a program that is neutral as to whether you 
graduated from university or trades and rewards you for your 
contribution, post-graduation, to the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know why they would oppose that and 
raise as an alternative something biased towards university 
graduates and against graduates in the trades. What hole in the 
economy do they think they’re trying to fill? Why this bias 
against graduates in the trades? Why not support a program 
that’s neutral in that respect? 
 
I understand some of their other oppositions. As I said, I don’t 
agree with them. But I don’t understand that one, and I wonder 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

if that isn’t just knee-jerk opposition. The government has come 
up with a program aimed at recruiting and retaining young 
people — graduates from post-secondary education whether 
they’re graduates from the universities, graduates from the 
trades. And because the Government of Saskatchewan has come 
up with it, we’re going to oppose it, and for no other reason that 
they could possibly give because, as we have said on occasion 
— but I guess it bears repeating — on this side of the House we 
are working for the people of Saskatchewan. And that side of 
the House — and this shows it more clearly than anything else 
because this is not a philosophical difference — on that side of 
the House, they’re working for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And that’s a key difference in this House. And that’s a key 
difference on the stance on the programs in this budget. That’s a 
key difference for the difference of opinion on the seniors’ drug 
plan and the difference of opinion on the graduate tax credit. 
That is the key difference here. 
 
And whether the benefits of the prosperity of this province are 
going to be shared with the people of this province as this 
government proposes or not, that is what this motion before this 
House is about. And it’s clear what side the government is on. 
And it’s pretty clear what side the opposition is on — and that 
is their side and their side alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I said at the beginning and I’ll say it now, this is a budget that is 
designed to keep Saskatchewan strong. This is a budget that 
wants to make this . . . that shows the government’s desire to 
make this the best place to live, work, and raise a family. This is 
a budget that wants to build on the prosperity of this province 
with purpose. 
 
Since this NDP government came to power, Saskatchewan has 
been brought from the brink of bankruptcy to boom times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Having now arrived at this time of 
prosperity, we need to share. We need to be fair. We need to 
build on that prosperity with a purpose. We need to keep this 
province strong. We need to keep this province and make this 
province even more the best place in Canada to live, work, and 
raise a family. This budget does that, Mr. Speaker. I support this 
budget. I oppose the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. The government is so pleased with this 
budget that they have presented, and you can hear it from the 
members opposite, from their speeches and from their 
applauding. And on budget day, how pleased were they with 
their budget? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the budget books there are . . . They are 
two great big books, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of pages. And 
every year the government, out in the rotunda on budget day, 
provides the public with copies of the budget books. And you 
know, all the different organizations like SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] and the school boards and 
the municipalities and the various associations come into the 
legislature, do their penance by sitting and listening to the 
Finance minister and the Finance critic for the opposition. They 
all dutifully sit here doing their penance and listening to it so 
that they can get a copy of the budget book and see what’s in it 
for them. 
 
Well this year the government was so pleased with the budget 
that they gave them a baseball card. This was it. This was all 
that was presented to the public to view what was in the budget. 
There were no books available out there for the public to 
purview. There was no information on how much money was 
going to be in Highways or Agriculture or Learning or Health 
or any of the other, Mr. Speaker, any of the other departments. 
They had no information. 
 
The public was not given access to the information on how 
much money the government was taking in, in taxes. They 
weren’t given the information unless they had a very good 
memory and listened very carefully to the Finance minister. 
They didn’t leave this building on budget day with the 
information, other than the little baseball card, Mr. Speaker. So 
I think it’s incumbent on the members of the House on both 
sides to lay out the facts as to what was in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget this year comprised of the largest 
amount of money this province has ever spent in a budget, $8.3 
billion — $8.3 billion. That’s a huge amount of money. Well 
more than $8,300 for every man, woman, and child because 
we’ve slipped below that magic million people in the province 
— what are we down to? — 968,000, something like that, the 
lowest it’s been in the last 10 to 15 years, Mr. Speaker. So 
we’re probably looking at an average of $8,500 of spending for 
every man, woman, and child. So when you stop and think 
about it, you have to realize that the NDP used to brag about 
free medicare in Saskatchewan. Well at 83 to $8,500 a person, 
you’d hardly call it free. 
 
But what did come out of this budget and what the public didn’t 
get the opportunity to review closely, because they didn’t get 
the budget books, was the fact that there was only $7.8 billion 
worth of revenues. We have a shortfall. 
 
Now the Finance minister stands up and says, 14th consecutive 
year of balanced budgets. Except it ain’t so, Mr. Speaker. He 
had to take money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to try and 
top it up. 
 
Now ever since the Finance minister . . . Two Finance ministers 
ago, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place thought up the 
idea of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. There actually never was 
any money in it. It was simply a paper shuffle. We’ll put down 
the fact that Liquor and Gaming has some money, so we’ll stick 
it into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And zoom, out it goes right 
away. So it’s like having a hole in your pocket. You put a nickel 
in your pocket, and it’s gone out the bottom. But theoretically, 
you’ve got a nickel in your pocket. 
 
Well there was no nickel, except until last year, Mr. Speaker. 
Last year, the Finance minister decides he’s actually going to 
put some money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. So he put in 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 7 to $800 million. 
 
So what does he do this year? Well it was supposed to be the 
rainy day fund. It was the fund that was supposed to be there to 
stabilize the province’s financial budget in times of need. Well 
the province is actually doing reasonably well. I’ll talk about 
that later. But the province is doing reasonably well. So where’s 
the rainy day? Where is the problem that we needed to dip into 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
The problem was in the polls, Mr. Speaker — not in the 
economy, not in the operations of government. It was in the 
NDP’s political polling. And so the Finance minister drew out 
500-plus million dollars to bolster up the NDP’s polls rather 
than to use the Fiscal Stabilization Fund for what the member 
from Saskatoon Massey Place originally said it was for, was to 
help stabilize the province’s economy in a time of need. 
 
[19:45] 
 
And as my colleague said, supposed to bolster up their flagging 
poll numbers. And you must think after listening to the 
members today in the House and question period, and listening 
to their debate here today, that those polling numbers musn’t be 
doing what they wanted them to do. They must not be getting 
the bounce out of it. Because they were busy today talking 
about how the deficit is not really a deficit rather than bragging 
about, supposedly, all the good things that are in the budget. So 
they’re busy trying to counter what the public is seeing as the 
truth, is that there is a real deficit again in Saskatchewan. And 
it’s not the first time under this government. They have been 
talking about the 14 years of deficit, of no deficits when in fact 
there’s been 7 of the last 15 years have been in a deficit 
position. 
 
Now they move money in and out of the budget so that the 
GRF, the General Revenue Fund, shows that it’s in a good 
position. But it’s like going to your bank and having a line of 
credit. As long as the banker keeps putting a little bit of money 
into your chequing account, you’re not in arrears in your 
chequing account but that line of credit keeps getting bigger and 
bigger every time. And that’s what’s happening in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, our line of credit is now over $11 billion again and 
that’s not even counting the unfunded pension liabilities, Mr. 
Speaker, not even counting those which are another $4.3 
billion. So we’re looking at almost $16 billion of debt. And one 
of my colleagues pointed out to me that the last Provincial 
Auditor’s report showed the debt to be almost $21 billion. So I 
didn’t ask him where the extra 5 came from in there but 
according to the budget books here it’s almost $16 billion. So, 
Mr. Speaker, there is some serious deficits occurring in this 
province. 
 
Now the previous member was talking about equity stripping 
and that raised an issue for me with the Crowns. We see the 
Crown corporations turning over dividends to CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] which in turn then 
pass it on to the provincial government. And this year CIC is 
passing on to the General Revenue Fund $200 million. But 
where is the money coming from? 
 

Well how’s this? SaskEnergy dividend is going to be 6.9 
million — 6.9 million, that’s a significant amount of money. 
Any one of us in here — well except perhaps for the Minister of 
Justice being a lawyer — is a lot of money. But SaskEnergy 
turned around and is borrowing 70.2 million. So they’re 
borrowing 70.2 million to pay a $6.9 million dividend. 
SaskPower is paying the government a $135 million dividend 
and is borrowing $475 million — three times as much. SaskTel 
paid a dividend of 61.4 million and is borrowing more than 146 
million. 
 
Well maybe the Crowns need this money for projects, etc. But 
why not let the Crown, the individual Crown, keep the money 
that they have generated to pay for those projects rather than 
giving the money to the government for whatever black hole the 
government wants to put it into and then turn around and 
borrow and pay interest on that money? Surely the Crown 
should be able to keep that money themselves and then incur 
less interest debt and build up less debt. 
 
When that happens, when that happens, Mr. Speaker, when you 
take the money to pay a dividend and then borrow actually to 
pay it, you’re equity stripping. You’re stripping the equity out 
of that corporation and that’s exactly what the Minister of 
Justice was talking about it and his government is doing exactly 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, even though the government didn’t 
want to let the public have the full budget books and simply 
gave them the baseball card, you would think that — if you 
listen to the members opposite — that they’re quite happy with 
this budget. They’re pleased with it. They think this is a budget 
to go to the people with. So I say to them, Mr. Speaker, if they 
actually believe that this is the budget to go to the people with, 
why don’t they just do so? 
 
You know, we’ll wait until the budget debate is over and that 
vote happens and then they can go to the polls. You know, if 
they believe that this is the budget that is to take to the people 
of Saskatchewan on an election year, then let’s get down to it. 
Let’s get to it, Mr. Speaker. I’m prepared to face the election 
and my colleagues are prepared to face the electorate, so why 
doesn’t the Premier, why isn’t the Premier ready to face the 
electorate? So I challenge him. Once the budget, this budget 
vote has happened, why doesn’t he go to the people? Why 
doesn’t he show the confidence that his Finance, the bravado 
that his Finance minister is showing and go to the people, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Well maybe the reason they’re not talking about doing this is if 
you look back at previous elections, Mr. Speaker. You look 
back at the 2003 election. Just before that election, the 
government went out and signed an agreement with a number 
of the unions associated with government, associated with the 
third entity such as the health districts, called joint job 
evaluation. And it was hastily done. They promised signing 
bonuses of $1,000, Mr. Speaker. And all of that, they went 
around the province saying, if the Sask Party gets elected, 
they’re going to cancel that program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, once the election was over, I know that out 
at ISC [Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] that 
I believe it was 43 employees were fired three days after the 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

election by this government. It turns out the joint job 
evaluations, they still had 18 months of negotiations to do with 
the unions after the election, and then they turned around and 
sent notices back to many employees, in particular those in the 
health industries, demanding that the $1,000 signing bonuses be 
returned, that that was not part of the collective bargaining 
agreement and they weren’t entitled to it. 
 
I know a number of the health care workers in my region 
received those letters and I know my colleagues had a number 
of people in their area that had received those letters. So just 
because the government put something in the budget, just 
because the government has promised it, doesn’t mean this 
government is going to deliver it. 
 
So when you take a look at the seniors’ drug program that’s 
being talked about, just because the government has said it’s 
going to be $15 a prescription, at the end of the day it doesn’t 
necessarily mean that’s going to be the case. For one thing, a 
good many seniors are already covered under various programs. 
It also means, Mr. Speaker, that some of the drugs that the 
seniors use aren’t on the formulary, so they’re going to have to 
pay for them anyways. And if a doctor is prescribing a drug for 
a patient, a senior, that the health department isn’t sure it does 
any good, they don’t fund it in that case either. So there’s a 
good many seniors out there, Mr. Speaker, no matter what this 
government is saying about the drug program, are not going to 
receive any benefits out of it at all. 
 
When I stop and think back, the NDP were very strong on the 
idea of clawing back CPP [Canada Pension Plan] payments to 
people who earn over a certain amount of money. And this 
would’ve been back about eight, ten years ago, they demanded 
and got that the level be set at $75,000 — that if you earned 
more than $75,000 as a senior, your entire CPP was clawed 
back. And yet this government is proposing not to do that with 
the drug program, that it doesn’t matter what your income level 
is, you’re entitled to $15 a prescription. 
 
I can remember back in the ’80s the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana saying that, if a person had to pay $125 a year for drugs, 
that you were forcing them to choose between their drug 
program and food. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was that member and 
the government she represents that raised that deductible level 
up to $1,700 a year and then changed it to 3.4 per cent of their 
gross income and now, just in time for an election, wants to roll 
it back to $15 a prescription for those who don’t qualify for any 
of the additional programs. 
 
I just don’t have any confidence — and neither do most of the 
people of this province — that after the election that this 
program will survive under the NDP. Because everybody we 
have talked to, Mr. Speaker, says that this is an unsustainable 
program. 
 
I think back to the 2003 election when the government said 
under the Boughen report there is lots of room in the fiscal 
capacity of Saskatchewan to deal with the property tax issues 
and to reduce PST. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what they did is they increased the PST and 
didn’t provide the long-term property tax reductions. So this 
government is notorious for saying one thing prior to the 

election and doing something completely different after. And 
when the Finance minister of that time from Regina Victoria 
was asked, well why did you raise the PST right after the 
election, why didn’t you talk about it during the campaign, his 
statement was, well you can’t talk about raising taxes during a 
campaign. So that’s going to be what happens in this case. 
 
They’re running a $700 million deficit. The debt has increased 
by $900 million, and there’s only one of three things they can 
do to change that. They could increase taxes to cover that off. 
They can cut programs to diminish the deficit, or they can 
continue to run deficits like their favourite politician Grant 
Devine did in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. Those are their 
alternatives. They’re heading down that path already. 
 
And fact is, the announcement today with SaskEnergy really 
reminds me of the 1986 campaign where they’re promising 
heaven and earth to homeowners with the energy program just 
before an election to try and get votes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a sustainable budget and I will not be 
supporting it. I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you very much. 
It’s my honour to be here as part of this great budget debate. 
Great budget — maybe the debate isn’t as great as the budget is, 
but the budget is certainly great. 
 
Before I get into that, Mr. Speaker, I do want to congratulate the 
member for Martensville. I listened carefully to her speech and 
she added some value to and brings something to this 
Assembly. So I congratulate her on completing her budget 
speech, which was also her maiden speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is just amazing. It’s awesome. This is 
a budget for my constituents. This is a budget that provides for 
$15 prescription fees for senior citizens. It is a budget for 
people — my constituents and many others. 
 
This is a budget that freezes university tuition fees. The 
Minister of Finance announced $21 million this year to freeze, 
for the third year in a row, post-secondary tuition fees. This is a 
budget for people. My people. Our people. This is a budget that 
deepens the education property tax relief from 8 per cent to 10 
per cent — that announced by the Minister of Finance a few 
days ago. This is a budget for people. My people. Our people. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget deals with the future. It deals with the 
exemption for post-secondary graduands that provides an 
exemption from all Saskatchewan provincial income tax on the 
first $20,000 each and every year for the five years for a total of 
100,000. Except I’m misspeaking a little bit. You see, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s indexed to inflation and by the fifth year it’s not 
$20,000 alone, it’s something closer to $21,000 is what the 
exemption is going to be in the fifth year. Ooh, they said. Ooh 
is important. Ooh is for my people. The opposition pooh-pooh 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

it. This is real benefits for real people, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t 
be prouder of what the Minister of Finance stood up and 
delivered short days ago. 
 
We’ve got more money for highways and our highways need 
fixing, there’s no question about it. With the ever changing 
demands, Mr. Speaker, on Saskatchewan highways, the uses, 
it’s small wonder that our highways take a beating. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, a few years ago — three is my recollection — I 
was in my hometown visiting and we were having some 
meetings in my school. And I counted the semis going by on 
that tertiary highway. And, you know, I timed it even and it 
averaged a semi every seventeen and a half minutes. Well let 
me tell you, you know, I’m not that antiquated, but I remember 
when I was a little kid in school and when a semi went by on 
that highway, the teacher would stop teaching and we just 
watched the semi go by. My times are changing. 
 
Is it any wonder that our highways, our tertiary highways take a 
beating? Is it any wonder that this Minister of Finance had to 
announce a huge highways rebuilding budget? We are very 
proud of what we’re doing. And we’re doing it in an affordable, 
sustainable way for people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am astounded. We cut taxes last fall. We cut the 
PST from 7 per cent to 5 per cent, and what did the opposition 
say? They said, well we told you to do that. We cut income 
taxes, personal income taxes. Each year in the last five years, 
we’ve saved the average four-person family earning $50,000, 
we’ve saved them $1,200, Mr. Speaker. A little more on that I’ll 
say but we went from $3,540 to $2,353. That’s the 
Saskatchewan income tax that family would pay five years ago 
to today. A $1,200 savings. 
 
It’s astounding, Mr. Speaker. What did they say? Oh, good. 
They said, tax cuts are good. But this budget . . . Tax budgets 
are good but this budget, Mr. Speaker, when we actually spend 
the taxpayers’ money on services for people, services like a $15 
prescription drug for every senior citizen in Saskatchewan they 
say the S-word. Unsustainable, they say. Tax cuts are good but 
services for people, unsustainable, they say. Well shame on 
them, Mr. Speaker. When we put up 21 million to freeze 
post-secondary tuition fees for the third year in a row, they say 
unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. Well shame on them. 
 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund they called the rainy day fund. 
Well they always cried, Mr. Speaker, that we shouldn’t have it. 
First of all, they say you shouldn’t have the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund; you shouldn’t ought to save money. Well we’re kind of 
like the favourite child that parents sometimes have, the 
favourite child that actually takes 10 per cent of their money or 
5 per cent of their earnings, some amount, and they actually put 
it in a credit union savings account, Mr. Speaker. What for? So 
that when they need to buy a new vehicle they can pay cash. 
Well isn’t that a shame? 
 
Premier, we’ve got money, we’ve got cash, we can pay cash for 
some things. They say deficit. What nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
What absolute nonsense. I am so proud our . . . [inaudible] . . . 
budget pointed out on page 44, I think it is, page 44. My vanity 
won’t let me put my cheaters on, Mr. Speaker. On top of which 
I can’t hardly find them. Here they are, here they are. Here they 
are. Now we’ll get to it, and it is page 44. My memory didn’t 

totally fail me, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to point out the year-end 
balance in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. In 2003-2004 the 
balance closing was 366 million. 
 
I also want to say, not so much for the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s no one so deaf as one who will not 
listen. I want to say for anyone who is tuned in on Internet or on 
TV, I want to say to them, in 2003-04 that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund had $366 million in it. This year, at the end 
of this year, after we draw it down by $510 million, after we 
draw that fiscal stabilization down, it’s going to have $378 
million in it. Eleven, nearly $12 million more than it had in 
2003-2004. 
 
Well I want to say this too before I leave that. In 2003-2004, we 
projected out four years, our budget, we projected it out. We 
tend to do things a little cautiously on this side of the 
legislature. Why do we do it? Because we’re spending our 
neighbours’, our friends’, our moms’, our dads’, our brothers’, 
our sisters’ money — we’re spending people’s money. When 
we tax money, we’re taxing from people and corporations for 
the greater good of all of the people and corporations in 
Saskatchewan. We do that, we take that seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
We tax and spend appropriately, wisely, just as if it was our 
own money. 
 
And we projected out 2003-04 that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
was going to have just a mere $40 million in it this year. And 
every year subsequent we missed and we put more money into 
that savings account and we cut taxes and we paid debt down. 
Why? Because we budget small “c” conservatively. We don’t 
want to get caught short. 
 
There’s nothing worse than caught short, à la Grant Devine; à la 
the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current 
who worked in John Gerich’s office in the ’80s; à la the Finance 
critic, who was Grant Devine’s youth president in 1985. Can 
you imagine being youth president in 1985 of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and you still hang around 
with the right-wing ideas? Unbelievable. He was there in their 
worst hours to date, their worst hours to date — 1985-86 — 
they were there in their worst hours and he’s hanging around 
now trying to get his hand on the throttle and his other hand in 
the till or the cookie jar, as we speak. I say shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we try and govern by providing services for 
people, services that opposition Sask Party say is unsustainable 
— unsustainable, they say. Oh give the big corporations 
whatever tax cuts you want. That’s perfect, that’s great they 
say. But provide real services for real people and it’s 
unsustainable. What a shame that is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier today I did a member’s statement, and 
we’re restricted to 90 seconds, so I wanted to read a little bit 
more of what . . . Michael Gregory, who is the senior economist 
at the Bank of Montreal, and Michael Gregory says: 
 

. . . when it comes to financial management, the 
Saskatchewan government is [is the] at the top of its class 
. . . 
 

When it comes to financial management, the Saskatchewan 
government is at the top of, of the . . . my goodness, at the 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2007 

top of its class. I won’t go through that one again. I’m going 
to go on to something else that he said. 
 
Michael Gregory goes on, quote, if someone says are they 
doing a good job, well you know: 
 

“Name me one other jurisdiction anywhere that you can 
think of that . . . can point to 14 balanced budgets in a 
row” . . . 
 

I need more hands here, “14 balanced budgets in a row.” He 
goes on. He says: 
 

Those cuts will . . . lead to revenue growth [those tax cuts 
will lead to revenue growth] for the province . . . 

 
He says on the spending side — get this, opposition, he says — 
on the spending side, the government has taken a responsible, 
sustainable approach, and it has left enough money in the 
province’s rainy day fund, quote, you know where they are 
right now with still a decent fiscal cushion. You know, they 
have 3 or 4 percent of revenues in terms of the financial 
stabilization fund which is an “adequate cushion,” end quote. 
Thank you, Michael Gregory, Bank of Montreal. 
 
My colleagues, three of them, did other quotes from other banks 
in member statements earlier today. Am I going to listen . . . I 
don’t always quote from banks, but I have to respect their fiscal 
acumen. I have to respect that they’re always looking to the 
future. They don’t have a four-year cycle. They don’t have an 
election cycle. Nobody can accuse them of that. 
 
Michael Gregory’s never run — that I’m aware of — for a 
nomination or you know to run for a seat in a legislature or the 
House of Commons. That’s not his game plan. He wants simply 
to protect the interests of the Bank of Montreal and to provide 
good advice that all can follow. And here we are, we take that. 
 
Now do we listen to the banks, people like Michael Gregory, or 
do we listen to the naysayers opposite when they say it’s 
unsustainable. When Michael Gregory says they’ve taken a 
responsible, sustainable approach and it has left . . . and it goes 
on and on. I’ve said the quote; you can review that on yourself, 
by yourself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has an economy that is hotter than a 
$2 pistol. We’ve never had such high employment. I couldn’t 
be prouder to be a member of the government. We’ve had some 
lean times. We’ve had times when people were desperate for 
work. When part-timers . . . we had to introduce legislation to 
protect benefits for part-time workers. Why? Because there was 
just way more workers than there were jobs. And some — some 
— a minority, some unscrupulous employers took advantage of 
that. To them I say, shame on you. To those small number, 
small number of unscrupulous employers, Mr. Speaker, I am 
delighted because they’re going to have to pony up now for 
workers. And that’s a good thing. It’s time workers were able to 
hold their heads up proud in every way, every day. 
 
I talked about our economy being hotter than a $2 pistol, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to review a little bit of history because I asked 
Economic Development and they were kind enough to give me 
real gross domestic product growth rates from 1982 to 2005 . . . 

is the last year they’ve got them finished. And I’m going to save 
the opposition from having to read all of the numbers; Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to save everybody cause numbers are 
just that, a bunch of numbers. 
 
But I want to point this out. Members opposite say that New 
Democrats govern in good times and we’re lucky. They govern 
in bad times because they’re unlucky. Well I tell you, if ever I 
heard a reason to elect New Democrats, that’s it. And the proof 
is in the real gross domestic product numbers. Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the numbers, in nine Devine Tory years, Saskatchewan 
was dead last in all of Canada in gross domestic product 
growth, dead last three out of nine — one third of the time — 
three out of nine. Oh it was just bad luck. Oh it was just bad 
luck says the member for Estevan who was Grant Devine’s 
assistant at the constituency level. Well what’s our record? 
First, second, or third in Canada six times in 14 years — six 
times in 14 years. We’d like it to be better but far, far better 
than the record of the Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economy is on a roll. We have overcome huge 
adversity. We are paying down the debt every single year we 
continue to govern. The debt as a percentage of gross domestic 
. . . And the member for Wood River says those are all lies. 
Well can’t you read the budget, member? Can’t you read the 
budget? Can’t you understand a simple financial statement? 
 
[20:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I just wish to remind the 
member that all remarks should be addressed through the Chair. 
Member for Regina Coronation Park is recognized. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I wrap up, I want to 
say again I will be voting against the amendment, and I’m 
going to be proudly voting for this government that provides 
real services for real people, my constituents and yours, and 
everyone’s constituents — real people in Saskatchewan. I 
couldn’t be prouder, Mr. Speaker. This is a great budget. I will 
be voting against the amendment and for the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
work this evening of the Standing Committee on the Economy 
and then the Crown and Central Agencies, which will succeed 
one another in room 8, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion at this stage is still out of order. I 
would ask the member to complete his statement and adjourn. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I missed my final note, which was 
to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park that the debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



March 26, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this will come as no surprise 
to you, but in order to accommodate the good work of the 
standing committees on the Economy and Crown and Central 
Agencies, which will succeed each other in that order, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:15.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................993 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................996 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................995 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


