


















































Hansard: December 12, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 3A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 39 
 December 12, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 
the first report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which I now lay on the Table. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 
Leader: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Revision to the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the revisions to the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as presented be 
adopted and brought into force effective December 13, 
2007; and further, upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
as revised are printed and republished in English and in 
French. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader and seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 

That the revisions to the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as presented be 
adopted and brought into effect December 13, 2007; and 
further, upon the adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
as revised are printed and republished in English and in 
French. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be remiss at this opportunity not to say a few 
words by way of background to the revision of these rules and 
the bringing of them into force, effective tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the course of the summer I, as well as my 
colleagues — the former Speaker, Myron Kowalsky; the former 
government house leader, Glenn Hagel; Clerk, Greg Putz; and 
deputy Clerks Iris Lang and Ken Ring — spent a fair bit of time 
going over the details of the rules as they were now being 
applied. Given the fact there had been fairly substantial changes 
to the way the committees work and with the fixed calendar, 
this required an update of the rules, some of which were 
actually quite antiquated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an opportunity for us to spend some time 
going over the details. And I believe a very good job was done 
and that the rules are going to serve this Assembly and this 
province very well going forward into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government members — and 
I believe it’s safe to say all members — I would like to express 
our gratitude to the individuals I mentioned for their 
participation in this very important and timely issue. So thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 
the second report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which I now lay on the Table. 
 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 
Leader and seconded by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
House Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed and carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you, it is a privilege to introduce three friends 
of mine and three respected members of the First Nations 
community. We have with us today Chief Guy Lariviere, the 
chief of Canoe Lake First Nations. We have Howard McMaster 
the chief of staff of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations] in Saskatchewan and Barry Opekokew from 
Canoe Lake First Nations. I’m really honoured that you’re in 
our Assembly today. 
 
Last week First Nations community lost a respected senator, 
Jonas Lariviere, from the FSIN and our condolences to the chief 
and his son on behalf of the Premier and the members in the 
Assembly. So please join with me in welcoming these three out 
of the First Nations to our Assembly. Please come anytime and 
it’s a pleasure to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
want to take the opportunity to join my colleague in welcoming 
these very special guests. Of course the chief, Guy, who has 
been around politics in the northwest part of the province for 
many, many years, and of course Mr. McMaster and of course 
Mr. Opekokew. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So I just want to say it’s an incredible honour to welcome them 
here as well and to point out that when we lost the respected 
elder, I did have the opportunity to attend the wake service, and 

it is indeed a great loss. So my sympathy to the entire family of 
Jonas who was a well-respected elder. He was 100 years old at 
the time of his death, and we did attend his birthday. 
 
And many say he was much older than that because in the old 
days the records weren’t kept very well, and that was when he 
was baptized. And many times baptisms took several years to 
achieve. So many people do believe that Jonas, who was a 
respected elder, was much older that his hundred years that was 
on his card. So I want to join the Assembly and the colleagues 
through all the parties in welcoming these special guests today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the legislature 32 grade 10 students from the 
Melville Comprehensive High School, their teachers Perry 
Ostapowich, Alyson Juve, and Elvin Mandziak. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d also like to specifically introduce you to one 
student up there, Afrodita Papageorgiu, who assisted in my 
campaign and actually was probably part of the reason that I am 
sitting in this seat today. 
 
I had the good fortune of meeting with the class before and 
mentioned Mr. Ostapowich today. I think a number of members 
in the House will start to realize he’s a familiar name in this 
legislature. He’s been very faithful in bringing his classes in 
here and letting them understand and see how the operations of 
the legislature work, and he’s to be commended for that. So I 
ask everyone to welcome them here today and hope that he 
brings many more classes to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce two guests in your east gallery. 
Sitting in your east gallery, two visitors, Tom Graham — Tom 
is the president of the Saskatchewan division of Canadian 
Union of Public Employees. And accompanying him this 
afternoon is Erin Morrison, the executive assistant of the 
Saskatchewan division of CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees]. So I’d like to ask all members to welcome them to 
our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Introduction of guests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly two 
people that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are Robyn 
Betker who is a student at the University of Regina, is taking 
human justice, and is the past president of Students Against 
Drinking and Driving. And also in the gallery is Tim Spelliscy 
who is the provincial director for SADD [Students Against 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

Drinking and Driving]. 
 
These people both reside in Regina, and they are in the 
legislature today to hear a member’s statement that I will be 
reading shortly regarding changes they were making to try and 
reduce the number of people drinking and driving in this 
province. I would like to ask all members to welcome them to 
their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

Battlefords Blend Celebrates Its 25th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
take this opportunity to acknowledge here in the legislature the 
women of the Sweet Adelines and in particular the members of 
the Battlefords Blend who this year are celebrating their 25th 
anniversary as a chorus. Twenty-five years is a long time in the 
history of our fine province, Mr. Speaker, but this barbershop 
style singing group of 22 to 24 women has been providing 
community and regional harmony to the benefit of our citizens 
since November 1982. And more significantly, six of the 
current group were at the very beginning when the Battlefords 
Blend was founded. They are Millie Fulton, Grace Waldner, 
Mary Nykiforuk, Hermione Martel, Elsie Boulton, and Alice 
Henderson. 
 
May I offer the congratulations of this Assembly for the 25 
years of accomplishment achieved by Battlefords Blend Sweet 
Adelines in this their anniversary year, and may they continue 
to bring harmony and joy to the people of northwest 
Saskatchewan for many years to come. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 
 

Tribute to First Nations Leader 
 
Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to 
Senator Jonas Lariviere of the Canoe Lake First Nation. Senator 
Lariviere passed away on December 3 at at least the age of 100. 
As hon. members know, Senator Lariviere was one of the most 
respected First Nations leaders in the history of our province. 
He served for many years as a councillor of the Canoe Lake 
First Nation and was one of the five founders of the FSIN. He 
was later made a senator of the FSIN. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting Senator Lariviere in the summer 
of 2006 when I accompanied then federal Indian and Northern 
Affairs Minister Jim Prentice, a long-time friend of Senator 
Lariviere, to the Canoe Lake First Nation for the official 
opening of the new health centre. Not surprisingly for a man 
held in such high esteem by all, the health centre was named in 
his honour. 
 
I was struck by the amazing sharpness of mind and energy for a 

man of 100 years. Senator Lariviere talked with great 
knowledge and insight about all the latest political happenings, 
both locally and in Ottawa, with Mr. Prentice and I. He really 
did love politics. His son, Chief Guy Lariviere, tells me that 
right up until he passed away, he closely followed political 
events, from the FSIN to the latest events in parliament. 
 
The esteem in which Senator Lariviere was held was evident at 
the memorial service held December 6 in Canoe Lake. Nearly 
1,000 people attended to pay their respects to this revered elder. 
Senator Lariviere will be missed by all — his children, his 32 
grandchildren, 106 great-grandchildren, and 51 
great-great-grandchildren. His legacy and spirit will continue to 
live on through them and the amazing contribution he made to 
his community, our province, and our country. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

North Park Wilson School 
 
Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, North Park Wilson School, the 
small school with a big heart, has been recently renovated. 
North Park Wilson is the only public elementary school serving 
the residents of City Park, North Park, and Richmond Heights 
within the constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. The school is 
unique in its focus on education through the arts. In 2004 it was 
declared by Today’s Parent magazine to be one of the 40 best 
schools in Canada because of its innovative programming, only 
one of three schools to be honoured so in Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite the importance of the school to the surrounding core 
neighbourhoods and the success of its unique, innovative 
programming, in 2004 the future viability of North Park Wilson 
was in doubt. The school was built in 1953, and aging 
infrastructure was affecting enrolment. Of particular concern 
was the school’s gymnasium which was too small to 
accommodate many sports and many other activities. The 
community, particularly the North Park Wilson School Parent 
Council, rallied around the school promoting to parents in the 
neighbourhood the benefits of the school’s program and 
pointing out to the Saskatoon public school board and 
provincial government the key role the school plays in the local 
community. 
 
Student enrolment increased, and in November 2006 provincial 
government funding was announced to make possible the 
construction of a new gymnasium and associated renovations. 
The new gym has now been built. I trust gym members will join 
me in congratulating North Park Wilson School on its new and 
bright future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

New Processing Facility in Arborfield 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, an exciting new venture has 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

recently taken place in the town of Arborfield. Can Pro 
Ingredients has purchased the assets and operations of the 
former Arborfield Dehy Limited. Construction at the existing 
alfalfa processing plant has already begun. The result will be a 
processing facility utilizing exciting new technology. 
 
In addition to alfalfa, Can Pro will be processing canola. Can 
Pro will make canola meal using innovative processing 
technology allowing canola to replace fish meal in fish food. 
This technology was developed at the University of 
Saskatchewan. It is a source of great pride that this facility will 
be able to grow and prosper in my home constituency. The 
Saskatchewan Party government shares Can Pro’s vision of 
further development and growth for this sector in Saskatchewan 
and what better way to do this than to promote home grown 
technologies and business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the vast canola-growing region that lies 
within the Carrot River Valley area, I feel the area chosen for 
the development of such a facility was a wise one. This new 
facility will be completed by May of next year and has 120 
employees throughout the construction phase. Once the plant is 
operational, Can Pro is expecting to hire an additional 20 
full-time employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join in congratulating 
Can Pro Ingredients of Arborfield and wishing them great 
success in their new venture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. On Thursday December 13, our 
province will see the investiture of seven Saskatchewan 
residents who will receive the Saskatchewan Order of Merit for 
2007. I’m especially pleased that a resident of Saskatoon 
Nutana, Donald C. Kerr, has been selected as an Order of Merit 
recipient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Professor Kerr is widely recognized in Saskatoon 
and indeed throughout our province for his many talents and 
contributions as an English professor at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He’s also noted as a published writer of stories, 
poetry, and plays; and a board member who has worked with 
numerous arts organizations, such as Grain Magazine, Coteau 
Books, NeWest Press, and SaskFilm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don Kerr is known for his passionate interest in 
preserving the city of Saskatoon and prairie heritage. Through 
his collaborative efforts, our city now has a heritage coordinator 
and people owning heritage property are given tax incentives 
for improvements that are made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kerr grew up in Saskatoon Nutana. He 
attended Nutana Collegiate, and he still lives in our old 
neighbourhood of Nutana. Most mornings you can see him 
down at the Broadway Roastery writing and regaling people 
who happen to go to the coffee shop. 
 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating Professor Don C. 
Kerr on receiving the 2007 Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 

Investment in Canola Crushing Plant Benefits 
Saskatchewan Economy 

 
Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I join my colleague from 
Carrot River Valley today in bringing another exciting story 
about canola, this time from my constituency of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently Mitsui & Co., a Japanese trading house, 
has invested a 40 per cent share in the Louis Dreyfus canola 
crushing plant that will be constructed in Yorkton in 2008. This 
is a prominent investment of approximately $30 million. 
 
The plant is scheduled to be fully operational by mid-2009. This 
is a great opportunity for farmers in the Yorkton area, Canada’s 
main canola-growing region. The plant would be capable of 
crushing 850 000 tonne per year of oilseed which will produce 
350 000 tonne of canola oil per year. 
 
Providing farmers with additional markets for their crop is not 
the only benefit of this new facility, Mr. Speaker. It will also 
produce more jobs for the people of Yorkton and its 
surrounding area. The Mitsui investment will create a trickle 
effect that will benefit the entire Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I on this side of the House 
would like to congratulate Louis Dreyfus and Mitsui & Co. on 
their investment in the future of Saskatchewan. The 
Saskatchewan Party government shares this vision of economic 
and industrial growth through the promotion of business in 
Saskatchewan. I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these companies on their new venture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

First Persephone Performance in New Theatre Building 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night something 
very magical happened in Saskatoon — first night for 
Persephone Theatre in its brand new building, the Frank and 
Ellen Remai Arts Centre. Mr. Speaker, it was both an honour 
and a pleasure to be in the crowd of the first show as we 
watched a truly wonderful production of Beauty and the Beast. 
 
Now it was a bittersweet night though as we all missed the 
original builder of Persephone River of Dreams, Tibor 
Feheregyhazy, who passed away last summer. We all felt his 
presence, and not only will he always be remembered for his 
role in the development of this magnificent cultural centre, but 
also for the tremendous growth of professional theatre and 
actors in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to recognize Sheldon Bourne, general 
manager for Persephone, who received special thanks and a 
well-deserved standing ovation last night for his commitment 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

and leadership in supporting Tibor and the board in the 
completion of this magnificent project. The goal of Building on 
a River of Dreams is simple — create a space that will not only 
enhance Persephone but also the cultural and physical 
landscape of Saskatoon. Musicians, dancers, amateur theatre 
players, multicultural performers, and more will move across 
Persephone’s new stages, enhancing the arts for generations to 
come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Persephone theatre, its staff, and patrons as the curtain rises on 
this beautiful theatre. Or should I say in dramatic fashion, break 
a leg, Persephone. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Essential Services Legislation 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when asked by reporters what 
work the Sask Party had done in advance of essential services 
legislation, the Labour minister said that since last winter they 
had been researching the practices of other jurisdictions in 
Canada. He also said and I quote: 
 

We’ve given it quite thorough study. It’s based on some 
best practices. So, I appreciate the insight, but we’ve 
studied this pretty thoroughly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister certainly seems confident enough 
about his research to tell reporters that it has been thorough. 
Researching other jurisdictions in Canada is fine but, Mr. 
Speaker, any research leading up to legislation should have a 
consultation process. 
 
As we clearly heard yesterday, this government does not place 
much value on any processes of consultation. To the Minister 
Responsible for Labour: could he tell us which Saskatchewan 
stakeholders he has consulted with in the past year of his study? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to take that question on behalf of 
the government. Mr. Speaker, as indicated, we have had a 
consultation process with many people in this province. That 
consultation occurred on November 7, 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this was a 
consultation that meant that there are 20 members opposite 
sitting in the official opposition benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time that the government of this province 

wants to build this province and grow. There will be a growth 
agenda. There will be a growth in population. And you know, 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a growth in the number of people 
who are in the unions, Mr. Speaker, because the labour force in 
this province under this government will grow, unlike . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Unlike that official opposition who for 
years managed decline in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on October 1 of this year, one 
short month before the provincial election, the Minister of 
Health was asked about the Sask Party’s intentions as they 
relate to essential services legislation. When asked if he would 
consider the legislation, here’s what he had to say, quote: 
 

No. It needs to be negotiated. It needs to be put in the 
contract. I’m quite confident . . . [he said] that it can be 
negotiated. I don’t think we need get to legislation. I don’t 
think we need to go there at all. 
 

Mr. Speaker, did this government do any consultations with the 
general public? Or did they simply sit around the room 
consulting each other? It looks like they decided to legislate 
essential services without even telling the current Minister of 
Health. 
 
My question for the Premier is, my question for the Premier is: 
why wasn’t the Minister of Health included in the backroom 
consultations about this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank that member for the question 
related to growth in this province. We need an agenda that is 
going to move this province forward. We are going to work 
with the people in this province and the different groups in this 
province to establish comparable legislation with other 
provinces. 
 
We want to be competitive, Mr. Speaker. We want to ensure 
that there is the position of this province such that when 
investors, when labour groups are looking at the province of 
Saskatchewan, they see it in the same competitive market that 
they see Manitoba and they see Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to be assured that this province takes its rightful place, 
Mr. Speaker, as a leader in the new West, a leader, Mr. Speaker, 
to determine that this province is going to grow. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to move forward and we will move forward 
on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, the 
former Sask Party leader, Elwin Hermanson, and even the new 
Premier of Saskatchewan all said prior to the election that 
legislation for essential services was not necessary. The Sask 
Party’s own election platform made no mention of legislating 
essential services. The president of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, who represents 93,000 members, says the 
minister responsible has not consulted him on the labour issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party had been preparing essential 
legislation for over a year without consultation — even as its 
own members were publicly saying legislation was not 
necessary. 
 
To the Minister of Employment and Labour: why did no one 
from his party consult with the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour during the year-long study of this legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour, Mr. 
Speaker, to stand and talk about growth and to talk about the 
need for Saskatchewan to rebalance, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
be assured that this province is in a competitive position. We 
cannot be in a situation where our neighbours, Manitoba and 
Alberta, have legislation or have different points in place that 
will make us less competitive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 16 years under that NDP government, 
thousands, in fact tens of thousands of young people left this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Why did they leave? They left this 
province because we were in an uncompetitive position and the 
jobs were elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. We want to change that. We 
want to assure people in this province that they have a choice 
— that they have a choice to work and build their careers in this 
province. And that is the growth and security agenda of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation represents more than 12,000 who work in 
Saskatchewan. Our professional teachers provide quality 
education to Saskatchewan’s most valuable resource, our 
children. As a former children . . . as a former teacher — 
possibly a child — the Minister of Education must have an 
understanding of the need for consultation on the important 
matter of essential services. 
 
To the Minister of Education, has his party respected the 
fundamental role of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation by 
consulting on essential services legislation, and how would they 
impact the lives of Saskatchewan teachers and the quality of 
education they are able to provide, or did they continue their 
practice of failing to consult with anybody about nothing? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour again 
to take that question from that member as regarding education. 
 
As the member has indicated opposite, I have spent a number of 
years involved in education. I was a teacher for 11 years and I 
was chairman of a school board for nine years, Mr. Speaker. 
And there are times when the boards of education make 
difficult decisions. They make difficult decisions about school 
closures. They make difficult decisions about the placement of 
students. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, clearly as we move forward in talking with 
our stakeholders, of which the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation is a very important stakeholder, unlike the 
government opposite who over the last number of years have 
not considered the unfunded pension liability and the obligation 
of this government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there will be a 
time in this province when the taxpayers of this province, 
through the statutory responsibility of government, will have to 
ensure that at least $300 million is put forward to ensure that 
teachers’ pensions are met, unlike that government over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
claims to have been working for over a year on essential service 
legislation. And they say they have been sending a clear 
message that they would be pursuing this since last winter. 
Despite all these claims, the Saskatchewan Party’s recent 
announcement that they would immediately be pursuing 
essential services legislation seems to have come as a surprise 
to hard-working men and women within the province. Perhaps 
that’s because they denied it just before the election. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s lack of clarity during the campaign, 
and quite frankly since the campaign, has teachers asking if and 
how they will be impacted by the government’s hasty pursuit of 
education essential service legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers deserve answers. Teachers deserve more. 
To the Minister of Education: will teachers be included in the 
government’s plan to legislate essential service? Yes or no. 
Simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before I tell that member 
what the agenda of timelines are for my office as early as next 
week, I do want to remind the member opposite that under that 
government when it was in office over the last 10 years, the 
enrolment in this province was 193,000 students and now that 
enrolment sits at 163,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government has cost job opportunities for 
teachers when they were in government. Dozens of teachers 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

were let go because that government did not look at an agenda 
that would involve growth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, next week I can tell the member that I will be 
meeting with the president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, Dianne Woloschuk, and I will be meeting with Mr. 
Lyle Vinnish. And we will be consulting with them on 
numerous matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan right 
now, there are no limits on the right to strike for police officers 
and firefighters. Interestingly, the right has almost never been 
used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our police and firefighters provide a vital public 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. In previous years, they 
have sat down at the bargaining table with their employer and 
negotiated a fair collective agreement. Both sides know that 
their service could be withdrawn during the collective 
bargaining process, but rarely has job action occurred. That is 
further evidence that the labour laws in Saskatchewan are 
working. 
 
I would ask if the minister consulted with police and firefighter 
associations. But we all know the answer. So, Mr. Speaker, 
would the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 
tell this Assembly whether police officers and firefighters will 
be considered essential services in this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education, Employment and Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Our 
government is consistent in saying that we’re going to ensure 
essential services. The way to do that in Canada is to come 
forward with legislation. The way to do that is to make sure that 
what we’ve seen in recent weeks — 400 people a day turned 
away from the Royal University Hospital because of labour 
action — that those rights of strikers are balanced with public 
safety and security in Canada. And that’s what we’re going to 
continue to work on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 25, 2004 
the member from Swift Current gave a speech to a Calgary 
audience where he stated his visions to, and I quote: “. . . 
explore synergies in [the] public service.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just a few short days into government, and 
the more than 50,000 public sector workers are seeing where 
those synergies begin. They begin with legislation that may 
have a dramatic impact on their rights. Yet the new Health 
minister said just before the election that this would not happen. 
That legislation was not necessary. Mr. Speaker, would the 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission tell 
this House why the Sask Party wouldn’t tell public sector 
workers of this plan for essential services before the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we table legislation, we 
invite feedback from across the political community, the policy 
community. That way we ensure that all voices are given voice. 
What we can speak to, Mr. Speaker, is that this is not about 
taking away the right to strike. This is about balancing the right 
of public safety with those who were going to strike to ensure 
that we don’t run into the same situation that we did a few short 
weeks ago where 400 people a day were being turned away 
from the Royal University Hospital. We can do better than that, 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, and it’s time we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This bears repeating. 
On October 1, 2007, just days before the call of the 2007 
provincial election, the current Health minister was asked to 
clarify his party’s intention with respect to health care and 
essential services. When asked directly if legislation would be 
considered, he said, and I quote: 
 

No. It needs to be negotiated. It needs to be put in the 
contract . . . I’m quite confident that can be negotiated. I 
don’t think we need get to legislation. I don’t think we 
need to go there at all. 

 
Now we hear from other members of the Saskatchewan Party 
that the plan for essential services legislation had been in the 
works for over a year. Mr. Speaker, my question through you to 
the Minister of Health: why did he tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that a Saskatchewan Party government would not 
legislate their rights away when his party clearly had a plan to 
do otherwise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as consistent with other 
Canadian jurisdictions, the way to protect public safety during 
labour disputes is to move towards legislation. That’s why 
we’re moving forward legislation. It’s consistent with other 
Canadian jurisdictions. It’s a way of ensuring that public safety 
is balanced with the right to strike. Thank you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that both the 
Minister of Health and the hard-working health care 
professionals who provide care have been in the dark for some 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

time about how the Saskatchewan Party plans for essential 
services. 
 
There are dozens of different professions within the health care 
sector. Workers have a right to hear today from this minister 
who will be affected by the legislation and the degree which 
they will have their rights limited. Will registered nurses be 
affected? Licensed practical nurses, psychiatric nurses? What 
about doctors? Maybe it will be radiologists or lab techs. How 
about paramedics, X-ray technicians, or psychologists? 
 
My question through you, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
Health is simple: will he put on the record today exactly which 
health professionals will be included in his government’s plan 
to legislate essential services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we will put on the 
table today is the right to ensure the right to strike is balanced 
with public safety. What we can also say is that the right to 
strike for unions is not going to be interfered with. What it is 
going to do is guarantee that public safety is balanced. And 
we’ll move to a national norm just as other provinces already 
have. We’re way behind after the legacy of the last government, 
and it’s time that we move forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it has 
been suggested that during the recent CUPE strike the Minister 
of Employment and Labour made a call to Peter MacKinnon, 
the president of the University of Saskatchewan. When 
reporters asked about conversations between Mr. MacKinnon 
and the minister, he replied, quote, “All I’ll say, there was a 
range of what I would term as quiet diplomacy. And I won’t 
give any specific details of that.” 
 
To the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and 
Labour: what quiet diplomacy did he conduct during the CUPE 
strike, and exactly what does he feel is an appropriate level of 
involvement with one side of the table during a labour dispute? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, on the public record, Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve said is we were delighted with the work of 
the ministry’s conciliator. He worked with both parties. And we 
were able to help end the strike through his work, and that was 
something the former government was unable to do during and 
after the strike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps that was 
the member’s best shot at answering the question, but it 
certainly doesn’t do it justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as most of us know, there are several different 
unions representing a wide variety of workers at the province’s 
two universities. At the University of Saskatchewan, for 
example, the faculty association represents more than 1,000 
professors, librarians, archivists, and extension specialists. I’m 
sure they are very interested in whether or not they qualify as 
essential services. There’s also ASPA [Administrative and 
Supervisory Personnel Association], representing the interests 
of personnel and administration and supervisory capacities, in 
addition of course to CUPE. 
 
[14:15] 
 
To the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and 
Labour: which of these unions have you had discussions with 
about essential services? Which of these unions represent 
employees who would be deemed essential services, and how 
many employees does this affect at each of the universities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 
question. As we table the legislation, we will receive feedback 
from across the policy community, and we’re looking forward 
to receiving that, especially from institutions as distinguished as 
the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. 
So I appreciate the question, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, the Sask Party made 
the following promise. It’s contained in their platform 
document, and I want to quote it. And it says: 
 

Protecting public safety by working together with the 
province’s public sector unions to ensure essential services 
are in place in the event of a strike or labour action. 

 
Note the words, Mr. Speaker, “working together.” Well it’s now 
clear from the members opposite that they haven’t talked to 
police officers. They haven’t talked to correction officers. They 
haven’t talked to firefighters. They haven’t talked to health care 
workers. They haven’t talked to nurses. They haven’t talked to 
anybody other than themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can say is this: they say that actions speak louder than 
words, Mr. Speaker, and you need to keep your word, Mr. 
Speaker. To the Minister of Labour: how does his lack of 
consultation square with your Throne Speech that says keeping 
your word? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a good day when the 
member opposite quotes from our party platform. 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we said we’re going to 
ensure essential service legislation, and that is consistent with 
what the standard practice is across Canada. That’s how we 
ensure essential services, is through legislation. We appreciate 
and anticipate and welcome feedback as we come forward with 
the legislation next week. And I appreciate the quote from our 
platform. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t be so 
bad had they had enough gumption to put essential services 
legislation in their platform. But they didn’t have that kind of 
integrity, Mr. Speaker. No, they said they were going to work 
with public sector workers to include essential services, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact their Minister of Health, before the 
campaign, said they didn’t need to legislate it. So, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s about integrity, according to their Throne Speech. It’s about 
keeping your word. Their word was, Mr. Speaker, that they 
were going to work with public sector unions. They were not 
going to legislate. 
 
So to the member opposite I ask this question again: why can’t 
the members opposite, on the third day of this Legislative 
Assembly, keep his word, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we will hear from across the 
policy community as we table the legislation and that way we 
can receive informed consultation, which is in stark contrast to 
what used to happen when the party opposite used to try to run 
the province. Consultation is going to be meaningful, and as we 
move forward it’s also going to be informed because 
stakeholders will be able to actually focus on what it is we’re 
proposing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say this 
is about public safety, Mr. Speaker. But they won’t say, they 
won’t say today, are police officers included in their legislation. 
And they have three police officers in their caucus. They won’t 
say it’s about firefighters. They won’t say it’s about registered 
nurses. They won’t say if it’s about physicians in the province. 
 
What they do say, Mr. Speaker, is they’re introducing 
legislation. Tell us today which professions are covered under 
their legislation. They’ve been at this for over a year. Surely to 
goodness they can tell us today. They need to be transparent, 
Mr. Speaker, and at least accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we will get into the details 
of legislation as we table it because there’s no sense inciting 
unnecessary fear. Because what we can guarantee is we can 
guarantee the right to strike from unions and that is going to be 
balanced with public safety. Because we want to ensure that 
there is no repeat of 400 people a day being turned away from 
the Royal University Hospital in times of need. We want to 
move forward to ensure that snowplow operators are operating 
during winter storms, Mr. Speaker. We want to ensure that 
public safety is balanced with the right of strike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Tougher Treatment of Repeat Drunk Drivers 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is cognizant of the danger on our streets and 
highways posed by drunk drivers. Given this threat to the 
security of Saskatchewan residents, I am issuing a directive 
today that will see tougher treatment of repeat drunk drivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective immediately, all prosecutors are 
instructed to strongly consider proceeding by way of indictment 
and, upon conviction, applying for forfeiture of the vehicle 
where the Criminal Code permits, in the following 
circumstances. 
 
If an offender has two or more convictions for impaired driving 
within two years of the date of a current offence, the Crown will 
strongly consider proceeding by way of indictment and, on 
conviction, applying for forfeiture of the vehicle. Secondly, if 
an offender does not have a previous impaired driving 
conviction within two years of the date of the current offence 
but has three or more impaired driving convictions within four 
years, the Crown will strongly consider proceeding by way of 
indictment and, on conviction, applying for forfeiture on the 
vehicle. Or, Mr. Speaker, thirdly, if an offender has a prior 
conviction for impaired driving within two years of the date of 
the current offence plus two or more impaired driving 
convictions within four years, the Crown will strongly consider 
proceeding by way of indictment and, on conviction, applying 
for forfeiture of the vehicle where the Criminal Code permits. 
 
Prosecutors are also encouraged to exercise their discretion and 
to consider applying for forfeiture of the vehicle where a repeat 
offender is convicted of impaired driving causing bodily harm 
or death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our police officers and our 
Crown prosecutors for their past good work on various 
checkstop programs. These programs have had significant effect 
in reducing drunk driving. This directive I am announcing today 
is one more tool that we can give our police and Crown 
prosecutors to combat the problem of impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this directive I am giving notice to the people 
of Saskatchewan: if you are charged today and you are facing 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

your third conviction for impaired driving, you run a serious 
risk of losing your vehicle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have voted for safer 
communities, and we are delivering on our promise to decrease 
the number of repeat drunk driving offences in our province. I 
am proud to issue this directive before the holiday season, given 
the unfortunate prevalence of impaired driving and tragic 
accidents that all too often result from impaired driving during 
this time of year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very important 
that we emphasize the way that society feels about people who 
drive when they’re drunk. And so this initiative is an important 
way to identify and make sure that people understand the 
seriousness. 
 
But it’s very clear — and I think the minister has outlined the 
fact — that this is building on many good things that have been 
done by the police and by the prosecutors and by the courts and 
by organizations like the people who are in the gallery today 
around the public education as it relates to drunk driving. And 
so we applaud that work. 
 
But I think one of the things that’s missing in this 
announcement today is the directive going to all the people of 
Saskatchewan. If you know someone who is at risk of driving 
drunk, then you have the opportunity and the obligation to get 
them help through our very good addictions services and mental 
health services throughout, across the province because that’s 
also part of keeping our streets safe. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I applaud the minister for doing this, but I 
think we also have to emphasize the fact that there are places 
where many of these people who get involved in the third or 
fourth or fifth event like this can get some help and get them 
completely out of this whole trap that they’re in. So thank you 
very much, and I applaud the minister for his work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Eagles, seconded by Mr. 
Ottenbreit, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 
moved by Mr. Calvert.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, merci. Comme vous le savez, 
vous êtes le membre de l’Assemblée qui represente mon village 

de Montmartre et les gens de Montmartre dans le district de 
Moosomin. Les gens veulent vous féliciter sur votre élection 
comme directeur de l’Assemblée. 
 
[Translation: As you know, you are the member of the 
Assembly who represents my village of Montmartre and the 
people of Montmartre in the constituency of Moosomin. The 
people wish to congratulate you on your election as Speaker of 
the Assembly.] 
 
I just congratulated Mr. Speaker on his appointment as he 
represents the hometown where I come from: Montmartre, 
Saskatchewan, Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a range of 
emotions. First and foremost is that I am thankful and I am 
humbled. And I wish to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Sutherland for putting their faith in me to represent them in this 
honourable House. I promise to do the best that I can do, and I 
promise to humbly serve the province and the constituents of 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
I would also like to thank my family, my election team, for all 
of their hard work during the election. We went to a lot of 
doors, knocked a lot, and heard a lot of responses from the 
community with regards to many issues. 
 
My work history has involved health care and policing. In 
policing I spent four years in the drug unit which is a combined 
unit of RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and city police 
officers that work to do the drug work from about Davidson 
north. And we were very successful in our endeavours. 
 
My family comes from a medical background. I grew up in 
Montmartre. My father was a small-town physician, so health 
care was a common topic in my home. I have two children, a 
daughter 25 and a son 23, who are both paramedics working in 
this province, and I worked as an EMT [emergency medical 
technician] prior to becoming a police officer. There’s many, 
many changes that have occurred in health care, rurally and in 
the urban setting, and some of them, of course as we know, 
have not been positive. 
 
The constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland is a very diverse 
constituency. I have people living in poverty, to middle class, 
upper middle class, up until millionaires. One issue that 
transcends all socio-economic classes is the issue of addictions. 
It is a real issue, Mr. Speaker. It is something that is a 
life-and-death situation. The disease of addictions can kill 
people, and does. It also transcends all of the areas — social 
services, education, health, and justice. I’d like to just talk a 
little bit about additions and how it crosses over boundaries 
between health, justice, and social services and education. 
 
The most commonly used drug in Saskatchewan is marijuana. 
Marijuana has a chemical in it called THC 
[tetrahydrocannabinol], and what we’ve done in Canada is we 
have discovered grow operations in climate-controlled 
environments. This method of growing marijuana has increased 
the THC levels substantially, and what we do know is that 
they’re about five times stronger than they were in the ’60s or 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

’70s. Consequently what’s happening with the marijuana usage 
in the province is . . . research is showing that there is a higher 
incidence of schizophrenia. That’s a mental health disorder. It’s 
a very serious one, and we connect it back to marijuana use. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Marijuana also costs money. For example an eighth of an ounce 
of marijuana costs $100, and that will last you maybe a day if 
you’re a heavy user. The grow operations in these houses are a 
risk for our environment, for the safety of our children. 
Chemicals used in grow operations, when children are living in 
the home, can cause serious health effects, and also the black 
mould that grows on the houses, on the walls, can be of 
detrimental effect when reselling the house. Grow operations 
are largely supported by organized crime. Organized crime is a 
real issue in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Cocaine is the second drug of choice, and cocaine can be used 
many different ways. You can inject it into your vein. Cocaine 
hydrochloride is water soluble, and that method is actually 
preferred. A lot of people or addicts are injecting marijuana or, 
pardon me, cocaine, as well as smoking it. Smoking marijuana, 
Mr. Speaker, or smoking cocaine, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, is 
done by turning the cocaine hydrochloride into a base called 
crack. This happens when you mix it with baking soda, and that 
makes it a smokable form. 
 
When children are in a home in a using environment, 
second-hand marijuana smoke is present. Second-hand cocaine 
smoke is present. And methamphetamine is also a drug that can 
be smoked, so second-hand methamphetamine is present. In my 
experience, what I do know is that nothing has been done to 
protect children in using environments by the previous 
government, and it was not looked at, touched, or 
recommendations made in any way in Project Hope . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . project hopeless, yes. 
 
Methamphetamine — we’ve had some serious issues with 
methamphetamine because it’s such a detrimental drug. 
 
The way methamphetamine works is when you use 
methamphetamine it causes a hormone called dopamine to rise 
in the brain, and that’s your pleasure hormone. So becoming a 
premier, becoming elected, any enjoyable experience you might 
have — seeing your child for the first time — that pleasure is 
activated by dopamine in the brain. With methamphetamine the 
highest form of pleasure you have is multiplied by five times so 
that when you smoke methamphetamine you never feel as good. 
Anything after that does not give you pleasure any more. 
Consequently recovery from methamphetamine addiction is 
severe. It’s rarely successful, and there’s an extremely high 
suicide rate with our teenagers and our young people with 
regard to methamphetamine addiction. 
 
Methamphetamine can be made at home in Saskatchewan. We 
don’t have to import it like cocaine. We can make it in our 
kitchens. Our children have access to recipes and how to make 
methamphetamine on the Internet. It’s been done, and it will 
continue to be done, and it will be continued to be sold on our 
streets, and it will continue to kill our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of substance abuse is a serious issue, and 

it’s one that we, the government, are addressing. I thank the 
Premier and Minister McMorris, Minister of Health, for 
selecting me as the Legislative Secretary to deal with the issue 
of addictions and opening of beds as per our promise in the 
Throne Speech and in our platform. 
 
I ask today that we take into consideration the children that are 
growing up in these environments, that are breathing in drugs. 
Research is yet to be done or concluded as to just how badly 
these children are affected. We know through fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder that alcohol is a very serious issue. It’s high 
in our Aboriginal population, and under addictions it also needs 
to be looked at and addressed. 
 
Project Hope to date has given us zero extra treatment beds in 
this province. I know through my experience — and member 
opposite mentioned the good addictions program we have in 
this province — I think all the addictions workers are dedicated; 
however we cannot access them after 5 o’clock. They have to 
wait; addictions people have to wait for three months to get a 
meeting with an addictions counsellor. They wait even longer to 
get a bed. This is unacceptable, and it’s something that’s been 
going on for some time. 
 
The help line is something that is a good idea. However when 
you have an adolescent that needs detox, that needs a counsellor 
at midnight, you can’t put him on the telephone. It doesn’t 
work. That’s not the help they need. We need more accessible 
help. And we, this government, plan on dealing with the 
addictions issue. We plan on opening 100 more beds. And it is 
the responsibility of government to make these things available 
to the people of Saskatchewan. This is something that the 
previous government has failed miserably at doing. 
 
I’d like to share a story with you, one that one of the 
constituents gave me. And I’ll just read it: 
 

Charles Plumb was a US Navy jet pilot in Vietnam. After 
75 combat missions, his plane was destroyed by a 
surface-to-air missile. Plumb ejected and parachuted into 
enemy hands. He was captured and spent 6 years in a 
communist Vietnamese prison. He survived the ordeal and 
now lectures on lessons learned from his experience! 
 
One day, when Plumb and his wife were sitting in a 
restaurant, a man at another table came up and said, 
“You’re Plumb! You flew jet fighters in Vietnam from the 
aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk. You were shot down!” 
 
“How in the world did you know that?” asked Plumb. 
 
[The man replied] “I packed your parachute” . . . Plumb 
gasped in surprise and gratitude. The man pumped his 
hand and said, “I guess it worked!” Plumb assured him, “It 
sure did. If your chute hadn’t worked, I wouldn’t be here 
today.” 
 
Plumb couldn’t sleep that night, thinking about that man. 
Plumb says, “I kept wondering what he had looked like in 
a Navy uniform: a white hat; a bib in the back; and 
bell-bottom trousers. I wonder how many times I might 
have seen him and not even said ‘Good morning, how are 
you?’ or anything because, you see, I was a fighter pilot 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

and he was just a sailor.” Plumb thought of the many 
hours the sailor had spent at a long wooden table in the 
bowels of the ship, carefully weaving the shrouds and 
folding the silks of each chute, holding in his hands each 
time the fate of someone he didn’t know. 
 
Now, Plumb asks his audience, “Who’s packing your 
parachute?” 
 
. . . Sometimes in the daily challenges that life gives us, 
we miss what is really important. We may fail to say hello, 
please, or thank you, congratulate someone on something 
wonderful that has happened to them, give [them] a 
compliment, or just do something nice for no reason. As 
you go through this week, this month, this year, recognize 
people who pack YOUR parachutes. 

 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this government knows 
who packed their parachute, and it identifies the issues and 
promises that will make Saskatchewan a better place than we’ve 
found it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to stand before you 
in the first session of the twenty-sixth legislature. I take this 
opportunity to congratulate you on your esteemed position to 
which you have been elected by your peers and colleagues. I 
would like to wish you a very successful term in the House. 
 
At this time I respectfully acknowledge my husband Douglas 
and my loving family of four teenagers, now adults, for the 
sacrifices they made for me to be here. I thank all the people 
whose support and encouragement have brought me here today. 
To my campaign team and hardworking volunteers, thank you 
for giving me your trust over the years — two and a half years, 
but who’s counting? It’s an honour and a privilege to represent 
them all in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all members of this Assembly and 
especially the members on my side of the House sitting for the 
first time as government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — I believe the message has been delivered by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The riding I represent is called Sask Rivers. I would especially 
like to thank the people of Saskatchewan Rivers for their 
overwhelming support. We won the election by more than 
1,000 votes. We had a very interesting, fun, though difficult 
task over the two and a half years, and I’m very happy that the 
people of Sask Rivers acknowledged my team’s hard work and 
also believed that people of our community have realized that 
we are capable of so much more. 
 
We campaigned on a platform to improve this community 
through hope, not fear, and I’d like to take this time to show my 
respect for the hard-working people of this constituency. 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Rivers constituency stands from Big River to 
White Fox, a span of 200 miles across. It borders the 
Saskatchewan River to the south and the boreal forest to the 
north. Situated in the northern area of the riding is beautiful 
Waskesiu who many have attended. It’s located in the Prince 
Albert National Park, home to 11,000 people, four First Nations 
communities, and several regional parks. It’s a riding dependent 
on agriculture, forestry, and tourism. 
 
This is the riding I call home, where my husband and I live on a 
fourth-generation cattle operation. My roots in this riding are 
almost as old as the province of Saskatchewan. My maternal 
grandfather homesteaded in the Christopher Lake-Northside 
area in 1916. Raising a family of ten, his descendants still reside 
in that area. 
 
In 1953 the community of Paddockwood presented a brief to 
the Royal Commission of Agriculture and Rural Life. Holding a 
forum to discuss problems of the community in regard to 
agriculture and rural life, all problems were discussed for the 
purpose of summarizing problems and solutions. It’s interesting 
to note that the problems the community had in the ’50s are 
very much the same as today — roads, health services, 
education, insufficient credit to young farmers. Things have not 
changed much since the ’50s and why is that so? Under the 
present government these issues will be rectified. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of these rural problems still sound familiar 
and linger in today’s world of 2007. These supposedly minor 
problems of the past have become major problems of today and 
the future, and I am confident our current government will 
focus on these problems and improve life in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The good people in Big River and area are struggling with 
forestry issues today, as well as many others in the 
Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. I, for one, would like to see 
innovations and entrepreneurship as sustainable economic 
development options for growth in the forestry sector. Our 
forest area is huge and needs to be utilized. When the saw mills 
began in the early 1900s, loggers prospered and families raised 
generations of foresters. These families would still like to work 
in the forest industry and need our ideas. 
 
Other areas exceeded higher than normal precipitation levels 
resulting in producers struggling to seed and harvest crops. 
Choiceland and Smeaton especially suffered, and the Smeaton 
community also experienced the closing of their elementary 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the central priorities of the new 
government is job creation and people retention. We have an 
abundance of opportunities in the Sask Rivers area that we are 
very excited about. We look forward to having an economically 
prosperous and fruitful constituency, and we’re confident that 
our population will actually grow. 
 
Under Premier Brad Wall, the constituency of Sask Rivers will 
prosper under the plan to train and retain young people. Young 
people represent the core of our foundation and are badly 
needed all across our province. For too many years, we 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

witnessed migration to other provinces without an appropriate 
retention plan. We badly need young entrepreneurs and 
labourers to give development in this constituency, and we’re 
very excited to bring our people back to Sask Rivers. 
 
We have an abundance of opportunity right here. We have a 
positive vision for the future. We picture new business openings 
and rural development with home builders and families flocking 
here. We’d like to see more children playing in our towns, more 
shops and businesses opening their doors, more services 
available for our residents. So let’s put a stop to those shrinking 
towns, and let’s start growing our population. We need to 
restore public confidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Sask Rivers 
offers some remarkable history. Not many people realize that 
our constituency is home to the very first Red Cross hospital in 
the British Empire — what an achievement! Carved out of the 
forest fringe, this hospital was built in Paddockwood and served 
smaller communities that were further away from the hub city 
centres. 
 
Built in 1920 and used until ’49, this hospital was developed for 
the large number of World War I veterans returning to the area 
and raising families. Vacant land was being taken up by 
returning men who had gone overseas from the Paddockwood 
area. Our community built and maintained this hospital, and its 
success led to the development of 23 more of these hospitals 
throughout Saskatchewan. Both of my parents were actually 
born in this hospital, mom in ’31 and dad in ’29. 
 
Our province was built by pioneers — hard-working farmers, 
labourers, and determined settlers. Saskatchewan Rivers still 
has the same attitude. We’re willing to work very hard to build 
a better way of life for our children. 
 
My grandfather arrived in Canada in ’27, filing a homestead 
and working for $55 a month to purchase a team of horses and 
wagon. My son is now fourth generation on this land. All of his 
four great-grandfathers farmed in the Sask Rivers constituency. 
Their move to Canada took a huge leap of faith. They left all 
that was familiar because they believed a better life would be 
found in Canada for their family in generations to come, and I 
will always be grateful for the courage they showed in what it 
was meant to be a Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, living and working in this riding, which was 
developed almost solely on immigration, I know how important 
it is that we keep our schools and long-term care facilities right 
in these communities. Our seniors deserve the best quality of 
life that we can give them, as these resourceful people were 
inventive, innovative, and courageous Canadians. I believe 
these qualities live on in our next generation, and I am here to 
represent their interests. 
 
One interest I would like to see is young individuals staying in 
Saskatchewan and having endless opportunities for success, 
room to grow and give to the social contributions of their 
society, just like their ancestors had hoped for. I spoke to many 
people with stories of their hopes and visions. Why have so 
many of our young people left this promising province? 

I’d also like to talk about some of the more recent 
accomplishments of our constituency. A major education 
company has recently named the Saskatchewan Rivers School 
Division as one of its North American showcase districts. 
Thanks to the hard work of the educators in my constituency, 
Smart Technologies has donated $76,000 worth of hardware to 
reward their creative use of technology in the classroom. Angie 
Lysitza, a teacher at W. J. Berezowsky School, was 
congratulated for showcasing her classroom ideas. Her teaching 
style is now a model for educators nationwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also confident that business will continue to 
grow in my riding. And some wonderful people are making 
Sask Rivers the place to be. Arne Petersen, for example, has 
done some great things with Elk Ridge Resort — a four-season 
complex and prestigious 18-hole golf course. Maybe some of 
you have golfed on it. 
 
Arne had a vision for our beautiful boreal forest and he’s 
developed one of the most successful tourist attractions in 
Saskatchewan. Arne achieved success using a relatively simple 
business model. We can entice people from all over the world 
with Saskatchewan’s natural beauty. Our province can be a 
destination hot spot for tourists, and Arne is realizing that 
vision. 
 
Tourism is one of the many industries on which Saskatchewan 
will grow under this new government. Our riding, for example, 
offers great potential for farming, forestry, and the diamond 
mine. I’m sure we’re all very excited about the prospect of 
diamond mining in the Fort-à-la-Corne district. With Great 
Western Diamonds, Shore Gold, Shane Resources, and Star 
Uranium Corporation, one of the biggest kimberlite finds in the 
world has been discovered right here in the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
The new government has only been in power for a few short 
weeks and I’d like to note the improvements that have already 
been made. Our next election date has been set for November 7, 
2011, thus marking the end of election game playing and 
pre-election gimmicks and spending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, also of importance for me 
personally, since I’m one of the few women in the legislature, is 
the zero tolerance for harassment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — Our new government has taken a hard-line 
stance against workplace harassment and this sets an excellent 
precedent for workplace conduct in our province. A new 
generation of government lawmakers should represent the 
ever-changing face of the Saskatchewan public and these ideas 
exemplify this new face. Employees in this province should not 
have to hesitate to voice their opinions for fear of losing their 
job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that everyone in this room is excited 
about the fresh, new Saskatchewan face that we are forming, 
and if any of you have loved ones living in other Canadian 
provinces, now is the time to convince them to come back to 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

Saskatchewan. There’s hope for this province after all. In my 
riding and all across Saskatchewan, I can feel optimism in the 
air. We have a fresh, new government that makes sense. We 
have world-class oil sands. We have fixed election dates. We 
have no more redundant taxes on used cars. We have aggressive 
diamond exploration and we have plans to improve health care 
and attract doctors and nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — We are growing our population at last. And 
last, but definitely not least, our beloved Riders have won the 
Grey Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Wilson: — I’d like to end on a note of optimism and hope, 
and to assure the people of Saskatchewan that the new 
government will work hard to address their needs. We are part 
of an exciting, new Saskatchewan. And again I’d like to thank 
the people of Sask Rivers for giving me their trust and support. 
In my part of the country we have numerous lakes, beautiful 
lakes, that dot the constituency and can be enjoyed by ice 
fishing, cross country skiing, and snowmobiling over the winter 
months. This year there’s been an abundance of snow to aid to 
these sports and I’d like to welcome all of you, all the 
Saskatchewan residents, to enjoy all the resources that my 
riding has to offer. 
 
On a final note, I’d like to wish you a joyous holiday season 
and, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the privilege of addressing the 
Assembly today. I look forward to the years ahead as we work 
together for the people who have put the faith in us. Mr. 
Speaker, I support the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, I’d just like to remind members again. And I 
realize for newcomers to the Legislative Assembly it’s a little 
hard to get used to not using an individual’s first name, but if 
you could just keep that in mind and remember that we refer to 
members by their constituency. And I thank members for taking 
note of that. I recognize the member from Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to 
congratulate the member for Saskatchewan Rivers on her 
maiden speech here and before that, the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. This is an exciting time for us as we hear new 
members on both sides of the legislature presenting their first 
speeches in this great Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by congratulating literally all 
members, old and new, on your and our elections, if I can put it 
that way. I say our because I’m including myself. It really is an 
honour to be in this great Chamber representing our 
constituents. No matter whether we’re invited to serve on the 
government side or on the opposition side, we are all serving 
the great province of Saskatchewan, and it is a challenge for us 
to do it in the best way we can. And I’m confident that literally 
every one of the 58 members in the Chamber today is going to 

try to our utmost to serve our constituents and our province. 
And again I congratulate all members for your elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — My second words, Mr. Speaker, are words of 
congratulations to you, sir, on your election as Speaker. Here 
you are, having conducted a couple of question periods now, 
and it just looks like you’ve been in the Chair for weeks or 
months rather than just a few short days. I’m looking forward to 
your continued speakership and good work coming out of you. 
 
I want to congratulate the new Premier, the member for Swift 
Current, as well. And I want to wish all members of the 
government well as you go about trying to fulfill your election 
promises. I sincerely hope that you can, and I wish you well as 
you try and fill those promises. 
 
I promise you something different than, well if you try and 
serve some different agenda. And that’s, simply put, the job of 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. So we just must remind 
ourselves to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I want to thank the good folks of Regina Coronation Park. It’s a 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, that’s full of hopes and aspirations 
and dreams. It’s a constituency that places a great value on 
family, on friends, certainly on young people. 
 
In my constituency there are three high schools. Then in 
addition to that, we have a Christian school and we have a 
Muslim school — all in my constituency, all doing just 
phenomenally important work, all of them full of students that 
are just a delight to behold, a delight to be around, and students 
that provide much room for optimism for Saskatchewan’s 
future. And I am optimistic about our future. 
 
I want to thank my wife in particular, Lorna, and my family for 
their support. The executive of my constituency organization, I 
want to particularly take a moment to thank, and I’m sure that 
all members would feel the same way about their organizations 
back in their respective constituencies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are in the great Throne Speech 
debate. But I want to start by saying, where are we today? I 
think by recognizing where we are, then we can measure when 
we’re moving forward or in some other direction. 
 
Today we’ve got more people working in Saskatchewan than at 
any time in Saskatchewan’s history — 506,000 people. We 
have a higher participation rate in the workforce than at any 
time in Saskatchewan’s history. We’ve got more of a budget 
surplus today than at any time in Saskatchewan’s history. 
Reputedly there’s something like $2 billion extra in terms of 
cash laying around. We’ve got an economy that is hotter than a 
$2 pistol — just never had an economy as hot as it is today. 
 
Our record when we were in government includes 14 balanced 
surplus budgets, 14 in a row. It includes $1.2 billion in debt 
writedown in the period from 2004 to 2007. It includes having 
the lowest-cost utility bundle for four years now, proven, and it 
includes having tax reduction every single budget for more than 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

a decade. There’s been some form of tax reduction for people, 
every single one of them. 
 
So from today, Mr. Speaker, we look forward. And my 
constituents in Regina Coronation Park are quite hopeful, quite 
optimistic. Why? Well we’ve just come through an election 
campaign. The government has promised 800 new nurses to be 
hired — 800 new nurses. They’re optimistic about that and they 
told me so on the doorstep through the election. Why are they 
optimistic? Well of course there’s initially there’s the jobs. 
Everyone wants to have a job. And if you happen to be trained 
in health care, you want to work in health care. That’s point 
one. 
 
But what my constituents were most concerned about was the 
wait-list to get health care procedures. And I know members on 
both sides of the House heard that over and over. I can tell you 
that in my constituency, thankfully, they trusted our plan. But 
they’re optimistic, optimistic. And if you can hire, when you 
hire 800 more nurses, the wait-list is going to be drastically 
reduced. And we look forward to that. 
 
My constituents, well they were looking forward to a $15 
prescription fee for everybody starting July 1 next year. That’s 
not to be. Instead the $15 prescription cap for seniors will 
continue. And I say for seniors with the caveat that this is 
seniors of modest or low income, and if you have too high an 
income you’re not included under this. So that’s the way that is 
going to work. 
 
My constituents are optimistic, Mr. Speaker. I noted that as I 
was making my way around this most recent election, there was 
a marked change from the previous election when I was going 
around. And it had to do with two things. One is there were 
some sections, some neighbourhoods that had clearly just really 
improved. The housing stock was much improved. The, if I can 
describe it, the vehicle stock was much improved on those 
streets. You could tell there was more affluence, not 
everywhere, but enough places that I had no problem noticing 
it. And I was very enthused about that, to see that turnaround in 
such a short period of time. 
 
The other thing that I noticed was there was very, very, very 
few people brought up crime as a problem this election. And 
four years ago crime was probably the number one issue that 
was raised with me in certainly in much of my constituency. I 
credit that with the efforts that we’ve made in the Regina police 
and the department of now Social Services — Community 
Resources — and Education, that we made around vehicle 
thefts. And we’ve driven, in Regina, vehicle thefts down to less 
than half of what it was four years ago. And I think my 
constituents are feeling pretty optimistic about that. 
 
My constituents, though, are looking forward to 125 more 
police officers being hired across Saskatchewan and expect that 
that will continue the downward trend in crime. 
 
My constituents are optimistic because, as I’ve mentioned 
before, we enjoy the lowest-cost utility bundle in Canada. And 
the optimists in my constituency are listening, or listened, and 
believed that when the Saskatchewan Party said, we’re not 
going to sell the Crowns, they were believing that. 
 

Now I wonder. There’s some realists, there’s some realists that 
heard something different — realists who heard things like . . . 
I’ve got a few quotes here. One quote, “. . . there’s too much 
state-owned enterprise in the province of Saskatchewan.” That 
was said in this very Chamber in November 2005. I wonder 
who said that. 
 
Or who said, and I quote: “STC ”. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes. We’ll tell you in a minute. The second quote: 
 

STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] is in that 
group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we have said quite clearly 
that we also would like to get the taxpayers out of that 
money-losing proposition. 

 
This was said in Hansard in this very same Chamber. Now who 
am I quoting? Well I’ve heard that the hon. member for 
Northeast was the person. I can assure you, no it wasn’t. For 
members opposite, it was the now Premier, your leader, who 
said that in this Chamber when he was sitting on this side of the 
House. 
 
Why would we take much consolation in that? Why would we 
believe, why would my constituents believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
the agenda definitely precludes the sale of Crown corporations 
when in fact the Premier has said what I’ve just quoted? How 
do we square that circle? And it’s on the record in Hansard, 
right here. Absolutely it is here. 
 
Who said, and I quote, “It’s [speaking of SecurTek] the 
government competing with the private sector . . . and does it 
send the right . . . [message]?” Well the same person said that in 
the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. That was the Premier, and that 
was quoted out of the Leader-Post. 
 
Well the now Premier has said all of the above. Small wonder 
we’re nervous about our Crown corporations. 
 
Who is it, Mr. Speaker, that said, when speaking about the $100 
million in rebates to SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], people who dealt with SGI, who is it that said, 
quote, “I’m just saying that’s something we wouldn’t have 
done”? Well I’ll end the suspense. It’s the very Minister 
Responsible for the Crown Corporations, that very same 
minister saying things like that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s many reasons for unease — many, 
many reasons. We fear losing the lowest-cost utility bundles. 
We fear, in Regina, losing the head office jobs of our Crown 
corporations. We fear losing many jobs right across 
Saskatchewan on the Crown corporations. So we’ll be watching 
with a great deal of interest to see how members opposite do 
that. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are not 
interested in seeing the Crowns die of a thousand cuts. They’re 
not interested in seeing SecurTek hived off and then the 
government of the day claiming, oh, but SaskTel is still there. 
We’re not interested in any of that death by a thousand cuts, 
Mr. Speaker. We want our Crown corporations to continue as 
viable entities. We’re proud of our Crown corporations. We’re 
proud of our Crowns that are providing the lowest-cost utility 
bundle in all of Canada. We’re proud of the jobs that they’re 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

providing. We’re proud of the economic leadership that our 
Crown corporations have provided and can continue to provide 
for our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by . . . Well before I 
close I want to just point out briefly, I want to briefly touch on 
essential services, briefly touch on essential services which was 
covered off in question period today. And I want to point out 
that governments may try to withdraw the right to strike. They 
may try to withhold that. The danger is, working people need to 
have the ability to negotiate in an equal way with employers, as 
equals. It can’t all be simply my way or the highway. 
 
And I know many people, many people will say that my way or 
the highway is reasonable. After all, the boss is writing the 
cheque. But some of these very same people, Mr. Speaker, wind 
up not being able to run an ongoing operation. Why? Because 
the best have left and what they’re left with is people that are 
left, if I can describe it that way. The best have left. Instead of 
having the best negotiate, instead of having the best work with 
you and negotiate, they’ve left. 
 
So I don’t know how essential services legislation is going to 
add one of the 100 new doctors that’s been promised. I don’t 
know how it’s going to add one of the 800 new nurses that the 
new government has promised. I don’t know how essential 
services will do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to close because my . . . a general 
agreement on the amount of time that we would take. I look 
forward to rising many, many times in this legislature. It is 
always an honour to try and share some ideas and some 
thoughts with my constituents through Hansard and through the 
television, but it’s also an honour to talk about some of the 
ideological agreements that we have with the government and 
the ideological differences. I look forward to much good 
coming out of this legislature in the coming years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that I want to simply close by saying I will be supporting 
the amendment and I will not be supporting the main motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
take part in this debate today and to support the Speech from 
the Throne. Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is about security, 
opportunity, and quality of life. It’s about accountability. It’s 
about being proud to live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Indeed our province is bursting with opportunity. The tourism 
sector alone generates more than $1.5 billion annually and is 
responsible for employing over 55,000 people. We can do 
more, and by doubling tourism funding to promote added 
marketing activities and make important capital investments in 
our tourism facilities, Mr. Speaker, we will do more. We will 
provide capital investment in ecological, paleontological, 
museum, and heritage facilities; provide improved and 
consistent signage promoting tourist attractions on 
Saskatchewan highways; enhance strategic partnerships with 

urban and regional tourism organizations in the province; 
support First Nations tourism initiatives; work with the federal 
government to facilitate the development of ecological and 
heritage attractions; increase northern and nature-based tourism; 
provide greater support for event hosting; and develop 
partnerships with other Western provinces to promote joint 
tourism activities. 
 
[15:15] 
 
We have a strong cultural heritage that tourists from around the 
world can’t resist. Our province is bursting with opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan parks host more than 2.5 million 
visits annually and are responsible for employing more than 800 
people, not to mention the thousands employed by businesses in 
the parks or otherwise bolstered by park-based tourism. We can 
do more. And, Mr. Speaker, by delivering on our government’s 
commitment to improve Saskatchewan parks, we will deliver. 
 
We will create an additional 1,000 electrified campsites in 
provincial parks and eliminate the campfire fee, improve park 
programming infrastructure, hire more summer students and 
increase security, triple provincial funding to Saskatchewan’s 
regional parks, and work with communities and stakeholders to 
establish new provincial parks in Saskatchewan including a new 
wilderness park to accommodate extreme camping. These new 
parks will be established after full consultation with First 
Nations and stakeholder groups. These are things that will help 
ensure that the legacy of our provincial parks will live on for 
the people of Saskatchewan and for generations to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a place where we take pride in 
supporting healthy, active families. I for one know first-hand, as 
a former police officer, that children who are involved in 
positive activities early on in life and given the opportunities 
are less likely to have problems later on in life, hopefully 
avoiding problems like drug addiction and alcohol abuse. 
 
This is why the implementation of the yearly 150 per child, age 
6 to 14, active families benefit is so very important. This benefit 
will significantly help families with the costs of cultural, 
artistic, and sporting activities. Through strong partnerships we 
will secure Saskatchewan’s future as a healthy, active province 
in the new West and across Canada. We will continue to be 
stewards for physical activity, sport, and recreation to ensure 
our children and families are healthy and active. 
 
Leadership is an action, not a position, and as you can see, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re ready to get moving. 
 
There’s no doubt that my first term in office will be exciting, to 
say the least. I have much to learn, and it is an honour and a 
privilege to serve in the House. Mr. Speaker, I have the great 
honour to serve southeast Regina and also a large and growing 
population east of Regina’s limits. I’m speaking of Emerald 
Park, White City, Pilot Butte, and the RM [rural municipality] 
of Edenwold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, White City and Emerald Park represent what is 
right in Saskatchewan. This community is growing by leaps and 
bounds. White City alone issued 100 new building permits in 
2007, Mr. Speaker, and if I’m not mistaken, that’s as many as 
the city of Moose Jaw. The new subdivisions in White City 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

include 350 lots, most of which are sold or sold out, and the 
town expects to issue another 150 more building permits next 
year. Once all the new homes are built in the present new 
subdivisions, the town of White City’s population will double, 
Mr. Speaker, and more new subdivisions are on the drawing 
board. 
 
The demographics of this new growth include a large 
percentage of young families. White City’s school is bursting at 
the seams with no talk of school closures, but rather expansion 
of the school, Mr. Speaker. In fact it is not beyond the realm of 
possibility that this area may become Saskatchewan’s newest 
city in the next few years. 
 
And what is fuelling this growth? Good, high-quality services, 
lower taxes, bigger lots at less cost, high-quality schools, and an 
attitude on the part of council and its residents. The 
development, business, growth, and security are welcome in 
this community, Mr. Speaker — the very things Premier Brad 
Wall intends to deliver for the entire province. 
 
Pilot Butte is growing. The RM of Edenwold is also growing. In 
fact the population of the rural part of my constituency is 
growing, buoyed by the recent optimism which started in spring 
’06 with the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election win and grew 
over the summer of 2007, this optimism generated by the 
possibility of a change in the legislature, that when occurred, 
prosperity, growth, security throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that the good people of Regina 
southeast, White City, Emerald Park, Pilot Butte, and the RM of 
Edenwold voted for positive change on November 7 and I am 
truly honoured that they provided me with the opportunity to 
help make that positive change. 
 
I wish to spend a few minutes here, Mr. Speaker, just thanking 
the people that helped me during my election campaign. My 
mom and dad, Jerry and Beryl Tell, worked actively to assist us 
in securing a Saskatchewan Party government. For almost two 
years my campaign team worked tirelessly — Regina Wascana 
Plains constituency members headed by the president, Sean 
Quinlan; Brad Hunter, my campaign manager; along with 287 
volunteers. I truly wish to thank all of them for their dedication 
and commitment to helping electing a Sask Party government. I 
also wish to thank my husband, Bob, and my two children, 
Regan and Cameron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is about growth, it’s about 
accountability, and it’s about being proud to live in 
Saskatchewan. It is for these reasons that I am in support of the 
Speech to the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today in the Assembly to speak in 
favour of the Throne Speech. But before I begin I want to join 
with the other members and offer my congratulations to you on 
your selection as Speaker of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll recall that during the ceremony that 

installed you in that position, the Premier had a little bit of fun 
at your expense and noted that when you were first elected to 
this Chamber, he was in university. Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to 
bother to mention how old I was when you were first elected, 
but I think at that time, when you were first elected, you were 
dealing with legislation and I was probably dealing with flash 
cards. So congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 
level of esteem by which members hold you is evident by the 
fact that you were uncontested for this race. So congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — I also, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the 
Deputy Speaker, the member from Arm River-Watrous, on his 
new position in this Assembly. 
 
And I want to offer my congratulations to all members of this 
Assembly on both sides of the House and particularly the new 
members. Having taken my place in this Chamber a little over a 
year ago for the first time, I have to say that I’m enjoying being 
around a lot of rookies and am sure reliving my excitement 
when I first took this Chamber through them. So I want to offer 
my congratulations. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Premier of the province, the 
Deputy Premier, and the members of the cabinet. Mr. Speaker, 
when I look around this side of the House I’m extremely 
confident with the team that we have in the Saskatchewan Party 
government, and I feel that way about the Premier and about the 
cabinet that he has selected. And so I want to offer my 
congratulations to them. 
 
I do want to be a voice in support for this Throne Speech 
delivered by the government. But I first need to thank the 
people who helped get me to this point, Mr. Speaker. First, the 
people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, who have now twice given me 
the great honour of representing them in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times for the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. Much of the boom that we are 
experience is related to the production of oil and all the spinoffs 
that relate to that industry. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
humbling for me to note that on a day when I’m on my feet in 
the Assembly of the legislature of Saskatchewan, that my 
father’s doing what he’s doing on most days, and that’s hauling 
oil in the southeast corner of this province. And it’s through 
hard work of my parents that I’ve been given the great 
opportunities that have been afforded to me, and I appreciate 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in the last couple of days there’s been a lot of 
media attention played about the increased potential of the oil 
industry of the southeast of the corner . In fact there’s a new oil 
play, Mr. Speaker, that . . . industry experts and government 
officials are estimating that there’s a new oil find that contains 
approximately . . . anywhere between 25 and 100 billion barrels 
of oil, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A couple of major companies that are in our area are Crescent 
Point — and an official was quoted in the newspaper on 
Monday as saying that this new oil play “. . . is the hottest play 
in [all of] Western Canada” — and, Mr. Speaker, Petrobank. A 
gentleman with Petrobank, Gregg Smith, he went even further 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

than that saying that this discovery “. . . is the hottest oil play in 
[all of] North America,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that is really causing a boom in our community and it’s 
pretty evident in Weyburn and surrounding areas when the you 
see the record housing starts, the new condos, and commercial 
construction. And, Mr. Speaker, best of all is the flood of new 
people that we have coming to our community — in particular 
the young families that have moved to Weyburn and area that 
are raising their families in Weyburn and that are active in our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel pretty privileged to live in Weyburn. We’re 
known as the opportunity city, but we are facing some of the 
same challenges that members, especially members opposite, 
have spoke about in the last couple of days — specifically 
housing prices. I know that when we purchased our house on 
6th Street in Weyburn, today we could probably put it on the 
market for about twice what we paid for it. So it really shows 
how dramatically the markets have increased in our area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you have a record like the previous 
administration where, over seven years, 35,000 people have left 
the province, that sort of thing will happen. Where over those 
seven years where people have left the province, it really does a 
lot to our housing prices. It doesn’t do much to them in terms of 
moving them forward. So when we have a boom that’s going 
on, this is when we get these wild, wild swings in prices. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is why we need a government that is 
committed to a growth agenda to ensure that our province, with 
so much potential and the resources that the world craves, 
remains competitive. Mr. Speaker, this is something that the 
opposition party obviously didn’t understand in government. 
And by listening to some of their speeches over the last couple 
of days, they clearly still do not understand it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you’re in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and you’re beginning in Weyburn on the east side 
of the constituency, as you move west throughout the 
constituency I can tell you . . . And I’ve had the chance to travel 
since the election to a number of communities in the 
constituency. And there’s renewed optimism in large part 
because the people in the rural part of my constituency . . . And 
I think this is true for all of rural Saskatchewan, considering 
that pretty much all the representation is on this side of the 
House. But the people of rural Saskatchewan finally, they 
believe that they finally have a government that will work with 
them, Mr. Speaker, and not against them. And I think that that’s 
going to be important for our party to know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact I had a couple of gentlemen that called up 
after the new government was sworn in, the cabinet was sworn 
in. And they were reading some of the comments made by 
members of the opposition party including the Deputy Leader 
of the Opposition, the Ag critic, who said that it needs to be a 
high priority of our new Saskatchewan Party government that 
we address issues such as the difficulties for cattle and hog 
producers, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you what was relayed back 
to me by these constituents. They really couldn’t believe that 
after that, in particular that member who’d been a member of 
the government for 16 years, Mr. Speaker . . . And the people 
that phoned me up, they couldn’t believe it because what had 

that government done for rural Saskatchewan over those 16 
years? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government wouldn’t even give producers 
and ranchers of the southern part of this province — many of 
my constituents — they wouldn’t even give them the time of 
day when they came to this Assembly last year in search of 
some assistance for the drought. Mr. Speaker, constituents who 
felt no support in their farming operations from the previous 
government were pretty upset when they heard members of that 
opposition party all of a sudden have a renewed interest in 
agriculture and in rural issues after 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the group opposite, now they want to criticize our 
plan that we have — this new government’s plan — for 
addressing closures of rural schools in rural Saskatchewan 
which in many ways, Mr. Speaker, relate directly back to the 
lack of support that people in rural Saskatchewan received from 
this government over 16 years. They want to criticize our plan 
and that’s well within their right as the opposition party in this 
province. But what did they offer when they were in 
government to rural schools? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s come to the point where even the Leader of 
the Opposition, he takes exception with some of the language in 
our Throne Speech regarding our commitment to increase the 
number of health care professionals in Saskatchewan. But what 
did they offer in government, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely nothing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — That’s right. That’s right. Absolutely nothing. 
In fact it was worse than that. They gave us the longest waiting 
lists. They gave us the worst retention rates of nurses and health 
care professionals, Mr. Speaker. In fact their own Health 
minister at the time said they don’t set goals on the number of 
doctors and . . . or the number of nurses that they want because 
you can’t really set goals because you might not reach your 
goals. That’s what the people of this province got from that 
former government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a wave of optimism that is sweeping 
across this province and in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. It 
started on November 7. It’s picked up momentum after the Grey 
Cup and I’m confident that it will continue with the stewardship 
of this Premier and this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in continuing to offer my thanks . . . and I have so 
many people who helped out on our campaign. And 
considering, Mr. Speaker, that our campaign, we did this a year 
and a half ago and we put a lot of work in and not just during 
the election month, but leading up to the election. So I was very 
pleased to see that so many people would come back and, after 
putting in so many long hours, that they’d want to do it all over 
again a year and a half later. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that they didn’t just work that hard 
just to help me get elected, but they were working to help bring 
positive change to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They saw that the Saskatchewan Party was going to bring 
positive change and they wanted Weyburn-Big Muddy to be a 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

part of that. And so I want to thank everybody on my campaign 
team. There’s not enough time to name all the members, but 
especially my campaign manager Marilyn Charlton, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this campaign we relied even more on our 
supporters than probably normally, because at a time when we 
were in the thick of the campaign — in fact it was in the first 
two weeks of the campaign, and a campaign that turned out to 
be a tremendous victory for not only Weyburn-Big Muddy and 
our team but our party and our province — at a time when we 
were going through a campaign that was going to lead to a win, 
Mr. Speaker, my wife Amanda and I, we lost two very special 
people, people that were important to us. During the campaign, 
at the beginning of the campaign, we lost . . . in a span of two 
weeks we said goodbye to both my grandmother, Doreen 
Tracey, and Amanda’s grandfather, Hugh Alexander. And I just 
want to briefly for a moment say a few things about those two 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very fortunate to grow up in a small town, 
Halbrite, Saskatchewan and actually my grandparents lived 
there also. And so for the first 18 years of my life, I got to grow 
up no more than three blocks away from my grandparents. And 
my grandmother and I, our birthdays were mere days apart from 
each other so we celebrated birthdays together, often shared a 
birthday cake. And it was, obviously, Mr. Speaker, it was quite 
a difficult period of time for us and she left us far too soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to mention a couple of words about 
Hugh Alexander, my wife’s grandfather. I think Hugh was 
probably quite well-known to some of the members opposite. 
Hugh was well-known for his affiliation with the CCF-NDP 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party] going back to the days of Tommy Douglas. In fact, he 
and Tommy were quite close friends. 
 
Hugh was a pillar of our community in Weyburn, very closely 
tied with his church, the Free Methodist Church and with the 
co-operative system. In fact, Mr. Speaker, my wife and I, we 
have a co-op membership in Weyburn and our co-op number is 
somewhere in the 20-thousands, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Amanda’s grandpa Hugh, who lived into his early 90s, 
was co-op member number six, Mr. Speaker. And so it goes to 
show you how closely tied he was to the community. And we’ll 
certainly miss both our grandparents, especially during this 
Christmas season, Mr. Speaker. And we certainly owe a lot to 
them for helping us get to this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you that during the election when we were 
. . . it was a difficult time and we were dealing with some grief. 
And I’ll admit to all members of this House and anybody that’s 
watching that, early in the campaign, there was days that it was 
difficult to get up and campaign. Certainly, Amanda and I 
didn’t always feel up to it. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was the strength of our family 
and the strength of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy that 
encouraged us to continue with the campaign. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll tell you . . . I know that full well there was people 
in our constituency, the people that I’ve had the pleasure of 
representing over the last year and a half, who felt abandoned 
by their government, by the NDP government. There were 

many people in Weyburn-Big Muddy that believed that, 
contrary to the words of that former government, that they were 
being left behind when the government said that nobody was 
going to be left behind. There were people being left behind. 
They didn’t know why they were being left behind. They didn’t 
know what they had done to deserve it. And so I want to thank 
the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy not only for their support in 
this election but for their encouragement throughout the entire 
campaign. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally I want to publicly thank my wife, 
Amanda, for her ongoing support and for the sacrifices that she 
has made to allow . . . to enable me to be here and to truly fulfill 
a lifelong dream of serving in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And so I thank her for her support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that I will be supporting the 
motion moved by the member from Estevan, my good friend 
from Estevan, seconded by my new friend, the member from 
Yorkton — and I’m glad to see him elected to this Chamber — 
and not only because, Mr. Speaker, I support this government 
and this Premier, but also because I believe this is the plan that 
the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy supported in the election. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, while the other parties were spreading fear 
and smear, and doom and gloom — and we’ve heard some of 
that already today in this Assembly — the Saskatchewan Party 
was carrying a message of growth and opportunity, of security 
and compassion. These are the values, Mr. Speaker, that I think 
that we share with the people of Saskatchewan and are the 
values espoused in this Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech because 
over 61 per cent of my constituents supported these values and 
supported me in this election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech outlines this 
government’s vision for building on the economic growth that 
we are experience. The Throne Speech outlines stronger 
balanced budget legislation that will require balanced budgets 
every year. Mr. Speaker, our government will provide a 
four-year financial plan each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in direct contrast to the previous NDP 
administration who didn’t include a four-year plan in last year’s 
budget. And I remember when that budget came out, Mr. 
Speaker, and we were asking the question, why didn’t they 
project into the future? Why aren’t they going to show us the 
numbers going forward into the future? 
 
I remember members in their budget reply, members of this 
party asking that very question. My colleague from Silver 
Springs, he asked: where is the plan for sustainability? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, just days after the new government was sworn, it 
became apparent why they didn’t forecast. They had put a plan 
in place to spend far more than the government could afford, 
and our new government will have some decisions to make to 
clean up their mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech also carries on with the 
commitment that I’m very supportive of, that was made during 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

the campaign, and that’s tuition rebates for post-secondary 
students who stay in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this Throne 
Speech outlines the most aggressive youth retention plan in all 
of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the previous NDP administration had 
an abysmal record of youth and population retention. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it’s one of the reasons why 
the people of this province lost confidence in that party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment, laid out in this 
Throne Speech which I’m supporting, that over the life of this 
term of government, we’ll increase the number of health care 
professionals. We’ll provide real tax relief, Mr. Speaker, for the 
families and individuals . . . to hire more police officers. In fact 
we’ll even fulfill the commitment that they couldn’t fulfill in 
eight years when they thought it would take four. They didn’t 
fill it in eight years, so we’re going to clean up that mess, Mr. 
Speaker, and hire more police officers on top of it. We’ll add 
more addiction treatment beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to growing our 
population and our economy — not for the sake of just growth, 
but to secure the future for all our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech also lays out something that 
the Premier of the province, the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Swift Current laid out over three 
years ago — which apparently it took three years for the 
opposition party to read — The Promise of Saskatchewan. But 
this Throne Speech lays out a commitment to create a 
partnership called Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to 
replace, get the politics out of economic development, Mr. 
Speaker, which will eliminate the kind of 11th hour politically 
motivated NDP-Domtar deals that was more about getting votes 
than it was about jobs or growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Throne Speech laid out a vision 
that truly will secure the future of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has my support and I am confident that they 
will have the support of my constituents, because I know the 
Premier and this government and this cabinet is one of action. 
 
The former government was long on talk, short on action. And 
they had 16 years, Mr. Speaker, and they failed on nearly every 
account, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s Ben Franklin that once 
said, and I think he said it best, “Well done is always better than 
well said,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Throne 
Speech puts this government well on our way to hear well done 
by the people of Saskatchewan by the end of our first term. For 
all those reasons I will be supporting this Throne Speech. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to start by congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, on your election. I 
know that you’ll come to this office and perform your duties 
with both dignity and respect for all members of the Assembly. 
 

I’d also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker in his election. 
I know that he will also perform the duties to the best of his 
ability with both dignity and respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate the new government. 
I’d like to congratulate you on your election and congratulate 
you on performing very admirably over the first few days, Mr. 
Speaker. But you have raised expectations of the public beyond 
belief. You will have to live up to those expectations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, over the next few years people will have the 
opportunity to see if you live up to those expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate all the members. Being 
elected to this Assembly is an honour that few ever have in their 
lifetime. It’s a honour which we all must take very seriously. 
We have a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to 
deliver good government. And we have a responsibility to hold 
the government accountable so that they can deliver good 
government. And we intend to do that to our utmost ability. 
 
But each and every one of us has a responsibility. We’ve been 
elected to represent the people of our province and we should 
be proud of that and we should do it with dignity and respect 
each and every day. 
 
I’d like to thank my constituents for once again electing me to 
this Assembly. It’s an honour to represent you in this great 
House. It’s an honour to speak on your behalf. And I promise 
you that I will continue to represent you to the best of my 
ability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a new government who brought forward 
a Throne Speech that talks a great deal about the future. But I 
want to start by saying, Mr. Speaker, in the opening of their 
Throne Speech they talk about keeping your word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in the first few days of the new 
administration several things that bring keeping your word into 
question. I’m going to start, Mr. Speaker, by talking about . . . 
In the early days, the early days, Mr. Speaker, we heard from 
the Finance critic how dire the financial situation was in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We heard a warning about just how 
bad the situation was in this province financially. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do you square that? How do you 
square that with 16 consecutive credit rating upgrades? How do 
you square that with more than one and a half billion dollars in 
available cash? How do you square that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about $4 billion in potential deficit. But, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re looking at every conceivable, 
every conceivable bad set of circumstances coming together at a 
single time to come up with those numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they need to be credible. If they 
want to talk about keeping their word, Mr. Speaker, they need 
to do that. Just short days after, Mr. Speaker, just short days 
after, Mr. Speaker, we had the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton talking about the need to immediately start negotiating 
to open the mill. We saw the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton during the election running ads saying a vote for him 
was a vote to open the mill. Just days after — and just days 
after, Mr. Speaker — we see the member responsible for 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

forestry in the new government quash the deal that would see 
Domtar reopen the mill in Prince Albert. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say one thing . . . Mr. Speaker, they say one 
thing and they’re doing another. And they’re saying one thing 
and they’re doing another. Mr. Speaker, we heard in the Throne 
Speech that, “my government believes actions speak louder 
than words.” We heard that from the new government, that 
actions would speak louder than words. Well they said they 
would open the mill, Mr. Speaker, and then they kill the deal to 
open the mill. They say that they’ll, that they’ll not introduce 
essential service legislation and then they tell us they will, Mr. 
Speaker. People will judge them on their actions. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they will judge them on whether or not they keep their 
word. Mr. Speaker, as we look to the future, as we look to the 
future, we will see whether or not this administration will live 
up to the promises they’ve made. 
 
In their election platform they promised 800 new nursing 
positions — 800 new nurses. Mr. Speaker, we see in the Throne 
Speech that that 800 has now become a goal. And mere days 
after the election, Mr. Speaker, when it was talked about in the 
media about the nurses that were being hired in the Philippines 
coming to work in the city of Regina — the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region sent a team of administrators and nurses to the 
Philippines to hire new nurses, Mr. Speaker — we heard the 
new government take credit for that. Mr. Speaker, I have to tell 
you those nurses were hired prior to November 7. I know that 
for a fact because my wife was one of those nursing managers 
that went and hired those 100 nurses in the Philippines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, they’re taking credit for 
things they didn’t do. Yes, they will be the government when 
those nurses actually start working. Yes, they will. Those nurses 
will start in early January. They will be the administration when 
those nurses actually start working in Canada. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re taking credit for things they didn’t do. They’re 
complaining about things that aren’t real and, Mr. Speaker, they 
need to understand that being in government is far more 
difficult than being in opposition. They will have a period of 
time in which people will let them, people will let them say one 
thing and do another but that will come to catch up with them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, people’s expectations are extremely high. 
You went through this election promising many, many things. 
Now it’s our responsibility as opposition to ensure that you live 
up to those promises and to those expectations. We are going to 
be like watchdogs and watchdogs do three things. They watch 
and see what you do. If you don’t do it, they bark to tell you 
you’re doing wrong. And if eventually you still continue not to 
do it, they bite and let you know that you’ve done wrong. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the role that the opposition has to play. 
We’ve become the watchdogs, those that are here, to ensure that 
there’s accountability for what you’ve promised. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all hope, we all hope that things in the 
province improve as they have over the last number of years. 
We have seen continued . . . [inaudible] . . . over the last 
number of years. 

Mr. Speaker, there was a call-in show the day after the election 
talking about what happened in this election, and 30 individuals 
from across the province talked about this election. The first 
individual who called in was a farmer from rural Saskatchewan, 
and he said the reality of this election was this: that the day after 
the last election there was the determination by the people of 
Saskatchewan the government would change. It wasn’t 
necessarily because the government was doing a bad job 
because it could be said very clearly that Saskatchewan is 
probably in its best financial position it’s ever been. He also 
said it’s not particularly because the people of Saskatchewan 
are enamoured with the prospects of a Sask Party government. 
In fact they’re quite nervous about what might become out of 
this Sask Party government. 
 
But the reality was, Mr. Speaker, that caller after caller said the 
same thing — that this change was inevitable. It wasn’t about 
bad government. It wasn’t about the good prospects for the 
future necessarily, but a decision had been made to change the 
government. Now you have to live up to those expectations, and 
we expect you to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear about safer communities, and we 
all agree there should be safer communities. We hear a promise 
of 120 new police officers, and we like the prospect of 120 
more police officers to add to the 251 that we put in place over 
the last number of years — 251 new police officers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We want to see, we want to see improvements in the issue of 
poverty in the province as you say you’re going to do. You’re 
going to work to reduce poverty in the province. We all want to 
see that. But we expect you to live up to those commitments. 
We expect you to live up to what you say you will do, and 
we’re going to work very hard to hold you accountable to those 
commitments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard prior to the election that schools in rural 
Saskatchewan would be dealt with differently than they were 
under this administration and promises that rural schools 
wouldn’t close. Rural schools would not close. Just short days 
after the election, Mr. Speaker, we heard that rural schools will 
continue to close. The reality is, the reality is when they were in 
opposition they would say one thing. When they’re in 
government, the reality is they have to deal with the real facts. 
You have to deal with the facts, and the real facts are that you 
have to make tough decisions at times, and you have to make 
tough choices at times. And you cannot be all things, you 
cannot be all things to all people. You have to make those tough 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the members opposite yelling from their 
seats at times, and that’s fine. They need to understand that 
they’re going to be held to a different standard being 
government than they were when they were in opposition, both 
by the media, by the public, and of course now by the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, today we are talking about the future 
and the future is giving . . . The people of Saskatchewan are 
giving the Saskatchewan Party a test drive. They’re out there 
taking this new government out for a drive to see what it’s like. 
If they do a good job, they may get re-elected. If they don’t, 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

four years from now we’ll have an election, and they’ll be 
defeated. Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to have to be accountable 
— and that’s what they’ll have to do in the future — and to say 
they can be all things to all people, what they’ve been doing for 
the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I read this Throne Speech it talks as if 
everything in the past was negative. Everything in the past was 
ineffective. It wasn’t good enough. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the number of taxation 
cuts that have made over the number of years to stimulate this 
economy, starting about six years ago when royalties were 
lowered. Taxes were lowered — both personal income taxes, 
then corporate taxes. Then the PST [provincial sales tax] was 
reduced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all these things helped stimulate the 
economy and create the environment that we’re in today. The 
government, the previous government which I was proud to be 
part of, worked hard to build this economy. We worked hard to 
create the environment in which we can move forward in . And 
we hope for the sake of the people of Saskatchewan that you 
continue working hard like we did to build this economy. 
 
You took over at a time with unprecedented wealth, where the 
population was growing, jobs were growing, and the province 
has never been doing better. That comes with great 
responsibility because the expectations of the people of 
Saskatchewan are that things continue to benefit them and that 
things continue to move forward in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have people saying, well it’s all about 
$90-a-barrel oil. No, it isn’t. We have a diversified economy; 
$90-a-barrel oil is only one element. Individual members over 
there don’t understand that we have a very diversified economy 
in mining, natural gas, oil. But, Mr. Speaker, the number of 
people working in this province today and the additional 
revenue coming from income tax is a significant driver of the 
better position that the government finds themselves in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all talk about wanting a province 
where our children can do better, where their children can do 
better, and we have worked very hard over the last number of 
years to move the province to a position where this economy — 
now the hottest it’s ever been in our province’s history — can 
continue to thrive. 
 
Now the members opposite say no thanks to the current 
government. They say no thanks to the current government. 
But, Mr. Speaker, they need to understand that those things 
don’t happen by themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, they are going 
to learn, they are going to learn that you can’t pick winners and 
losers in the economy. You can’t say that you put money into 
the agriculture industry in our province, but you won’t put 
money into forestry. You can’t say that you’ll put money into 
manufacturing and not put money into the forestry. Mr. 
Speaker, you can’t make decisions on ideology. You have to 
make pragmatic decisions based on the business case in each 
individual circumstance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite in cancelling the Domtar 
deal affected hundreds of families in the Prince Albert 

community — individuals who were looking forward to the 
reopening of the mill. One family member or another who 
worked at that mill would have the opportunity to return to 
Prince Albert from where they had to move to to seek 
employment. They need to understand as a government that 
every single decision that they make affects others. And several 
hundred families in the Prince Albert area are affected by the 
decision not to reopen the mill. 
 
We have a situation where we were moving towards reopening 
the mill. We had a commitment to open the mill. And they 
made that decision; they made the decision to tear up the 
memorandum of understanding on Domtar without 
consultations with the mayor, without consultations of the 
unions, of the employees, without the task force from Prince 
Albert, without meeting with the chamber of commerce, 
without meeting with the community at all, Mr. Speaker. They 
made that decision on pure ideology without understanding the 
impact. 
 
The Speaker: — We’re getting to a point of having too many 
debates at this time. And we would like to hear the member 
from Regina Dewdney, and I’ll recognize the member from 
Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying earlier, Mr. Speaker, the government has to understand 
the decisions they make impact others. 
 
And their decision to cancel the memorandum of understanding 
that would have seen the opening of the mill in Prince Albert 
affected some 700 families. And those families were looking 
forward to a Christmas with a little more optimism. They were 
looking towards the future of employment in the city of Prince 
Albert. They were looking to working in their communities. 
Many of those individuals had to move to Fort McMurray and 
others for interim employment because there wasn’t 
employment in their areas, in the Prince Albert area. But, Mr. 
Speaker, their hopes were dashed. Their hopes were dashed on 
November 7 when this government was elected and shortly 
thereafter decided they wouldn’t carry forward with reopening 
the mill in Prince Albert. 
 
But during the election, the member from Prince Albert Carlton 
said a vote for him was a vote to open the mill. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be watching very closely to see if that mill 
reopens. And the people of this province will hold the 
government accountable if that mill doesn’t open as the people 
of this province will hold the government accountable for other 
things. They’ll hold them accountable for all their 
commitments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s our job to ensure, as Her Majesty’s 
Loyal Opposition, that they’re held accountable for their 
commitments. They made many, many promises and, Mr. 
Speaker, they have to live up to it. Some of their promises they 
told people about. Some they didn’t. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty obvious. We didn’t hear about 
essential services anywhere in their campaign nor did any of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. But short days after, 
we heard, we heard we’re going to have essential service 
legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker. 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government is going to be held 
accountable by the people. It’s our job to hold them accountable 
to their commitments, and we will work very diligently over the 
next number of years to the next election to ensure that there’s 
accountability and ensure that they live up to their 
commitments. And, Mr. Speaker, with that, I’d like to indicate 
that I am supporting the amendment. I’m not supporting the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to rise in the Legislative Assembly today to speak in 
support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by taking this opportunity 
to congratulate you on your appointment and well-fought, 
well-earned victory as Speaker. I know that it was a tremendous 
amount of campaigning and a lot of speeches to be made for 
that. But, Mr. Speaker, you are a gentleman of integrity, 
fairness, and I’m sure that you will handle the position with a 
great deal of competence and add a lot of professionalism and 
decorum to this Chamber. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Arm River. His constituency is one 
that is right next to mine. And at one point we over . . . he had a 
portion of my constituency, so a number of my constituents 
were formerly his constituents. And I know from meeting with 
those people and speaking with them that they were well 
represented, and I know that that same type of representation 
will continue in his role as Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by thanking the good 
citizens of Southeast for their confidence and my re-election. 
My margin of victory increased from just over 600 votes to well 
over 3,000 votes, and I want to thank the people of Saskatoon 
Southeast for their confidence and for getting out to vote and 
participating in the democratic process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that I also thank some of my 
campaign workers. I would like to thank everybody that came 
out and worked, but I want to recognize a few of them by name. 
My campaign Chair for life, Lynne Agnew, who has served as 
my campaign Chair many times in the past, continues to do a 
yeoman’s duty time after time. And I would also like to 
recognize the campaign Co-Chair, Shannon Hardy. It is the first 
time that she was involved in one of my campaigns, and she 
was able to provide a new role by providing sort of a family 
pack. We not only had Shannon; we also had her husband, her 
brother, two sisters-in-law, and a brother-in-law, and her son as 
well who came out and worked. These people, as well as Ujin 
and Pat Humenny, came out and they worked 16-hour days. 
They assembled lists. They phoned people. They recruited 
volunteers. They put up signs; drilled holes in the frozen ground 
on some days when the ground was too hard to put up signs. 
And it culminated on election day when we had over 300 
scrutineers and other volunteers working. 

On behalf of my wife, Sandy, and myself, we would like to 
thank everybody that participated in the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to comment briefly on my 
mother, who is 87 years old. In January of this year she had a 
fall and broke her C1 vertebrae. I want to thank the people that 
worked at MD Ambulance and the hospital workers at St. 
Paul’s and City Hospital who were able to ensure that she had a 
relatively rapid and successful recovery. She has still not 
regained all of her mobility but she was able to come out and 
celebrate election night with us. The StarPhoenix carried a 
photograph of myself pinning a corsage on my mother. My 
mother actually received more letters of congratulations for 
having her picture in the paper than I received. So on behalf of 
my mother, I thank everybody as well. 
 
I would like to also thank my constituency assistant, Rita 
Flaman Jarrett, who worked exceptionally hard for the last four 
years, was extremely competent, and did a very good job of 
looking after the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast. It’s a pleasure 
to have her back. On a personal note, during the campaign her 
son was diagnosed with cancer. Today he is having his second 
chemotherapy treatment. And I would like all members to wish 
her and her family well as they go through what is going to be a 
very difficult time, and want to wish her son speedy recovery. 
 
I would like as well, Mr. Speaker, to thank and recognize my 
wife, Sandy. She works at Robertson Stromberg Pedersen, 
which is the same law firm that the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin used to work at before his election. During that 
period of her life she had to spend her evenings at home with 
me and her days at work with the member opposite. So she 
certainly had her challenges in that time. And I’m pleased to 
announce she is just down to one of those type of challenges. 
 
During the election, Mr. Speaker, she worked exceptionally 
hard. She had her own team of volunteers and she would 
usually go into an area two or three days ahead of me, and then 
I would follow along and try and secure the votes and talk to 
people that she had met, and she would indicate which ones she 
thought were receptive. 
 
A frequent comment was, yes, we’re going to vote for you. We 
met your wife. She was young, attractive and pleasant. She’s 
not at all like you, but because of her we’re going to vote for 
you. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to quote Karlheinz 
Schreiber, but he did say, “I was born ugly, not stupid.” And so 
I didn’t argue with those people. I just went on my way and 
thanked them for their support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize and thank the other 
candidates for their commitment and participating in the 
democratic process. In my constituency the NDP was 
represented by a former teacher, Jane Wollenberg. And 
unbeknownst to her at the time when she made the commitment 
to run, the election date fell on her parents’ 55th wedding 
anniversary. Her parents live in Ontario. They came out here 
and they spent their 55th wedding anniversary scrutineering in 
two different polling stations. And I’m sorry I wasn’t willing to 
give them an anniversary gift of allowing their daughter to win 
the election, but I would like to wish them well on their 55th 
wedding anniversary. 
 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

I would like to also recognize the Liberal candidate, Mark 
Lemstra, who spent a lot of time writing policy for the Liberal 
Party and he actually came and had a meeting with me and was, 
I think, a very bright, hard-working person. I would like to 
encourage him to stay active in politics. 
 
The first candidate that came to see me, Mr. Speaker, was Mike 
Fornssler who was the Green Party candidate. He contacted me 
early on, indicating that he was going to be running. He paid me 
a courtesy visit. He is a university student and a very interesting 
gentleman to talk to, a lot of interesting ideas and hope that he 
too stays active in politics. 
 
I would like to make note of some the significant changes, Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency during the last four years. The 
constituency has grown very substantially. I have new 
communities of Stonebridge, Stonegate, Willows, and a 
significant expansion in the south Briarwood neighbourhood. I 
want to welcome all of those constituents to my constituency 
and thank them for participating, in getting out and voting. I’m 
pleased to see that our province is growing and was gratified 
that those people came out, and I’m pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we won each and every one of those new polls 
that were there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to sort of comment on an old 
schoolyard joke that was floating around when I was growing 
up. You would ask somebody to spell post three times, and they 
would say, p-o-s-t, p-o-s-t. And then you would ask them what 
they were going to do when they would get to a green light, and 
they would usually say, stop — because of the letter 
recognition. And there’s an adult version of that joke, and it’s: 
what happens if you say fear three times? How are you going to 
vote? And the answer is usually NDP. But this time, Mr. 
Speaker, it was an interesting schoolyard joke, but the people 
said, I think I heard that when I was in grade 5 and I’m not 
going to be tricked again. 
 
So this was an election, an election about the future of this 
province. It was the public’s opportunity to say that we want 
growth and we want opportunity. We aren’t afraid to use the 
province’s resources. We want to overcome fear. We want to 
overcome the mentality that we can’t grow, that if we keep it all 
at home, there’ll be more here for the rest of us. 
 
Those days of that kind of fear and that kind of fearmongering 
are past us. This time, in this election, the NDP tried to use 
Enterprise Saskatchewan as its fear tactic. And it’s interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party had the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan document on its website since 2004. 
 
And I don’t know whether it took the NDP three years to be 
able to read it or to understand it or to realize, oh, we should try 
and use this in the run-up to the election. In any event they 
made their best efforts to use Enterprise Saskatchewan as the 
fear tactic in this election. And it failed, and failed miserably. 
Their best efforts to demonize the plan that’s going to give our 
province the tools to grow and to prosper was the very thing 
that they choose to demonize. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what will happen in the next election is 
people will remember the successes of Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. And they will look back at the NDP, and they 

will say, aren’t you the party that was opposed to Enterprise 
Saskatchewan? Aren’t you the party that was doing the 
fearmongering? 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this session you will see legislation 
introduced that will make Enterprise Saskatchewan the model 
for economic growth. The opposition leader talks about the 
mysterious board that’s going to be on Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, even in opposition that 
particular member cannot refrain from fearmongering. I would 
like to ask that member to just wait and see when the legislation 
is introduced and see the people that are going to be 
participating. I’m also going to be asking that member and the 
members of his caucus for their support on that initiative. 
 
During the time that the NDP were in opposition, they regularly 
called on the Saskatchewan Party to support a budget initiative, 
to support a particular plan or particular agenda. Well this time 
we’re going to be asking the NDP for their support, on their 
vote when we introduce the legislation on Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. And it will be an opportunity for them to support 
what is going to be an initiative that is very good and going to 
be very successful for this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to give them some other 
opportunities to support some very good Sask Party legislation. 
One of those pieces of legislation is going to be The Trade 
Union Act amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has very deep roots within the trade 
union movement. They hold themselves out as being 
democratic. As a matter of fact, democratic is one of the words 
in their name. And I’m confident that the New Democratic 
Party will want to support democracy by being willing to vote 
for and support secret ballots on union certification, informed 
communication, supervised balloting — things that are basic to 
democratic principles anywhere in the free world. And I would 
like to ask those members opposite for their support when we 
introduce those changes to The Trade Union Act. 
 
And if they’re not willing to support them, I would ask them to 
go out and explain that to their memberships and members of 
the trade union movement so that they know and they 
understand why that they as individuals do not have rights 
within The Trade Union Act. 
 
I’m also going to be asking them and inviting them to support 
the essential services legislation, a piece of legislation that 
exists virtually in every other province in Canada and virtually 
every other state in North America. It’s something that’s 
necessary for our province, and I’m confident that the NDP will 
want to ensure that we don’t have labour interruptions in our 
hospitals and elsewhere in our province that affect the safety 
and security of our citizens. 
 
I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP chose to raise this in 
question period and as a topic for debate in the House today. 
Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that those individuals over 
there, the men and ladies on that side of the House, the women 
and men that are there, would want to have stood up and said, 
those are good pieces of legislation; I want to talk to my 
members in my constituency about them and I want to vote in 
favour of those things because, Mr. Speaker, those are things 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

that are very good for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitments in the Throne Speech are guided 
by the following values: growth and opportunity, security and 
compassion, and keeping our word. Saskatchewan citizens have 
a right to feel safe in their homes and communities with their 
families. This means ensuring that there are programs in place 
to protect the public and to reduce criminal activity. The Throne 
Speech outlines some important measures our new government 
will undertake, but that’s just the beginning of the work to be 
done. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan supports the federal 
government’s efforts to implement tougher sentences for 
serious crimes, crimes that involve the use of a firearm, and for 
repeat dangerous offenders. Saskatchewan supports effective 
and immediate changes to strengthen the dangerous offender 
provisions of the Criminal Code. We are especially pleased to 
see the current 12-month limit for a recognizance order for 
high-risk offenders doubled to two years. We’ve also 
committed to toughening penalties for repeat drunk drivers. We 
support the provisions in new federal legislation to deter and 
detect those who would drive while impaired by alcohol and 
drugs. 
 
These changes to federal law will be complemented by my 
directive today to Crown prosecutors to seek the forfeiture of 
vehicles from those convicted of three or more drunk driving 
offences under the Criminal Code — a promise made and a 
promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is committed to providing the tools necessary to 
allow assets used to commit crimes and proceeds of crime to be 
seized and to be forfeited. Seizure of assets used to commit 
crimes and proceeds of crime disrupt organized crime and gang 
activity. We will further thwart gang activities by working with 
other provinces to develop a Western Canadian gang member 
database and by cracking down on drug and gang activity in 
provincial correctional centres. 
 
Our new government is committed to ensuring that fines are 
collected. And while we examine options to improve the 
province’s ability to collect fines, we will continue to ensure 
that there are serious consequences for people who do not pay 
fines. It is not merely a matter of revenue for the province, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a matter of having respect for the law and 
ensuring that there is appropriate public deterrence. 
 
[16:15] 
 
People who do not pay traffic fines, including Criminal Code 
driving offences, will not be able to get their licences renewed. 
People whose fines are sent to a collection agent will see their 
credit rating affected in a downward manner. People who do not 
respond to demand letters and collection agents could see their 
wages or bank accounts garnisheed, personal property seized, or 
face a hearing to determine if they should be incarcerated. The 
Ministry of Justice will be conducting a pilot project to 
withhold income tax refunds and GST [goods and services tax] 
rebates for individuals with outstanding fines early in the new 

year. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to improving 
services to victims of crime in our province. Increased revenues 
generated through an increase in the fine surcharge will benefit 
victims of crime and close existing gaps in services to the 
central part of the province and some areas in northern 
Saskatchewan. The victim impact surcharge is the primary 
source of funding for programs and services for victims of 
crime. The current rates have been in place since 2004. We 
wish to see an increase in those rates. Improvements in our 
ability to collect fines will also increase revenues to the Victims 
Fund. 
 
We want to ensure that restitution orders are enforced and 
victims receive payment of those monies. We are currently 
examining options to improve the province’s ability to monitor 
payments and to collect on those orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next four years we will provide free home 
security devices and home safety audits to low-income seniors 
and to seniors who have been victims of break-ins or home 
invasions. 
 
We are a government that will keep its promises and those 
promises include a promise to add 120 new police officers over 
the next four years and to develop a long-term policing strategy. 
No one approach, Mr. Speaker, can accomplish everything to 
improve community safety. Ministries throughout government 
will work hard with communities, families, individuals, and 
others to accomplish this goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not only be supporting the Speech from the 
Throne and the motion to support that, I will be supporting with 
pride and with confidence that we’ll help the citizens of this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise this day to express my appreciation for the anticipated 
co-operation, co-operative atmosphere among the members on 
both sides of this House. I say that it is in appreciation for the 
new and promising future that this Throne Speech is 
introducing. And I’m confident that as we move forward for the 
betterment of all the citizens of Saskatchewan that there will be 
an awakening in the opposition’s seats knowing full well that 
this province, with the wisdom and foresight of the new 
government, will conceive an understanding and an attitude of 
why didn’t we think of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my first attempt in the field of politics. And 
successfully being elected by the good people of Moose Jaw 
North to represent them and to sit in these, your chambers, and 
assist in the forward direction of this magnificent province, I’m 
overwhelmed by the foresight and the energy of these ladies 
and gentlemen who are now my colleagues as we embark on a 
new and exciting future. 
 
Although I’ve been in this building on numerous occasions in 
the past and I’ve had the pleasure of, on occasion, of being 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I cannot fully describe the 
feeling of anticipation and excitement when on November 9 I 
walked up those front steps and through the doors of this 
magnificent structure as an elected official. Mr. Speaker, I stood 
there in awesome wonder for a gentle moment to take in the 
ambience and feel the confidence of the people of my 
constituency and what they have entrusted in me. 
 
I’ve many thanks to the people of Moose Jaw North for 
bestowing on me this opportunity and for those who worked so 
diligently to make my dream come true, both for me and for 
many people who willingly gave their time and their talent and 
their energy to have Moose Jaw North represented on the 
government side of this new government. This is truly an 
accomplishment and an opportunity. 
 
There are hundreds of volunteers in my home constituency who 
could see the new direction and future of this province. I want 
to take a few minutes to thank many of those volunteers who 
helped in my campaign and my election just past. I want to 
thank those people who put their trust in me, Mr. Speaker; 
people who stated, I know you, Mr. Michelson. I voted NDP all 
my life, but I know you and I trust you. Or a gentleman that told 
me that, I’ve never voted in my 41 years but, Warren, I know 
you and I want you to represent me at the legislature. 
 
There’s a story of a mother who came to me and said, I couldn’t 
get my kids to sleep that night because they had to know, is Mr. 
Michelson winning? And those kind of stories really warm the 
heart. I want to express my thanks to Agnes, a very dear lady 
who wrote to me after the election and actually replayed some 
of those actions that went on the election night as we went to 
the victory hall. My wife, Debbie, and I walked into the hall. 
Our children were there. There was some cheering, 
handshaking. They introduced me and I said a few words. Mr. 
Speaker, I was there. I lived it. It was, it was that simple. But 
when Agnes wrote to me and replayed it, it meant so much 
more like I hadn’t even been there. This is what Agnes wrote: 
 

Dear Warren, I was so touched and blessed when you 
came into the hall holding hands and then your children 
met you and embraced you with so much love and a 
beautiful bouquet of flowers. They’re so proud of you. I 
wept when I saw the genuine love and respect you have 
for each other. You’re truly winners in more ways than 
one and it is a testimony and model for how families 
should be. 
 

There was something that I missed and I really appreciated and 
thanked Agnes for replaying that for me on that election night. I 
want to express my deepest appreciation for all these people 
and to my family. I want to acknowledge my mother-in-law, 
Mary Sinkewicz, who for the first time in her 96 years was so 
pleased and proud to be seated in your chambers, Mr. Speaker, 
during the swearing-in ceremonies last Tuesday. 
 
I want to thank my wife, Debbie, who supported me right from 
the idea of running for the nomination. Debbie was not only 
supportive but many times took the lead role during the 
campaign and attended functions in the community and called 
on hundreds of homes to speak of the promising potential of 
this province and to ask for the hope in a new and exciting 
future for all of us and for our children and our grandchildren. 

Mr. Speaker, hope and an exciting future — that’s what this 
Throne Speech is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Michelson: — I want to thank my son, Paul, who earned 
his journeyman’s ticket in electrical at the SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw. He now works for one of the 
largest electrical businesses in Saskatchewan and at this time 
there’s no need to mention Humboldt Electric, so I won’t. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, a journeyman electrician who stayed in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Paul was there to support me on the 
nomination night last January. He was there during the 
campaign and came down from Saskatoon on election night 
even if it took after 11 o’clock to understand who really won 
the election with such a slim vote. And he helped, was there 
when we launched a new career for me as their representative in 
Moose Jaw North. And by the way, also was there when we 
launched a new career for Mr. Hagel, who I now recognize for 
his 21 years of service in the legislature. 
 
I want to thank my two daughters, Krista and Kimberly, and 
their children, Taylor and Jacob, who came out when they could 
to support the efforts in any way they could during the 
campaign. 
 
As a matter of fact, I’m not the first in the family to go into the 
political arena. My daughter Krista was elected just about two 
years ago on the Holy Trinity school board. It is also interesting 
to note that her four-year-old son, Taylor, who saw grandpa and 
grandma going out door knocking night after night — Taylor 
was an inquiring little fellow — begged to go door knocking 
with grandpa and grandma. So on one holiday Monday we let 
him fulfill his dreams and let him come with us and deliver 
some of the brochures in the neighbourhood mailboxes. 
 
I want to mention my youngest son, Brent. Brent is now in his 
fourth year of education in the University of Regina, and he 
took every opportunity to assist me during the campaign right 
through the summer in the hottest days and on the weekends 
during his fall semester. It is interesting to note that when Brent 
couldn’t be home to help, his belief in the potential of this 
province was so focussed he assisted three other candidates 
right here in Regina, two of whom are seated in your House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Michelson: — I can tell you more about Brent. Brent is 
now in his early 20s. He, like many other young people in this 
province, has an open vision for this province. These new 
voting citizens are not short-sighted about events of 20 years 
ago. They’re not willing to accept the scare tactics and the 
fearmongering and the negative cries of deception that were 
displayed during the election campaign. 
 
These young citizens, Mr. Speaker, are looking for a bright new 
beginning. They’re looking for the future filled with hope and 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

prosperity, a place where they can call home because it is home, 
that they can grow and they can live and they can raise their 
families in secure neighbourhoods with opportunities to enjoy 
living at its fullest. 
 
We saw with optimism these young people through my 
constituency. I recall two young students attending SIAST 
Palliser Campus who were so excited about their very first time 
being able to vote. They’re excited about the future of this 
province. They’re excited with the pride of placing their X for a 
brand new Saskatchewan, and they couldn’t wait for their 
voices to be heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that same pride and assurance as I speak 
today to you, to this Throne Speech by a government that has 
been given the authority by the people to present a program of 
progress for this province. The details of this document, the 
Speech from the Throne, will lead this province into its rightful 
place as leaders for the rest of Canada — in fact, much of the 
world. For who can deny the resources that God has provided 
for us? And we now have come of age to understand these 
benefits for the people of our province. And what a glorious 
opportunity we have. 
 
Saskatchewan has just about half of the arable land, 47 per cent 
of the arable farm land in Canada. What an opportunity. What 
advantages we have over every other province and most nations 
for food production and processing. Saskatchewan has provided 
some of the world’s leading technology in farm operations. 
 
Our farm diversity over the past decades has shown the 
ingenuity of the Saskatchewan producers both in grain 
production and in agricultural manufacturing sector — 
manufacturers like Brandt and Honey Bee, Schulte, Degelman, 
Rite Way, Doepker, Ram, Leon, Morris Industries, and there 
are dozens more of those entrepreneurial individuals of which 
we can be so proud of. 
 
For much of our first century, farming had been the very 
backbone of the Saskatchewan economy. Even with its ups and 
downs, farming has and will have a vital impact on the 
prosperity of this province. 
 
It was the farming lifestyle that I was born into in a little town 
of Lipton, Saskatchewan. Both my grandparents migrated to 
that area more than 100 years ago and, like all immigrants, they 
became familiar with dozens of people like themselves who 
were new to this glorious land but came from different 
countries and different backgrounds. My grandmother, Rosa 
Fry, like many of them, came to this country but she came as a 
teenage girl, and not with her parents, but rather with her 
mother’s brother, her uncle. 
 
Grandmother Rosa worked and lived in the district all of her 
life. She grew up. She got married and raised a family of her 
own, but never had the opportunity to return to her native 
Switzerland or to ever see her parents again. 
 
They plowed the fields. They grew the crops and, through 
countless hardships of drought and disease and depression, 
carved a life for their children while developing communities 
with a co-operative spirit of support and assistance. 
 

[16:30] 
 
My father was one of those children. After returning from 
service in the World War II, he bought a piece of land where 
many said no one could survive. He and my mother made a 
home from an abandoned log house which once served as a 
halfway house for travel between Fort Qu’Appelle and 
Touchwood on the Touchwood Trail. Hence this is where the 
name Touchwood originates in the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
A post office had been set up near there called Headlands. 
Indeed the remnants of this old log shack that served as the post 
office still can be seen on my father’s farm, 15 miles north of 
Lipton, where my nephew still farms today. 
 
We were a family of eight children in a humble three-bedroom 
abode. We walked to school for the first four years of my 
education and then in the early ’60s were bused to town, which 
was an hour each way. The years were hard. I recall as a young 
child seeing the entire crop wiped out and destroyed by a 
five-minute hailstorm, yet the home always felt secure. 
 
The memories of those young years were strong as my parents 
were providing their children the opportunities that they did not 
have. And if they could see us now, each with our own talent 
and abilities to carve a place in society, providing service and 
support to others, as they lived and raised their own families 
providing with a work ethic and faith installed in them as we 
grew up. 
 
It’s unfortunate only four of my eight brothers and sisters 
remain in the province, as opportunities presented themselves in 
other parts of Canada. Opportunities here in Saskatchewan were 
never made possible even with the abundant wealth potential of 
this province. That, Mr. Speaker, is changing and will continue 
to change. 
 
As the people of this province can see from the direction of the 
Throne Speech, there will be overwhelming opportunities for 
Saskatchewan. There will be more opportunities than people to 
fill them. I can see there will be mass exoduses from other 
jurisdictions to return to Saskatchewan where the promise of a 
safe, secure family future is foreseen. I speak with confidence 
as we develop more of the potential of this great province. 
Although farming was considered the wealth of Saskatchewan, 
the overwhelming potential of prosperity is becoming more 
evident as we look into the future. 
 
Half of our province is covered with forestry. The prospect to 
future develop and to expand the forest industry I’m confident 
will be part of this province’s glorious future. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we won’t do it on the backs of the taxpayers but by 
entrepreneurs and visionaries who see the great potential in the 
forest industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Michelson: — As we look into the future, we see the 
further development of our natural resources. We see the 
expansion of the oil, the natural gas industry, and new exciting 
opportunities to develop a clean power source through research 
and development of uranium. The world’s largest potash 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

deposits will future enhance the well-being of Saskatchewan for 
the benefit of the people. 
 
Our universities and technical schools will increase the 
knowledge base to future develop and improve the 
opportunities in Saskatchewan with increased education 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tourist sector is poised for even greater 
attractions in our province with parks, lakes, recreation 
facilities, and historical sites and venues. 
 
If this is the province that’s home to medicare, you wouldn’t 
know it by the state of our health care — the long waiting lists, 
the shortage of doctors and nurses, and temporary rural hospital 
closures. In fact in my city, the Moose Jaw Union Hospital has 
medical facilities dating back to 1954. And the best, the best 
that the former government could do in a feeble attempt to 
make amends near the end of the election campaign was to 
hand-stuff black and white photocopied little memorandums — 
or you might say a memorandum of understanding — that they 
shoved in their election brochures that said that if they were 
re-elected they would start doing something about it. It was 
more of a disgrace than it was a promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But thanks to the citizens of Moose Jaw North that they did not 
buy into this deception. Now we can stand to move on and hire 
more nurses, creating more training seats, and more residency 
positions for our doctors. And we have a prescription drug 
program that makes sense. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government will 
clean up the mess. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also refreshing to know 
that business can now feel welcome in this province with less 
restrictions and fairer labour legislation. The barriers to 
investment were very evident in a meeting of some 20 business 
people last Friday that the hon. member for Thunder Creek and 
I had the pleasure of attending. It all begins with good business 
opportunities and good economic policies, Mr. Speaker. We 
cannot have good social programs without good economic 
policies. Creating a good business atmosphere leads to more 
business, more jobs, more families, stronger communities, 
greater benefits for all by working together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what Saskatchewan can be. Saskatchewan 
can and will be the envy of the rest of North America with our 
resources, our people strengths, and our vision for a secure 
future. Make no mistake — the Speech from the Throne is the 
beginning of a better Saskatchewan in securing the future. Mr. 
Speaker, I speak in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start off by 
congratulating you on your election as Speaker and on the 
election also of the Deputy Speaker. I know from the years that 

I’ve spent in this place that you’ve watched very carefully the 
very good Speakers who have preceded you and that we will be 
well served in the coming years as you provide a fair hand in 
the debate that we have in this place. 
 
I also want to congratulate all the members in this House, the 
three new members that we have on our side of the House, and 
the many new members that are on the other side of the House. 
There are many times that you will wonder why and how and 
what you’re doing in this place, but ultimately you have been 
given a great opportunity to be part of the leadership of this 
province. And that role of leadership happens whether you’re in 
the government side or you’re in the opposition side. 
 
We in this particular election are in a situation where a strong 
group of men and women have been given the task of being the 
opposition, and we will be working very carefully and 
diligently in that role. And you can expect that we will provide 
good ideas, good advice. We’ll give warnings to ministers that 
we’re . . . of various things that are happening. It may be public, 
or it may be in conversations. 
 
And I would have to say that I would thank the members 
opposite who did that in the 12 years that I served as a minister. 
There were many times that we were able to solve problems for 
individual Saskatchewan people because we worked together. 
So I know that there’s a big role that we have there that many 
people don’t always understand. 
 
But there’s also a very public role that we have to hold the 
government accountable, and we’re going to be doing that as 
well. And that will be set out in very many different ways, and I 
think that you will all have to be on your toes in the government 
side as we work together over here. And in the same way, we’re 
looking forward with a bit of anticipation, a bit of fear in some 
ways, of what kinds of things that you will set forth in your 
agenda. 
 
I’m speaking for the motion that provides an amendment to this 
budget speech and against the budget speech because I don’t 
think it quite . . . The budget speech itself doesn’t capture where 
we are at this point. But I’ll get to that in a second. 
 
I want to say thank you to all of the constituents of Regina 
Lakeview for the trust that they’ve placed in me again to serve 
them. I also want to thank the members of my family, my wife 
and my daughters, my parents, my friends who have stuck with 
me in this interesting and sometimes difficult task. I also want 
to say a special thank you to the staff who worked with me for 
all the years in my offices, in the minister’s office and in the 
constituency office. I was very well served by very many 
capable people, and I want to make a special point of thanking 
them. 
 
Another group of people who I want to thank for the good work 
they’ve done so far — and I look forward to seeing the good 
work that they will bring in the coming years — is the civil 
service of Saskatchewan. The people of this province are very 
well served by a professional civil service, and I strongly urge 
the members opposite to be extremely careful in how you end 
up making the kinds of changes that I know you will make as 
you move forward. We have many, many years of experience 
that can be lost if things are not done correctly. 



December 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

So I strongly urge all of the ministers, the Premier, and 
everybody else to think once, twice, and then again about some 
of the kinds of things that you will do because I know from the 
many years of experience that I’ve had, that the skills, the 
knowledge, the background that the civil servants have 
provided to the Blakeney government, the Devine government, 
the Romanow government, the Calvert government, and now 
the Wall government — and I understand your comment about 
using that name — but in that context I think those . . . many of 
the same people have provided the advice all through those 
years. And I urge you to be very careful in what you do. And I 
thank all of those people who worked closely with me and with 
all of my colleagues when we were in government. 
 
Unfortunately this budget speech is a sign to me, and it has a bit 
of a sense of uneasiness about it. And I say this because people 
are apprehensive about change at the best of times, but 
unfortunately there are some things that aren’t in here which 
should be in here. There’s some things which have been 
announced which have come out of the blue, and my colleagues 
have done a good job of talking about those. But in the province 
and talking to people from other parts, everybody is quite 
uneasy because they don’t know what this government is going 
to produce, what it’s going to do. 
 
Now last week I was thinking, okay we’ll come forward to this 
week, and we’ll see a confident presentation of what the new 
government’s going to do. Unfortunately my assessment is that 
that confidence isn’t there and that there’s something not quite 
certain about what’s happening. 
 
Now as you all know, I love Saskatchewan poetry and I will use 
it, read it at any time that I can. And I found a poem by my 
favourite Saskatchewan poet, Glen Sorestad — and I have to 
say that — who was our first poet laureate. It’s called “When 
the World Disappears,” and we’ll all recognize this one because 
it fits with what we’re dealing with on a relatively regular basis 
right now. 
 

When the World Disappears 
 
Driving through a flat-out prairie 
blizzard is a classic struggle between 
terror and faith. Between Paynton and 
the Battlefords the world disappears — 
horizon, buildings, trees, traffic, 
the road itself, all gone. Snow, 
blasted by a fierce south-easter, 
obliterates equally land and sky. 
 
On this two-way stretch of highway 
we drive into the snow cloud. 
As vehicles behind and in front 
vanish from my sight, so too have I 
from them, my hands iron vises 
clinging to the steering wheel, 
clinging to frail threads of reason, 
clinging to little more than blind hope 
as the white-out erodes confidence 
and panic probes below 
the thin skin of logic. 
 
We hurtle through nothingness, 

my silent prayer willing that whatever 
lies on the other side of this void, 
whatever other drivers are steering 
the margins of their own misery, 
their paths do not intersect mine. 
We are, all of us, blind pilgrims 
groping for some distant shrine 
lost from our view, alive only 
in the minds that will them. 

 
[16:45] 
 
Now this poem, we all in this room and, I think, in this province 
have lived through a situation like this — whether we’re a 
passenger or a driver — in some of our winter storms. We all 
have the goal of coming through this kind of a storm and 
surviving and getting out from the other side. 
 
But my sense today and even more so after I heard that Throne 
Speech on Monday is that we’re sitting there with, as the quote 
goes here: 
 

. . . my hands iron vises 
clinging to the steering wheel, 
clinging to frail threads of reason, 
clinging to little more than blind hope . . . 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is not a good feeling. And my concern, 
my prayer for what happens in our province is that there will be 
some better sense of where we’re going than what we’ve got so 
far. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have many, many things that we’ve done 
very well, and some of them have been done over a number of 
decades. We’re building on the kind of work that has been done 
before us. And I think that one of the signs of a recognition and 
of a maturity of a government is that it will step forward and 
say, we’re confident in where we’re going and what we’re 
going to do. I don’t feel that yet. I don’t feel it in this Throne 
Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the responses that come to questions, 
whether they’re answered here or out in the press or at some 
other event that go back and try to rewrite history or blame 
people before them, that’s not the sign of a confident 
government. That’s a sign of things that people don’t have a 
clear idea of where they’re going or what they’re going to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you listened to the kinds of comments 
that come forward over the last couple of days, the concern 
rises. And so, Mr. Speaker, I fervently believe that there is some 
capacity to listen carefully to the good advice that you will get 
from the civil servants and others who are part of this province. 
And it’s important that you do that. But frankly our province 
needs a confidence, a confident government, a confident leader 
that is not going to mess up the things that have happened to 
this point. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all watching very carefully the various 
strong parts of our economy. You can read the business pages 
locally in Toronto, New York, London. And this is a rare time 
that we as Saskatchewan people have, where the price of wheat 
is coming up and holding, other agriculture products are going 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2007 

up. The policies around the use of corn in the United States for 
ethanol have made a huge change in the value of fertilizer of all 
kinds, but especially potash, and that’s made a very major 
difference in the value of that particular asset that we have. 
 
We all know about what’s happened with oil and natural gas. 
We, I think, are all very proud of our Saskatchewan engineers 
and oil people who have used their ingenuity to figure out how 
to get this hard-to-obtain oil that’s in southeastern 
Saskatchewan, the hard-to-obtain oil that’s up in northwestern 
Saskatchewan, the oil sands, all the heavy oil on the west side 
of the province. 
 
The educations that have been provided to our people through 
our universities and through other Canadian and worldwide 
universities — all of that skill is coming to bear which is 
providing a really good solid economic base for what’s 
happening in this province. 
 
But when so many things are happening in a positive way in a 
situation where our economy has done well at various points, 
but we’ve always ended up with one or two parts that aren’t 
pulling their full weight. And so, Mr. Speaker, my wish for the 
government, my wish for all of us here in Saskatchewan is that 
we will not make hasty decisions that are based on some of the 
ideological positions that we see in this Throne Speech and in 
some of the other actions, but that we actually listen to the 
practical advice of people, that we actually spend some time 
consulting. 
 
I’m quite surprised that the Premier and the Deputy Premier 
have referred to the election as the consultation on every topic 
that comes up. I agree that the election is a time when there is a 
measuring or a decision about who is going to provide the 
leadership. But if that leadership does not take its role in the 
way it should, which is to make sure that the people of the 
province are with them as they move forward, then we’re in 
trouble. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’m uneasy. Many of the 
people I’m talking to are uneasy about this Throne Speech. 
They’re uneasy about the leadership that’s been shown so far. 
And my hope for all of us is that some of this shakiness will 
disappear because it’s not good for me or my family or my 
children or all of us in this province or, for that matter, in 
Western Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re driving through this blizzard with 
our hands gripped with some kind of blind hope and that’s all 
we’ve got, then we need to understand that slogans or other 
things like that are not the point. The point is to work with the 
whole community — work with and understand and listen to 
those people who actually know of the various information 
that’s available — and then proceed with consultation, with 
support. And if we can do that, we can have some good 
government in Saskatchewan over the next few years. 
 
We’re going to have some other opportunities for the New 
Democrats to be leaders in this province, and we will continue 
to work in this place, in this building, as the leaders for the 
province. 
 
But if the public gets the impression that decisions are made 

without consulting them, without talking to them, without 
listening to what they say, without listening to the many, many 
professionals who are part of the civil service of Saskatchewan, 
then I think we’re all in for a sad time. 
 
Now personally, I wish all of the members of the government 
the best as they move forward. We will do our role in keeping 
track of what you’re doing, advising you of things that we think 
need to be fixed, and making very public those things where 
you don’t seem to be listening to the kinds of consultations that 
we have and that we hear. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re in for some quite interesting 
times. I’m sad to be able just to stand here and say I’m quite 
uneasy, but I think I do reflect a very large part of the 
population of this province. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................39 
MOTIONS 
 Revision to the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................39 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................40 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................40 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Battlefords Blend Celebrates Its 25th Anniversary 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 Tribute to First Nations Leader 
  Harrison.......................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 North Park Wilson School 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 New Processing Facility in Arborfield 
  Bradshaw .....................................................................................................................................................................................41 
 Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................42 
 Investment in Canola Crushing Plant Benefits Saskatchewan Economy 
  Ottenbreit ....................................................................................................................................................................................42 
 First Persephone Performance in New Theatre Building 
  Forbes ..........................................................................................................................................................................................42 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Essential Services Legislation 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Wotherspoon ...............................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Norris ...........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Broten ..........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................46 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Tougher Treatment of Repeat Drunk Drivers 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................47 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................48 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Schriemer ....................................................................................................................................................................................48 
  Wilson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................50 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................52 
  Tell ...............................................................................................................................................................................................54 
  Duncan .........................................................................................................................................................................................55 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................58 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................61 
  Michelson.....................................................................................................................................................................................63 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................66 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


