


















































Hansard: April 11, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1231 
 April 11, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan and in particular the residents 
around the Broadview area who feel quite strongly that a 
dialysis unit would be appropriate placed in Broadview Union 
Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
good folks of Broadview, Cowessess, Kahkewistahaw, 
Saskatoon, and Whitewood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again on behalf of my constituents who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Foam Lake, 
Yorkton, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition asking that the government maintain full 
service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, they 
are concerned that, without an office, submission of electrical 
and gas permits will be more difficult and cause delays in 
customer hookups. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Rosetown. I am pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
while on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
a petition from citizens concerned with the safety when driving 
on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, 
Annaheim, Meacham, Watson, and Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from the citizens of Biggar who are concerned 
about possible health care cut in services in Biggar and district. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district and 
Rosetown. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present yet another petition on behalf of 600 
children under six years of age and their parents in the 
Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek-Willowgrove 
neighbourhood of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek and Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. 

 
The signatures come today from northeast Saskatoon, from 
Brunst Crescent, Kucey Cove, and Budz Terrace. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens of the South that are very 
concerned that if the lab services of the Lafleche and District 
Health Centre are withdrawn, it would cause undue hardship to 
residents, particularly seniors. And I read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Limerick, 
Moose Jaw, Lafleche, Hazenmore, Glenbain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of southwest Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of rural school closures. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Limerick and 
Wood Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring forward a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
deeply concerned about the presence of sexual predators that 
present a threat to our communities. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
a known sex offender in their communities as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status and to ensure the economic 
viability in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Strasbourg, Bulyea, and Silton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I rise in the House today to present a petition 
signed by citizens from my constituency of Saskatoon 
Southeast regarding the widening of Highway No. 5. The prayer 
says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of the students, parents, and friends of 
Georges Vanier School in Saskatoon. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take necessary steps to ensure 
that the Saskatoon Catholic School Division be provided 
with sufficient funds to enable the construction of the 
proposed facility expansion of Georges Vanier School for 
2007-08 to ensure that adequate and appropriate facilities 
exist for the fulfillment of the school’s mandate and the 
appropriate education of the students. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I present this on behalf of people from the Saskatoon 
Eastview constituency and as far afield as St-Denis. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning [and these are all related to 
the Learning department’s leased facilities in Regina]: 
what is the name of the building manager at the 
department’s existing facilities at 1945 Hamilton Street? 
What is the annual cost to lease the department’s existing 
facilities at 1945 Hamilton? What is the total cost of the 
move into the department’s new facilities at 2045 Broad 
Street? What is the total cost to renovate the department’s 
new facilities? What is the name of the contractor the 
department has hired to renovate the new facilities? What 
is the name of the building manager at the department’s 
new facilities? And what is the annual cost of the lease to 
the department for these new facilities? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: how much money did the 
government spend on advertising and communications in 
the fiscal year 2006-2007? 
 
Also to the Minister of Learning: how much money was 
spent on each advertising campaign the department 
undertook in the fiscal year 2006-2007, and which agency 
received the contract? 
 

Also how many legal actions were taken against the 
department in the fiscal year 2006-2007? What cost was 
attached to the settlements? Also, how many legal actions 
are pending against the Learning department? 
 
And what was the total amount of money spent on the 
ministerial travel in the fiscal year 2006-2007? What was 
the total amount of money spent on the staff travelling 
with the minister during the fiscal year 2006-2007? How 
many staff were employed by the minister’s office during 
the fiscal year 2006-2007? 

 
Also I have similar questions to the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety. Also to the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment. And also I want to repeat to the Minister of 
Saskatchewan Property Management, to the Minister of ITO 
[Information Technology Office], similar questions to the 
minister of youth and recreation, also to the Minister of Labour, 
similar questions also to the Minister of First Nations and Métis 
Relations. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
tickets has the corporation purchased for the upcoming Al 
Gore speech, and how many tickets does it plan to 
purchase? 

 
And I have the same question for the Minister Responsible for 
SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], 
and the Crown Investments Corporation. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce two 
ladies sitting in your gallery: Angela Currie from Moose Jaw 
and Raynelle Wilson from Regina. 
 
It should be noted that Raynelle is our candidate in Regina 
Lakeview and we’re very pleased to see her here. And Angela, 
being from Moose Jaw Wakamow, she’s associated with the 
Moose Jaw Wakamow Saskatchewan Party constituency 
association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these ladies have indicated to me that they’ve been 
watching the proceedings and are very, very disgusted that 
there’s no answers coming from the other side of the House. So 
they wanted to be here in person today to see if they could 
actually hear what the members opposite were saying so they 
could witness it first-hand. So I would ask all members to 
welcome these ladies to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly a group seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They 
are members of Piapot First Nation. Most of them live in the 
city of Regina, and they are taking adult basic education at the 
Treaty Four Education Centre. 
 
Their teacher, Bev Kulach, is here and the teacher’s assistant, 
Linda Opoonechaw, is also here. It’s a unique partnership 
between Piapot First Nation and Southeast Regional College. I 
look very much forward to meeting with them later on, Mr. 
Speaker, getting their impressions of question period, and 
having a good talk with them about the issues of the day. 
 
But if all members could join me in welcoming the students 
from Piapot First Nation and the staff from Southeast Regional 
College to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce three very special people who are seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery front row. School is out in Saskatoon so 
revisiting this legislature for the third time is Sam Wilkinson, 
who is accompanied here by his baba, Olesia Kowalsky, my 
wife, from Prince Albert. And Sam is sort of watching this 
Assembly very, very critically and curiously and seeing what 
exactly it is that we as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] do here, and he’s working that out. 
 
With him is another baba, Roseanne Kowalsky, who is here in 
Regina to visit her first grandchild, Mila Victoria Evanchuk 
who is the daughter of Anna Marie Kowalsky who used to work 
in this building, and is also the daughter of Noah Evanchuk. 
 
Members, would you please welcome Sam Wilkinson, Olesia 
Kowalsky, and Roseanne Kowalsky to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Gratitude to Canadian Armed Forces 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge 
the dedication and sacrifice of the men and women of Canada’s 
Armed Forces. I particularly want to pay respect to the six 
Canadian soldiers who were killed and the two who were 
wounded in the bomb blast in Afghanistan this past Sunday and, 
Mr. Speaker, to pass our condolences on to their families. As it 
did 90 years ago, Easter Sunday has once again proven to be a 
day of sorrow for Canadians and Canadian soldiers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are sentiments usually reserved for 
November and Remembrance Day. But I think the terrible 
coincidence that saw Canada’s worst day of casualties in 

Afghanistan occur at almost precisely the same time as the 
commemoration of the 90th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge, one of the most significant battles in Canada’s history, 
serves as an awful reminder that the life we have here in Canada 
comes at a price. And that we owe a deep debt of gratitude to 
our fellow Canadians, both past and present, who put 
themselves in harm’s way so that we can enjoy the rights and 
freedoms and the quality of life that we do today. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

80th Anniversary of Girl Guide Cookies 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
Mrs. Christina Riepsamen of Regina decided to bake some 
cookies 80 years ago to help her Girl Guide company raise 
some money so her Guides could go to camp at Last Mountain 
Lake, I’m sure she had no idea what an institution the cookies 
would become. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, 2007 is the 80th 
anniversary of the beloved Girl Guide cookie that has become a 
cultural icon in itself. 
 
In 1927 the cookies were baked and packaged by the dozen in 
brown paper bags out of a house on the 1300 block of Robinson 
Street to be sold to family, friends, and neighbours. At that time 
they were sold for 10 cents per dozen. What started as a small 
fundraising effort in 1927 has exploded into a national 
campaign that now sees 7 million dozen cookies sold every 
year. 
 
This morning we had several Guides, Brownies, Sparks, and 
their leaders attend our caucus meeting to distribute cookies. In 
a beautiful gesture to the past, the young girls handed out the 
cookies in paper bags as they had been done some 80 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all those involved with the 
Girl Guides that visited us this morning to educate us on the 
history of the Girl Guide cookie and also for giving us a sample. 
I would also like to invite members of this Assembly to 
congratulate them on 80 years of successful fundraising that 
also instils these young girls with a variety of skills, including 
leadership and community involvement. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Over the weekend, I and other members of the Legislative 
Assembly had the honour of attending one of the largest and 
longest-running powwows in the country — the 29th Annual 
First Nations University of Canada Powwow. 
 
People of all ages come together to compete in a variety of 
performance categories. In addition to dancing there was also a 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

trade show that featured Aboriginal arts and crafts and a 
selection of very tasty traditional food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, powwows are important social, spiritual, and 
cultural gatherings that promote cross-cultural awareness and 
understanding. This weekend, thousands of dancers, singers, 
drummers, and spectators from across North America gathered 
to celebrate traditional First Nations music, dress, song, and 
dance. 
 
It was a celebration of life that provided participants with an 
opportunity to renew old friendships and begin new ones, and 
gave students a chance to visit with family and friends and to 
say thank you for supporting them during their educational 
journey. Mr. Speaker, First Nations University of Canada 
provides Aboriginal students with an atmosphere that affirms 
culture and pride and plays an integral role in the lifelong 
process of learning. 
 
The theme of this year’s powwow was, Honouring Our 
Students Past and Present. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to 
join me in acknowledging the powwow committee for hosting 
an excellent event. And to First Nations University of Canada 
and to President Charles Pratt and everybody that organized it 
and sponsored it, congratulations. Congratulations also to the 
performers. And I wish everyone at the First Nations University 
good luck in their academic endeavours and future careers. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend I had the privilege and the pleasure to attend and 
participate in the 29th annual First Nations University Powwow 
that was held at the Brandt Centre in Regina on Saturday and 
Sunday. This event brings together celebrants, drummers, and 
dancers from across Canada and the US [United States]. In fact 
the vehicle ahead of me in the line on Saturday morning was 
from New Mexico. 
 
There were 20 drum groups and about 600 or more dancers in 
all categories: men, women, children of all ages from preschool 
to elders. The powwow was well attended by thousands of First 
Nations and non-First Nations spectators. The dancers’ 
costumes for both male and female dancers were elaborate and 
emblematic of the First Nations culture and colour. I was played 
out just watching some of the more enthusiastic dancers. 
 
In all four of the grand entrances, the veterans were paid a 
special honour on the 90th anniversary of Vimy Ridge. First 
Nations are rightfully very proud of the service to Canada of 
their veterans. Mr. Anderson, a veteran of the Second World 
War, marched in all four of the grand entrances. Well done, Mr. 
Anderson. 
 
The First Nations University Powwow is an excellent 
opportunity to showcase First Nations people and culture. It is 
an opportunity for us all to enjoy the celebration and to gain a 
better understanding of our friends and neighbours from the 
First Nations communities. Congratulations to the First Nations 

University on an excellent powwow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Samuel McLeod Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Last week the Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce 
hosted the annual Samuel McLeod Prince Albert Business 
Awards. These awards have been recognizing business 
excellence in our city since 1990. And I want to take the 
opportunity today to acknowledge this year’s committee and to 
recognize this year’s winners. 
 
For new product or service is Solid Innovation. For new 
venture, Travel Master Prince Albert. The Industry Award went 
to Transair. The Marketing Award went to Prince Albert 
Alarms Systems Ltd. 
 
In the investment category, that was won by Broda Group of 
Companies. And for community involvement, Northern Lights 
Casino. Mr. Speaker, for job creation, Broda Group of 
Companies again. And for tourism, the Prince Albert Exhibition 
Association. Mr. Speaker, the Business of the Year is Broda 
Group of Companies. 
 
And as we have every year, the Legacy Award — which was 
established to honour individuals or businesses that have made 
a significant, long-term commitment to Prince Albert — the 
winner is my neighbour, Herschel Davidner of Davidner’s 
Clothing and Western Wear. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in congratulating the finalists 
and the winners in the Samuel McLeod Prince Albert Business 
Awards. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Questions Regarding Carriere Settlement 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our office received an email from a Mr. Richard Zimmer in 
Saskatoon who is extremely frustrated with the way the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government has handled the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal. Mr. Zimmer had this to say about the NDP 
government paying 275,000 taxpayers’ dollars to a man fired 
for harassment and convicted of assault, and I would like to 
quote: 
 

. . . in the last 5-6 weeks we just continue to hear and see 
how much more that Mr. Carriere has been rewarded from 
the coffers of the Saskatchewan Taxpayers. 
 
. . . as Mr. Nilson stated on CTV news that with this 
settlement we now consider this case closed. 
 
I say BS Mr. Nilson we want this case in . . . 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. I would remind 
the members that they are not to use quotations or any other 
indirect means to bring unparliamentary language to this 
Assembly. And I would ask the member to withdraw the 
remark, which is unparliamentary, before he proceeds. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’ll withdraw that, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
requote: 
 

. . . as Mr. Nilson stated on CTV news that with this 
settlement we now consider this case closed. 
 
[He doesn’t agree with Mr. Nilson.] . . . we want this case 
in court . . . 
 
We also want Premier Calvert to tell the truth on when he 
was first told of the assaults and why he did nothing about 
it? 
 
Was Mr. Carriere a friend to all NDP cabinet and that’s 
why nothing was done earlier? 
 
We need to know as Taxpayers how badly we have been 
shafted again. 
 
There should be some cabinet members resigning this time 
around, enough is enough. 

 
Mr. Speaker, taxpayers of this province are demanding answers 
from this NDP government on the Carriere scandal. It’s time to 
let an all-party committee investigate and get to the bottom of 
this so that it never happens again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Judge Gerald Morin Receives Willy Hodgson Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, every year the Law Society 
of Saskatchewan awards the Willy Hodgson Award to an 
individual for their outstanding contributions to the province 
and to the legal profession. This year the Willy Hodgson Award 
was presented to His Honour, Judge Gerald M. Morin of the 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, for his work in the Cree court 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cree court system enables Cree speakers to 
communicate in their own language. It was established to 
ensure testimony, instructions, and rulings are not lost in 
translation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 Judge Morin was appointed to the 
Queen’s Counsel — the first Aboriginal lawyer in 
Saskatchewan to receive this designation. In 2001 he was 
appointed as a Provincial Court judge. Judge Morin is 
past-president of the Prince Albert Indian and Métis Friendship 
Centre and past member of the Prince Albert Raiders board of 
directors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Judge Morin for his work in our province and as the recipient of 

this award. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Al Gore’s Presentation on Climate Change 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week the Premier announced former US president, 
Al Gore, had accepted an invitation to speak in Regina. 
According to the Premier this event is designed to help the 
people of Saskatchewan and I quote, “. . . understand the 
significance of climate change.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event will be held at eleven o’clock on a 
weekday morning. Many working people will not be able to 
attend and will have to rely on media coverage. However that 
will be difficult since cameras and recording devices are banned 
from Al Gore’s speech. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: if the 
purpose of this event is to inform the public and encourage an 
open public debate, why did this NDP government agree to this 
media ban? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the privilege of having 
vice-president Al Gore in our province and in its capital city, 
Mr. Speaker, is a rare privilege. Mr. Gore is in demand across 
the globe. It is a rare privilege to have him in our community. 
We have chosen, in consultation with his organization, a very 
large venue, a venue that will accommodate 5, 5,000 people, a 
little more, Mr. Speaker. The vice-president, Gore is 
traditionally speaking to audiences of much fewer. We are 
maximizing the opportunity, and his very presence in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, raises the important issue of the climate 
crisis change that is confronting us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, these are very 
important questions that the people of the province have. Public 
dollars are being used to sponsor this event. SaskTel is paying 
$208,000, money that may or may not be recovered through 
ticket sales. The Premier says this event is to spark public 
interest and prompt an informed debate on climate change in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the Premier said he was aware of 
these media restrictions right from the very beginning. With 
taxpayers footing the bill, why on earth did the Premier agree to 
these kind of restrictions — restrictions that will limit who will 
hear the former vice president’s views? 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on the involvement of 
SaskTel as a sponsor for this event, we’re very, very pleased 
and very proud that SaskTel is doing this. SaskTel as you know, 
Mr. Speaker, has been a proud sponsor of a number of 
important public events including, I believe, the visit of the 
former President Bill Clinton to the province. They have 
sponsored a variety, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is SaskTel’s investment here is 
already almost returned, Mr. Speaker, in the ticket sales. I’m 
told that about three-quarters of the tickets have already sold, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s twice as many tickets as they sold in 
Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the point, Mr. Speaker, the point, Mr. Speaker — and I 
know the Sask Party opposite will do most anything not to be 
talking about issues like climate change — Mr. Speaker, the 
point is the presence of this international spokesperson in our 
province is good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
bodes well for what we will do on a provincial basis to tackle 
global warming in our time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly this is a 
photo op for the Premier because only 5,000 people are going to 
hear that message, Mr. Speaker. The media will not be 
conveying that message to the million people that exist in this 
province. 
 
Clearly the Premier is trying to advance his own short-term 
political agenda by asking a celebrity to help put a new face on 
this tired, old NDP government with a horrible record in the 
area of greenhouse gas emissions. Clearly this Premier is not 
the slightest bit interested in advancing the debate over climate 
change. And if he was, the Premier would lift the restrictions 
that are now in place. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit 
today to lifting the restrictions on media coverage of the Al 
Gore speech so that everyone in Saskatchewan will have a 
chance to hear at least some of this important debate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how 
this works. On one minute the opposition is criticizing me 
because we’re not allowing the media in to the event. The next 
minute they’re criticizing me for using this as a photo op. Well 
a photo op with who, Mr. Speaker? Lookit, it’s one way or the 
other. Mr. Speaker, we’ve extended an invitation, and an 
invitation has been extended to all of the members of the 
opposition. In fact all members of the legislature . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve offered an invitation 
to all members of the opposition, all members of the legislature, 
to purchase a ticket to be at this event, Mr. Speaker. It is 
important that we who are public policy-makers, the decision 
makers in this province, I think experience, experience the 
presentation by the former vice-president of the United States, 
Al Gore. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I asked this morning. 
We haven’t had one response from the opposition yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 

Long-term Care Beds in Lloydminster 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently reported 
in my local paper, there was a protest. Imagine in our province 
where a group of seniors are standing out in the cold holding 
signs saying, where are we going to die? Mr. Speaker, this 
unfortunate event happened in Lloydminster last week because 
there is just not enough long-term care spaces. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is simple and direct and to the Premier: what answer 
does he have for these seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Prairie North Health Region, which is responsible for the 
administration of long-term care beds in the Lloydminster area 
on the Saskatchewan side, is currently discussing the issue with 
the health region on the Alberta side, Mr. Speaker. The majority 
of the people of Lloydminster reside on the Alberta side. 
Alberta government has a shared responsibility, Mr. Speaker, 
with regards to long-term care. And Prairie North, Mr. Speaker, 
is seriously engaged with the Alberta government on dealing 
with this issue which we recognize is very important to the 
seniors of the Lloydminster area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, it has been 16 years to get 
some kind of vision and plan in place for the seniors of all parts 
of our province. And here a protest happened in Lloydminster, 
and again these seniors, they want to know where they’re going 
to end their days. These people are the ones that actually built 
this province, and now they must hold signs asking where they 
must go to die. Mr. Speaker, again I’m asking the Premier: what 
does he have to say to these seniors? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Every day Saskatchewan Health does things to enhance the 
lives of Saskatchewan families. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker 
— that the member opposite chose to vote against — had the 
single largest contribution toward seniors in Saskatchewan 
Health, Mr. Speaker, in the history, since the development of 
the prescription drug plan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan seniors 
in Lloydminster are eligible for the new and changed 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

prescription drug program effective July 1. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of long-term care, we are 
continuing discussions that have been ongoing for some time 
now, Mr. Speaker, with the province of Alberta to ensure that 
we can address the long-term care needs of the people of the 
Lloydminster area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Plans for Recruitment and Retention of Health 
Care Professionals 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the 
Minister of Health misunderstood the question. It was about 
people in long-term beds, Mr. Speaker. But as usual, this NDP 
government never fixes a problem. They let it continue and drag 
on ignored. 
 
This morning media are reporting that in the South East 
Cornerstone area the province lacks many health care 
professionals. More than 50 positions for physicians, nurses, 
and technicians remain empty. This NDP government must 
answer to the constituents of Cannington who fear they will not 
receive proper health care services. 
 
Other than the minister’s empty rhetoric, how soon will there be 
nurses and other professionals be in place to provide services to 
Sun Country, and particularly nurses to reopen the acute care in 
Arcola and the 10 closed long-term care beds in Carlyle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Although the member opposite wants to portray this issue as 
very specific to a particular part of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
this government acknowledges, acknowledges the competitive 
nature across Canada of recruiting and retaining health care 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated a 
very clear plan on recruitment, retention, and education of 
health care professionals. Mr. Speaker, we’ve answered this 
question a number of times inside and outside this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we have been dealing with 
since the development of the workforce action plan that was 
released in 2005. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that work. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we ask the members opposite to support the 
efforts that are being made by this government to ensure that 
Saskatchewan citizens currently in school or living outside 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is not a 
new problem but an old problem that this NDP government has 
failed to address in well over a decade — the worse job 
retention rate in health care, of the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can the minister stop his rhetoric and provide specific steps that 
this minister has taken to ensure that my constituents do not 
suffer from the lack of health care professionals? Will this 
minister commit today to provide concrete recruitment 
measures and a timeframe to solve this urgent problem and 
provide much needed health care to the seniors, to the young 
families, and the citizens of southeast Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First 
of all, the member opposite would best support his constituents 
in this regard by having shown some leadership and having 
voted for the budget that was just presented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, he could have supported last year’s budget — which 
also he chose not to do — which instituted a recruitment 
agency, Mr. Speaker, that is assisting all of the regional health 
authorities. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, he can turn to his seatmate and talk 
about the alternative that the members opposite should have in 
place . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
plan of the government is very visible. It’s very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. The plan of the opposition is not only invisible, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s about as clear as bull meat in a hamburger 
patty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Compensation for Former Deputy Minister 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, when former Environment 
Deputy Minister Terry Scott resigned . . . Terry Scott was one 
of many who ignored harassment complaints and ended up 
being the scapegoat for this NDP government. When he 
resigned, the women who were harassed by Murdoch Carriere 
were asked to attend a meeting with the associate deputy 
minister. The ADM [associate deputy minister] informed the 
victims of the resignation and that, in addition to a generous 
pension, Terry Scott would have a soft landing because the 
NDP government was guaranteeing his deputy-minister-level 
salary regardless of what job he landed in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for how long did the NDP government guarantee 
Terry Scott’s deputy-minister-level salary? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice. 
 
The Speaker: — Notice has been taken. The Chair recognizes, 
for supplementary, the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear that Terry Scott took 
the fall for the NDP’s mishandling of the Murdoch Carriere 
affair. Someone had to go, and it wasn’t going to be one of 
Murdoch’s buddies in cabinet. I doubt it’s government policy to 
ensure a nice, big salary regardless of what job someone 
decides to take after they’ve resigned. Mr. Speaker, how much 
did Terry Scott’s top-up in salary cost taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the member of the 
opposition continue to insinuate that Murdoch Carriere was the 
buddy of people in this cabinet. I want to say to the public — 
because I think it’s important to know that it is a continuation of 
misinformation that is coming from members of the opposition 
— there isn’t one person on this side of the House that was a 
buddy of Murdoch Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, one of the friends the NDP did 
take care of was Terry Scott. Murdoch Carriere, the man who 
should have been fired with cause in the first place, gets 
$275,000 plus an additional three-year top-up in his pension. 
Terry Scott, the deputy minister, who is a scapegoat for the 
NDP government, took the fall for the whole Murdoch Carriere 
scandal and received a $200,000 pension plus guaranteed 
deputy-minister-level salary. Mr. Speaker, how many other 
people have been paid big sums of money so the sordid details 
of the Murdoch Carriere scandal don’t become public? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve indicated I’ll take notice on the 
question regarding Mr. Scott. But I will say this, that Mr. Scott 
was the person that had, in legislation, the duty to hire and fire 
people in his department as the deputy minister for the 
Environment. Mr. Scott disciplined Mr. Carriere by demoting 
him three levels, red circling him, suspending him without pay 
for three months, and moving him to Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s this thing called double jeopardy. When it 
became known by the members of the government bench, we 
made the decision that his actions were need for dismissal, Mr. 
Speaker. He was punished twice for the same event. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s called double jeopardy, and that is why Mr. 
Carriere had an action against the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, once again the Premier may well have been caught 
saying something that isn’t quite true about the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal. This morning he told reporters that he is being 
misquoted in a brochure from Sask Party MLAs. He says he 
was talking about firing Murdoch Carriere. But he says he was 
actually talking about paying off Murdoch Carriere when he 
said he would do it all over again. 
 
But here’s the whole quote. Here’s the whole quote, Mr. 
Speaker, quote, “Mr. Speaker, they tell us we should fight . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order please. The 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the quote of the 
Premier in this Assembly on this issue: 
 

Mr. Speaker, they tell us we should fight the case. The 
best legal advice said this is going to cost the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan, and we are not . . . [going] to put those 
complainants through the public process again. 
 
Do we like this, Mr. Speaker? You bet we don’t like it. 
Would I do it again? You bet I would. 

 
The Premier was clearly talking about his decision to settle out 
of court and pay Murdoch Carriere. Why is the Premier again 
changing his story, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it once; I’ll say it 
again. When it was brought to my attention, by the minister at 
that time in charge of the Public Service Commission, what had 
occurred, it was . . . I accepted her recommendation that Mr. 
Carriere be terminated from the public service of Saskatchewan. 
That termination has been demonstrated to have been 
inappropriately through its process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said then — I’ve said in this House — and I say 
again, if I had that decision to make again, I would make the 
same decision. You bet. I’ve referred to that firing on many 
occasions in this regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what the Leader of the Opposition needs to explain is how 
it is he takes taxpayers’ dollars — taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. 
Speaker — and spreads misinformation through radio ads and 
print box materials all over this province. Now I thought, Mr. 
Speaker, and so did the people of Saskatchewan, with the 
arrival of that new leader there was going to be a code of ethics, 
that they wouldn’t participate in this kind of knowingly 
misleading folks, Mr. Speaker. But he goes on and on, and it’s 
being funded, Mr. Speaker, by taxpayer dollars. 
 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear what this 
particular brochure says. This brochure says that the NDP 
government rewarded harassment. Let’s review the facts. 
 
They paid $275,000 to someone who is convicted of assault, 
fired for harassment. Then in this Assembly, on the second day 
of the session, the Premier quite clearly pointed out, he 
defended his decision to fight this in the court . . . not to fire 
Murdoch Carriere, to fight it in the court. I just read him his 
own words. He said he would . . . He asked the question, 
“Would I do it again? You bet I would.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier realizes the amount of public 
outrage to this issue. And so what’s he trying to do again? As 
he did in his press conference, he is trying to change his story, 
Mr. Speaker. The people of this province have had enough. 
 
When is he going to learn that he ought to be telling the truth 
about the Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we just heard it again. The 
Leader of the Opposition stood in his place in this House not 
moments ago and said that Mr. Murdoch Carriere was rewarded 
for harassment. That’s just what he said. And now the member 
from Cannington says that’s true. Mr. Speaker, nothing could 
be further from the truth. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 
from the truth than what the Leader of the Opposition just said 
in this legislature that Mr. Murdoch Carriere was rewarded for 
harassment. Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere was terminated, terminated as a result of this Premier 
and this cabinet’s decision, Mr. Speaker, on occurrences in that 
workplace. Mr. Speaker, he was not rewarded for harassment. 
 
And as long as the Leader of the Opposition and his party takes 
taxpayers’ dollars and provides this kind of misinformation to 
the people of Saskatchewan, you know, it says more, Mr. 
Speaker, it says more about that opposition and their tactics and 
their desperation for government, Mr. Speaker, than it says 
about anything else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important we review 
how many times the NDP have changed their story with respect 
to the Murdoch Carriere scandal each day as information has 
come forward. 

First, they said they had a zero tolerance policy towards 
harassment. Then we find out they tolerated harassment for 
years and years and years, back to 1994. Then the minister of 
Justice at the time said they would defend the position of the 
government vigorously in court with respect to Carriere. But 
then, Mr. Speaker, they folded like a cheap lawn chair. They 
paid him $275,000. And no matter what the Premier says, the 
victims view that as rewarding harassment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Then the Premier said, then the Premier said he 
never heard about the harassment until it was leaked in the 
media. And then, Mr. Speaker, he had to call . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members, order. Order. Members would do 
well to allow the members who have the floor to make their 
statement and then to make the response. And I ask members to 
do that. I invite the Leader of the Opposition to complete his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he didn’t learn 
about this harassment until he read it in the paper. Then he 
actually had to hold a hastily called press conference after hours 
in this building to confirm that what he had said originally in 
this House on that subject wasn’t the truth. 
 
Now we find out, Mr. Speaker, now we find out that he’s 
changing his story that he gave again, a quote in this Assembly 
where he was asked, would he do this again? Would he pay this 
kind of a settlement again in court? He said, I would do it again. 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier the question is this: why does he 
keep changing his story, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is becoming readily 
apparent to the people of Saskatchewan that that leader and that 
political party will do just about anything in their desperation 
for elected office, Mr. Speaker. They stand in the House, they 
accuse . . . they suggest that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard over and 
over again in this House and outside of this House the kind of 
misinformation that this opposition will put forward and claim 
to be truth. 
 
Again the Leader of the Opposition stands in this legislature 
and suggests that Murdoch Carriere was settled with or 
rewarded for harassment. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, could be 
further from the truth. But you know, it speaks, it speaks to 
some of the values of a party that when they had opportunity, 
voted against — voted against — provisions in legislation to 
protect workers in this province from harassment in the 
workplace, they voted against it, Mr. Speaker. Well we may 
have an opportunity in the days to come to test their resolve, to 
see where they truly stand when it comes to voting, Mr. 
Speaker. 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

But it’s pretty clear what they’re doing today and what they’ve 
been doing for the last several weeks. You try and use 
misinformation and tax dollars to fund it, to achieve your own 
political goals — not good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Carriere scandal is simply not 
good for the victims, Mr. Speaker, for other employees of the 
government who want some leadership from this Premier, and 
yes — on a much more minor point — it’s not very good for the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here is exactly what the Premier said in this 
Legislative Assembly. Thank goodness we have Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker. Here’s the quote: 
 

. . . they tell us we should fight the case. The best legal 
advice said . . . [that it’s] going to cost the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan, and we are not . . . [going] to put those 
complainants through the public process again. 
 
Do we like this, Mr. Speaker? We bet we don’t like it. 
Would I do it again? You bet I would. 

 
Those were the words of this Premier, the leader of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. I ask him again, will he finally 
answer a question? Why does he keep changing his story on the 
Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the story does not change. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Murdoch Carriere was terminated when it was 
advised by our minister then in charge of the Public Service 
Commission of what had occurred when the Gillies report 
became a matter of public discussion, and I made the decision, 
Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Murdoch Carriere should be terminated. 
 
And I said, I said previously, I say it again: if I was faced with 
that decision again today, I would make the same decision. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this opposition wants to do, what this 
opposition wants to do is take tax dollars that are provided to 
that opposition for research, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, what 
they try to do is score of course political points because that’s 
what they get up every morning trying to do. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, here’s the difference. We get up 
every morning asking ourselves what can be done to benefit 
Saskatchewan. What can we do for Saskatchewan people? They 
get up every morning and ask themselves, what can we do for 
the future of the Saskatchewan Party today? That’s their 
mission and that’s our mission and that’s the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to bring down 
a ruling. Last Thursday, two points of order were raised during 
the 75-minute debate concerning the language used. I thank 
both the member for Saskatoon Southeast and the Government 
House Leader for their interventions. At the time, the Acting 
Speaker committed to reviewing both the written and the video 
record and to bring back a ruling at the earliest opportunity. I 
have discussed the events of last week with the Acting Speaker 
and now wish to rule on the points of order. 
 
Much of the language and conduct of many members on both 
sides of the House during last Thursday’s debate on the 
Murdoch Carriere case was unacceptable. The written Hansard 
is replete with instances on both sides of the House of language 
that was unnecessarily personal or offensive, either towards an 
individual or towards a recognized group. Once again I direct 
members to Marleau and Montpetit where it is stated on page 
525 that, and I quote: 
 

The proceedings of the House are based on a 
long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of all 
Members. Thus, the use of offensive, provocative or 
threatening language in the House is strictly forbidden. 
Personal attacks, insults and obscene language or words 
are not in order. 
 

Numerous rulings by Speakers of this Assembly can be cited in 
support of this authority. I draw members’ attention to just one. 
The rule of May 12, 2000 addressed a similar circumstance 
where the language and decorum in the Assembly diminished 
considerably during the debate on a private member’s motion. 
At that time my predecessor reflected that, and I quote: 
 

It should be our mutual goal to achieve hard-hitting, 
politically effective criticism of policies, positions and 
actions without resorting to rude, intemperate and 
simplistic attacks on the integrity and motives of others. 

 
I recognize that achieving this goal becomes more challenging 
when the matter under debate is an emotional one which 
involves passionately held beliefs and values. Nevertheless, it is 
possible. The remarks made by the member for Regina 
Dewdney illustrates how one can effectively and forcefully 
refute the positions proposed by the other side while avoiding 
any personal aspersions on the integrity of other members. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I do find that the remarks made by the member for Humboldt at 
the conclusion of her speech are unparliamentary. Regardless of 
whether they were captured on the Hansard recorders, the 
language used was clearly audible in the Chamber and on the 
video record. They constitute a personal attack on another 
member and caused considerable disorder in the Chamber. 
Accordingly at the end of my statement, I will call upon the 
member from Humboldt to withdraw the remarks she directed 
at the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
A further concern that I wish to address is the rising level of 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

noise in this Chamber, particularly during divisive debates and 
proceedings. In my view, the debate last Thursday was 
characterized by an inordinate amount of heckles and 
interventions by members who were not recognized to speak. 
 
The volume of noise reached an unacceptable level when it 
prevented both the Acting Speaker and members on both sides 
of the House to hear the words spoken in the debate. When the 
presiding officer must consult with the written record before a 
matter can be addressed, it illustrates the difficulty caused by 
excessive noise. It also prevents the Assembly from dealing 
promptly with questionable language or possible rule 
infractions. 
 
In the future I strongly encourage members to curb the volume 
of their interventions to a level which does not impede the 
proceedings. 
 
In regards to the point of order raised by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, I reviewed the Hansard and the audio 
tape, and they do not record the comments alleged to have been 
made by the Minister of Finance. Accordingly, I am unable to 
rule on this matter. 
 
I wish to conclude by cautioning all members to be temperate in 
their remarks, both while recognized to speak and while 
speaking from their seat. 
 
Many of these unofficial comments or heckles are intentionally 
provocative and inflammatory. The course of last Thursday’s 
debate is illustrative of how such remarks are unhelpful. The 
fact that Hansard may not be able to attribute them to a 
particular member does not make them acceptable language. 
 
I now provide the opportunity for the MLA for Humboldt to 
rise and withdraw her unparliamentary remarks of Thursday. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I withdraw the remarks I made on Thursday. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for Humboldt. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
would ask the member for Regina South to come to order. 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order. Order, 
order. On written questions the Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling response to written questions no. 1038 to 1041 
inclusive. And further, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to table a 
correction to the response to written question 866 which was 
provided to the Assembly on March 29. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1038 to 1041 have 
been submitted and the member has requested leave to or he 
will be ordering the questions . . . Will the member repeat that, 
please? 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To a correction to the response. We’ll be 
tabling a correction to the response to no. 866. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to table a 
response to no. 866. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Returns Nos. 4 — 20 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling returns no. 4 through 20 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Returns no. 4 through 20 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill 61, The Vital Statistics 
Act, 2007. Mr. Speaker, this Bill will repeal and replace both 
The Vital Statistics Act, 1995 and the unproclaimed vital 
statistics Act, 1998. 
 
The Vital Statistics Act is a bilingual legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
As such both the English and French language versions must be 
passed by the legislature. Due to the time required for 
translation, only the English language version of the Act is 
being introduced today. Because of the important nature of this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, we have chosen to introduce the 
English language legislation at this time to ensure that it enters 
the public forum. The French language version will be 
introduced this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though the current legislation dates to 1995, 
the core of the Act governing the registering of Saskatchewan’s 
vital events dates back to 1888. Having celebrated our 
centennial year in 2005, this makes The Vital Statistics Act 
older than the province itself. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the original 
legislation governed the North-West Territories which 
encompassed most of Canada west of Ontario. 
 
That I stand here today introducing the amendments to one of 
Saskatchewan’s original pieces of legislation only demonstrates 
how important vital statistics are. It is the recording of the 
milestones in life, Mr. Speaker, whether birth, marriage, or 
death. It is our responsibility to keep that information accurate, 
safe, and secure and use it prudently to improve the lives of 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Times have changed since 1888, Mr. Speaker. In fact times 
have changed since 1995. The processes employed by vital 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

statistics, hospitals, and funeral directors have changed and the 
Act must be changed to reflect the era in which we now live. 
We must address how we collect, record, and use information in 
this day and age. 
 
When you are reviewing and revising an Act that’s been around 
for more than a century and will still be around a century from 
now, you consult with the experts, Mr. Speaker. You consult 
with the parties who record vital events and work with 
registration documents each day. Our consultations have 
included the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 
Funeral and Cremation Services Council of Saskatchewan, and 
Saskatchewan Justice amongst others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank them all for their efforts in 
helping us amend the vital statistics legislation. The proposed 
amendments touch three different areas: access to documents 
and records and the protection of privacy, use of vital event 
information by Saskatchewan Health, and ensuring our 
disclosure policies are transparent — and they are, Mr. Speaker. 
With the proclamation of this Act our disclosure policy will be 
more transparent than any legislation you’ll find in most other 
provinces and territories. 
 
In the past 130 years we have gone from paper records, written 
longhand, to databases. Electronic records have become the way 
we do business, improving our organization and efficiency. We 
need to revise our legislation to address the technology we now 
use every day and the challenges technology presents as far as 
record maintenance and retention. 
 
While we continue to collect and retain the vital events 
information of Saskatchewan residents, we must also ensure we 
are following best practices when it comes to privacy 
protection. We are the custodians of a great deal of personal 
information, Mr. Speaker, and we take that responsibility very 
seriously. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, babies are still born in the usual 
fashion; not much has changed since 1888. But the nature of the 
families they are born into certainly have. With non-traditional 
family structures and advances in reproductive technologies, the 
term co-parent is now part of the vernacular and needs to be 
included in the Act. 
 
Though we are proud of the legacy of this legislation, now is 
the time to update and clarify The Vital Statistics Act’s 
language and ensure that it encompasses the administrative and 
business processes involved in registering vital events. The 
passing of this Act will ensure our legislation remains aligned 
with the vital statistics legislation of other jurisdictions, and is 
ready to face the century to come. Mr. Speaker, therefore I am 
pleased to move second reading of The Vital Statistics Act, 
2007. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 61, The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise this afternoon to speak briefly on Bill 61, An Act 
respecting the Keeping of Vital Statistics and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, this is a very critical bit 
of legislation, and it certainly dates back to the beginning of our 
province and actually — as the minister outlined — before the 
beginning of the province. It’s one of the very oldest pieces of 
legislation that we have in our province, and indeed it is timely 
that this information be updated to reflect the modern realities 
that are before us. Certainly the importance of gathering vital 
statistics are certainly something that we very much support. It 
is certainly the kinds of information that’s required in order for 
governments and municipalities to properly plan for the future. 
We need to know what the record of people that are in this 
province, the statement of live births, the statement of deaths, 
the statement of stillbirths, the statement of marriages, and all 
of these things are needed in order to make sure that we 
understand the needs and demographics of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I think the minister has rightly outlined 
that in the original instance I’m sure these statistics were kept in 
ledgers in a very manual accounting system that recorded all of 
this information. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, over the last 
100-plus years there’s been tremendous changes into how 
information is stored. 
 
But I think it is important when we recognize that we are now 
in the age of databases and electronic records. Not only is this 
something that should change in this Act in terms of the way 
this information is harvested, in terms of electronic filing of 
information. We have to ensure that the databases that contain 
this very personal information are properly safeguarded and 
made sure that they are not accessible by people who have no 
right or authority to access these databases. And I’m sure the 
government recognizes the need for security of information in 
these databases and that the ways of accessing this information 
by appropriate people is safeguarded so that it is only those who 
have a need to know this information can access these 
electronic databases. 
 
Of course in the electronic world, we have to also ensure — if 
we’re using electronic databases — that they are properly 
safeguarded by proper backups and duplication of data so that, 
in the event of an electronic failure of some of this equipment, 
we do not lose this very important information for our province 
and our families for the future. 
 
I think the minister, as well in going into this Act and opening it 
up, recognizes that there are many words and terminologies and 
phrases and parenting relationships, if you like, that have 
changed over the 100 years and that these different situations 
have to as well be addressed in this new legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have certainly had a very initial opportunity to 
look at this information, and we as well are very desirous to 
communicate with the departments and the individuals that 
were mentioned by the minister, certainly the medical 
professionals and the various organizations that represent them 
and also people involved in the funeral business that need to 
account for information at the passing of our citizens. And so 
all of this information is important to discuss with these various 
stakeholders to make sure in this very elaborate and very 
comprehensive review of a vital piece of information that 
nothing was omitted or left out. And in order for that process to 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

occur, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 61 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
[14:45] 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to move second reading of Bill 62, The Vital Statistics 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2007. Previously I moved 
second reading of Bill 61, The Vital Statistics Act, 2007, Mr. 
Speaker, and as you know it is bilingual legislation. We are 
translating the French language version and hope to table it 
during the fall session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However in the meantime, The Vital Statistics Consequential 
Amendment Act is required to ensure the amendments to the 
Act are applicable to all the other bilingual Acts that relate to 
The Vital Statistics Act — Saskatchewan’s marriage Act and 
adoption Act for example, Mr. Speaker. The Vital Statistics 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 makes all relative 
bilingual Acts compatible with the proposed 2007 legislation 
until the French language version of The Vital Statistics Act, 
2007 can be passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Vital 
Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 62, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
I rise to speak to Bill 62 as well. Mr. Speaker, as the minister 
outlined, this Bill is required in order to make sure that the Bill 
No. 61 that was just read the second time is compatible with 
other existing statutes, particularly those that are translated into 
the French language. And I note in passing that changes to The 
Change of Name Act, The Adoption Act, and these types of 
Acts are mentioned — The Children’s Law Act — are 
specifically mentioned in this consequential amendments that 
need to be made compatible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the general concept is one that the official 
opposition very much supports. We need to make sure that 
when we’re amending significant pieces of legislation we do it 
properly and completely. And certainly we believe that this 
piece of legislation should move together with the main Bill so 

that they are considered together. And in order for that to 
happen, I would move at this time to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 62 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and 
Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to spend a few minutes talking about Bill 53, An Act 
to amend certain Environment Statutes with respect to matters 
concerning Inspections and Investigations. 
 
At first blush it would appear that this is more of a 
housekeeping Bill, standardizing terms and wording across 
Bills. However, Mr. Speaker, it allows for additional inspection 
powers of wildlife officers, or WOs, in various Bills, and I 
would like to just address that as part of the Bill. And on the 
first page of the Bill it states, and I’m quoting the Bill: 
 

“If an officer is conducting an inspection or investigation 
pursuant to this Act, the officer may be accompanied by 
any person who, in the opinion of the officer, by virtue of 
his or her expertise in a particular field or his or her 
knowledge of facts relevant to the matter being inspected 
or investigated, may assist the officer in carrying out the 
officer’s duties”. 

 
Well that’s a pretty long-winded statement, Mr. Speaker, and 
the implications of that, I think, will have to be discussed and 
debated. Who determines the expertise level of an individual? Is 
the conservation officer or wildlife officer just going to pick 
somebody that he or she knows to accompany him or her? 
 
But it’s very, very ironic, Mr. Speaker, because in 2003-2004 
time frame this NDP government eliminated 200 positions — 
200 and I want to emphasize that — that were conservation 
officers, now called wildlife officers. As far as I can ascertain, 
they’re one and the same thing. It’s a different name, possibly 
used interchangeably as far as I can understand. The wildlife 
officer, conservation officer — I don’t think there’s any 
difference in there. But the fact is 200, 200 were eliminated. 
 
So now we have a government introducing a Bill that says, now 
a CO [conservation officer] or WO can come along and take 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

somebody to help them, to accompany them, to do whatever, 
based on their expertise. I’m just kind of thinking out loud. 
Would it not be better if you actually had another conservation 
officer or wildlife officer to accompany you? Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the 200 positions that were eliminated were — 
where? — predominantly in rural Saskatchewan, a lot of them 
from the North. 
 
Well if you’re dealing directly with an environmental Act that 
includes hunting and fishing, I don’t know how much fishing 
there is in downtown Regina or how much hunting there is in 
downtown Regina. I know the odd deer comes through, and 
there might be a couple of minnows in Wascana Lake. And yes, 
Mr. Speaker, I know there’s lots of geese out here, but I don’t 
believe we’re allowed to shoot them in the city. 
 
So if you look at where the wildlife officers and conservation 
officers, where they do their duty and due diligence is in the 
rural areas. And yet what did we do, or what did they do? They 
cut 200 positions. So now we’re saying, oh we’ll cover that off. 
We will have wildlife officer go along and grab somebody and 
say, you’re now an expert in this field; come and give me a 
hand. I think there has to be some questions asked and 
hopefully some answers given to those particular questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to address another section that is being 
added and it’s: 
 

“Search of person 
 

19.1 An officer may search any person if the officer has 
reasonable grounds to believe that the person has 
concealed on his or her person any evidence of an 
offence against this Act. 

 
Again I think there needs to be some questions asked with 
respect to that, Mr. Speaker. When I read this Act, what 
basically . . . The way I understand it, with these additional 
powers that are given to the conservation officers, they would 
have the same powers as the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police]. I do not know if that’s the intent. I do not know if that 
is what the minister had envisaged when he put this in the Bill. 
But that’s pretty strong that an officer has reasonable grounds to 
believe . . . may inspect if he “. . . has reasonable grounds to 
believe that a person has concealed on his or her person any 
evidence of an offence against this Act.” 
 
So I wouldn’t want to be facetious, but how many deer are you 
going to hide on your person? Or how many geese? So I don’t 
know where this is going and what kind of broad powers that 
it’s giving to the COs and the WOs — or whatever name we’re 
going to use — to protect the system. And I want to use both 
because somebody will say, well they’re not a wildlife officer; 
they’re a conservation officer and vice versa. So I will use both 
of those names. So I’m really wondering what the intent of that 
portion of the Bill is, is to give these broad powers. 
 
There’s another one here that I also flag, Mr. Speaker. And it 
says, an officer and any person or persons . . . 

 
“Entry on land 
 
19.2 An officer and any person or persons lawfully 

accompanying an officer for the purposes of carrying out 
the officer’s duties may enter on or pass over any land, 
whether enclosed or not, and while so engaged he or she is 
liable only for any damage that he or she may wilfully 
cause”. 

 
That congers up a whole bunch of thoughts because if you 
relate back to the earlier one, the powers that are given, does 
that indicate that the COs and WOs are authorized to go into hot 
pursuit? And if they’re allowed to go into hot pursuit and 
they’re going over planted fields for an example, and it’s 
muddy — the damage that is caused to a grain farm operation 
— is that wilful damage or is that in hot pursuit? 
 
And so there’s a number of issues in there. And also, also “may 
enter on or pass over any land” but also whether it’s enclosed or 
not, “whether enclosed or not” — so that would indicate to me 
that that gives these officers blanket entry to any building, 
facility, that they choose. Again I would suggest that this is 
giving them the powers that are equal to the RCMP. If that is 
the intent of the minister, then I think he should state that, that 
we wish to give the COs and WOs the same powers as the 
RCMP now have. I do not know whether that’s his intent or not, 
but those are some very, very . . . a lot of questions that really 
need to be answered. And there’s just a number of questions in 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Entry at a reasonable time to inspect, and again a WO, CO can 
enter at any reasonable time and inspect any premise required to 
be licensed pursuant to the Act or any commercial premise used 
by a person required to be licensed pursuant to this Act. 
 
That again is carte blanche as far as I can see. And I can see 
why the COs and WOs would like this because their hands are 
not going to be tied where they would have to have somebody 
accompanying them if they’re going to gain entrance into this. 
Again questions need to be asked. Maybe they require an 
RCMP to accompany them. 
 
Well if there’s 200 more that they got rid of, it would be a lot 
easier to fulfill their duties. Because even if then, if you had to 
have an RCMP member to accompany them, it would be easier 
to gain access to them if you had more than one person in a 
given area. And I know there’s some areas of rural 
Saskatchewan where you’re hard pressed to find a conservation 
officer or wildlife officer for miles and miles. 
 
I know I had a situation in my area where the one conservation 
officer deals with an area that is just literally hundreds and 
hundreds of square miles. And he’s the only person there to 
cover that whole area. So I can see why they would require or 
want more powers for inspection and entry into facilities 
because where are they going to get any assistance, any help for 
them to go into these facilities or to search somebody? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are just a number of questions in this 
Bill that I think they’re going to have to have some stakeholders 
that really would like to look over this Bill. There’s just a 
number of questions that I just picked up reading this Bill in the 
last hour or so, and so I’m sure there’s stakeholders that would 
really like to go over this Bill and dissect it a little bit to see 
who this Bill is going to affect. 
 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

Realizing that the conservation officers do an excellent job, the 
wildlife officers do an excellent job, giving them more powers 
. . . I think the fact that they cut 200 wildlife officer positions, 
200, and a lot in that member’s area — a lot were cut from the 
North, and that member should know it if they’re cut from the 
North. Now where do they get a conservation officer to come 
and do inspections or to control? Because we do know that 
there’s poaching going on. We do know illegal fishing goes on. 
We know that there’s an awful lot of activities within The 
Wildlife Act that people have a propensity to abuse at times. 
 
So these conservation officers, wildlife officers are very, very 
important. But I would add again, not important enough that the 
NDP didn’t cut 200 positions in the rural areas where the 
hunting and the fishing takes place. I want to remind people of 
that constantly: 200 positions were cut by that NDP government 
and they’re supposedly now the protectors of the environment 
and protectors of the fish and game and all of that good stuff. 
But they are the ones that actually cut the conservation officers. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s going to be an awful lot 
of people that would like to review this Bill, assess the powers 
that are given to the conservation officers. But who it will really 
affect— I think there’s going to be a lot of people that want to 
look at it. With that being said, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate on second reading of Bill No. 53 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 17, the miscellaneous statutes municipal 
taxation — Mr. Speaker, very basically a simple Bill but there’s 
a whole lot of history and concern and angst that people have 
felt for many years that took on before this Bill was introduced. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government really has the bulk of 
the blame for the situation that we find, and they have felt that 
they needed this Bill to be brought forward. 
 
As we know, the NDP government amalgamated health care 
districts, and they forced amalgamated school boards. They 
tried to force amalgamate RMs . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? Member for 
Melfort. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
reviewing Hansard from Thursday, I would like to make a point 
of order pointing out that the member from Regina Wascana 
Plains made accusations against the official opposition 
members that were not appropriate. And specifically on page 
1225 where the member outlined that, and I would quote: 
 

Would it be a reward that members opposite in the ’80s, 
when they were convicted of fraud, received their 
pensions, received the benefits that were coming to them? 

 
Mr. Speaker, certainly there isn’t one member of the official 
opposition that was convicted of fraud, and those comments are 
entirely out of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I thank the member for raising 
this, but I have read all of the remarks that were made on that, 
during that particular debate. And there were likely a dozen or 
more comments that were made by members on both sides of 
the House which members could — if they want to — raise 
points of order. I decided to deal with them all at once and not 
embarrass the members of the House with the repetition of 
remarks which ought not to be repeated. 
 
Clearly that remark was not acceptable, nor were several others. 
Order please. However, I chose at that time not to bring up the 
other remarks hopefully that members would get the message 
and . . . However, I will at this time provide opportunity. If 
there’s any member that was speaking in that debate and wants 
to make a retraction, I would allow to them to do so at this time. 
 
Order. The Chair recognizes the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On Thursday in an exchange across the floor with the member 
for Rosetown-Elrose, the member had made a set of accusations 
that are patently untrue. I described them at that time as a lie. I 
am not sure whether that’s unparliamentary or not, but clearly 
did little to raise the level of debate and I would apologize to 
the House as I’m sure the member for Rosetown will want to as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member . . . Order 
please. The Chair recognizes the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would look at the 
remarks that I wrote, but this certainly . . . when we’re talking 
about payment of pensions and things that were . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Either the member 
wishes to withdraw her remark at this stage or not. We’re just 
dealing on a point of order. We are not debating. We’re not into 
a debate. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — . . . offensive to the House, I would 
withdraw the comment that has offended the members. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to repeat the 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

withdrawal because it was not on the record at the time. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — A member of the Assembly attributes to me 
a comment that was offensive to other members of the 
Assembly. I would withdraw those comments. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I thank the member for Melfort for 
raising the point. The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope I’m able to be 
heard. I’d like to continue with the adjourned debate concerning 
Bill No. 17, miscellaneous statute municipal taxation. As I was 
saying, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I know. It’s 
my light. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again the Chair recognizes the member 
for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to continue 
with the adjourned debate, Bill 17, miscellaneous statutes 
municipal taxation. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the 
government, the NDP government of the day has much if not all 
to be blamed for the situation that the province finds itself in . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try it 
again. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members, we seem to be having 
a little technical difficulty and by leave of the House, I would 
ask the members’ permission to allow the member from Biggar 
to make his remarks from an alternate chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try once again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Start from the beginning again. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I think I will start from the beginning. I was 
speaking to Bill No. 17, miscellaneous statute municipal 
taxation. And as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government has a lot to speak concerning of where the blame 
really lies in this situation, where actually tax revolts took 
place. 
 
As I had said, this government has a habit of being very 
heavy-handed. They forced the amalgamation of health districts 
as well as the forced amalgamation of school boards. And they 
tried to have the forced amalgamation of RMs, rural 
municipalities, and they had to back down because of the 
outrage over what they were trying to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re speaking of the collection of 
municipal taxes, as we know, by statute the RMs have to collect 
not only the municipal tax but also the school tax, the education 
portion of the municipal tax. And they have been doing this for 
many years. Of course they have to incur the costs of collecting 
the money and then passing it on to the school boards. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, people, residents, property owners of this 

province have been paying their tax as they expect to. But over 
the years the amount that individual property tax holders had to 
pay has increased dramatically and it’s mainly in the education 
portion of the municipal tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I mean the government of the day, the NDP 
government are well aware of the situation over the last 16 
years since they’ve been in power. They certainly refuse to do 
anything about the disparity in the amount of tax being paid. At 
one time, tax for education was funded by the provincial 
government at 60 per cent and by the property owner at 40 per 
cent on the average across the province. And as we found out, 
that not only reversed, but actually became more than 40/60 
where the property tax owner was even paying more than 60 per 
cent of the education portion of property tax over the years. So 
obviously the stage was set for a revolt from the taxpayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people in the municipalities, the 
property tax payers, only had certain avenues to take when they 
wanted to have a tax revolt. Now individuals could just 
withhold their own taxes, but of course if they don’t pay the 
taxes they were charged a penalty. Normally the municipalities 
would give a discount if they paid five to six months ahead. 
And each month it was a less amount of discount till if they 
paid in December there’d be no discount. And if they didn’t pay 
into the next year then they’d be penalized by I believe usually 
about 1 per cent per month. 
 
So the property tax payer had limited means to actually revolt 
against the heavy-handedness of the NDP government. So they, 
the tax property payers in the province, lobbied their municipal 
governments to do something. And there was many, many 
public meetings held across the province. And a number of 
RMs, about 100, decided to refuse to pass the property tax 
funds on to the school boards. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, people withholding their taxes 
or RMs withholding their education portion of the tax didn’t 
have a problem with their municipal government. They 
certainly didn’t have a problem with their school boards. 
Everyone down the line wanted an improvement in the school 
system, in the school boards, in the schools. They wanted to 
keep schools open for the betterment of the young people in 
their areas. But where else could the taxpayers go to show their 
displeasure with the government handling of the education 
portion of the tax and really the over-taxation of the property 
owner concerning education tax? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these 100 RMs collected the tax from the 
taxpayer so the taxpayer was not being charged a penalty 
because they didn’t pay. So the RMs just withheld the education 
portion and either passed it on in the new year to the school 
boards or even withheld the money to a later date. 
 
Now at some point, obviously, the point was to impress upon 
the government of the day — the NDP government — that 
there’s a serious concern with the amount of tax being paid by 
the property taxpayer concerning education tax. And it was very 
effective, I have to say. I mean you have to hand it to the 
individuals and to the RM councils that really stuck their necks 
out in doing this revolt to impress upon the government the 
seriousness of the situation. 
 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we have seen, I believe it was 
last year or the year before, some of the RMs actually gave a 
discount to individuals who paid . . . Sorry, gave a discount . . . 
penalized individual tax holders if they paid early, just the 
reverse of what normally was done. So it’s really . . . The intent 
was to have the taxpayer withhold their money to the RM until 
the last minute, and then they would get a discount when they 
paid in December. 
 
And again it’s just another mechanism, another tool that the 
RMs used to show their displeasure with the whole taxation 
system concerning education tax in the province. And this was 
very effective. 
 
Now the side effect of this was that the school boards are short 
money. There’s some issues around interest on the money that 
wasn’t paid. The school boards, I understand, are concerned 
that they’ve lost some money because of this tax revolt. And 
again it wasn’t the intent of RMs or taxpayers to hurt school 
boards, that the intent is to impress upon this NDP government 
the seriousness of the situation when it comes to the collection 
or the payment of education tax. And again the only way that 
they could display their displeasure with the high taxation rate 
was to withhold. 
 
So I’ve demonstrated some of the novel ideas that the RM 
councils came up with to pass this displeasure of the taxpayer 
onto the government. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we know now in this Bill, the 
RMs are going to be held responsible for doing monthly 
financial statements. And then I believe what’s also in this Bill 
that they will have to pass on the education portion of the tax 
onto school boards on a monthly basis so that they are being 
forced into paying basically on time. And again it just speaks to 
the dire situation that RMs and school boards and parents and 
property taxpayers are in because of the government’s lack of 
funding of the education system over many, many years. 
 
So what is a municipality to do? This government is going to 
bring in and ram this Bill through and really, you know, really 
deflect the criticism that is due to the government and place it 
on the RMs where it shouldn’t be. The RMs is just the vehicle 
of the taxpayers of this province and, through the RMs 
withholding tax, to display their displeasure with the 
underfunding of the education system by this NDP government. 
 
And this isn’t something that just happened overnight. This has 
been going on for many, many years. This government has been 
in power for 16 years, and this problem with underfunding of 
the education portion of the tax is growing and growing and 
growing, and it’s obviously that’s what prompted this tax revolt 
by the citizens of this province, by the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
Naturally, as the official opposition always does, we speak to 
the stakeholders and we will be doing that again with this 
particular Bill. And it’s really, the real problem with this whole 
situation is not . . . It’s not the citizens’ fault. It’s not the 
taxpayers’ fault. It’s certainly not the RMs’ fault, and it’s 
certainly not the school boards’ fault that this situation has 

arised. It’s the NDP government’s fault and their lack of 
funding of the education system in this province that really has 
come to a critical point and something has to be done. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we will speak to the stakeholders and 
we will discuss this, and so at this time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Biggar has moved to 
adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to add my voice to that of my colleagues who have questions 
about the Bill No. 31, regional health services, the amendment 
to this Act. The amendment was brought forward as a result of 
the recommendations made by the Provincial Auditor. We agree 
in principle that the formal service agreement is necessary in 
working with affiliates, affiliated hospitals, or non-designated 
health care organizations. 
 
My colleagues have brought forward their concerns of some of 
the agencies who have an interest in this Bill. And the duty of 
the opposition of course is to make it clear that everyone’s 
voice is heard and that we bring forward the very best ideas 
possible. 
 
The discussions are ongoing with Sask Health, and we 
encourage that outstanding issues be resolved prior to passing 
this Bill. We know what the government’s history was like with 
The Ambulance Act where they really failed to consult with the 
ambulance operators. And it really is very necessary that 
discussions continue. 
 
In speaking with SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 
Services Association], we know that their concerns were the 
fact that one year’s notice can be given without cause. The 
banker may say that there is no long-term business plan to 
warrant a business loan, and it affects business planning. 
 
We also are concerned that when notice is served to terminate 
the contract, once notice is served to terminate the contract, 
there are provisions for RHA [regional health authority] to buy 
out the operator at fair market value. However the ambulance 
operators argue that if the extent of any conflict is only one 
year, the value of their business is greatly diminished. 
 
And lastly, the provision that gives 14-days notice to remedy 
any service disputes followed by ceasing of the payment is 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

problematic. Operators feel the need to be a longer period to 
resolve this disputes before payment is ceased. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we know the discussions are moving 
along and that there are other agencies that want to speak to us 
about this Bill, so at this time I would move that this Bill be 
adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this do now be 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 37, The Court of 
Appeal Amendment Act. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my 
understanding that this Bill in effect reduces the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal from nine to seven members. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I presume that’s in response to the lack of activity and 
population in this province. 
 
However, there are some issues around this matter, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, particularly relating to the caseload of the 
justices of the Court of Appeal and the backlog of cases and so 
on. In the remarks by the minister when he introduced the Bill, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a former chief justice is quoted in the 
minister’s remarks as suggesting that the workload in this 
province is light for a nine-member court. And that may very 
well be, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But having worked in and with the Court of Appeal and other 
courts during the 1970s, I can say that the workload of the then 
seven-member court was heavy. And the backload of cases, 
both civil and criminal, was fairly substantial at all times 
through the ’70s when I was there. More research and 
consultation will be required to determine what the current 
workload is and to decide, Madam Deputy Speaker, what is 
appropriate, the appropriate number of Court of Appeal justices 
to deal with that caseload in an expeditious fashion. 
 
It’s telling, Madam Deputy Speaker, that after 16 years of NDP 
government in this province that the population and activity in 
the province is sufficiently diminished to even have to consider 
reducing the size and capacity of our highest court, the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
I suspect that it may be much more expensive to be forced to 
increase the size of the court in the future again under some 
more progressive government. Accordingly, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we will need to conduct more consultation and 

research before any formal decision can be made. And I suggest 
that the government do the same, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
accordingly I move to adjourn this matter. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 43 — The 
Payday Loans Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to speak to Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act this 
afternoon. 
 
According to the news release on March 12, the purpose of this 
Act is to provide “a comprehensive framework for the 
regulation of the payday lending industry and provide 
protection for borrowers [those] who use payday loans.” 
 
Payday loans are by and large a very expensive way for 
consumers to meet their temporary credit needs. However the 
demand appears to be rapidly increasing. The demand is 
obviously spurred by the very convenience that the consumer is 
able to access cash prior to their receipt of their paycheque. For 
the lender, there are obvious risks — risks in collection of the 
loan proceeds, in dealing with customers with whom they may 
not be familiar, and in dealing with customers who may be 
transient in nature, etc. 
 
Because of the nature of the risks for the lender, very high 
interest rates are charged on these loans. Various fees are 
associated with obtaining the proceeds of the loans as well. 
Section 347 of the Criminal Code makes it an offence to charge 
more than 60 per cent interest per year on a loan. And 
provincial legislation has previously been implemented in other 
provinces. 
 
However the federal legislation does not address the area of 
fees. There has been support from the Canadian Payday Loans 
Association for regulation within their own industry. However 
the association at present represents less than one half of the 
payday loan operations in the country. 
 
The payday loans industry has similarities to the cash-back tax 
preparation services where for a fee the tax preparer will 
advance your anticipated refund for a substantial fee. This really 
only differs from the practice of payday loans procedure in that 
the cash-back tax preparers actually are loaning funds based on 
the anticipated tax refund, but they are also actually providing 
an additional service — that is, preparing and filing the tax 
return for the individual. 
 
This industry, the cash-back tax preparers industry, are 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2007 

regulated in what they can and cannot do and what they can and 
cannot charge. Their regulations has resulted in minimizing the 
abuses that were apparent in this service industry as it evolved. 
The cash-back tax service too saw an ever-increasing demand 
and not that long ago a completely unregulated and 
underground practice preying on those in need of ready cash 
was ripe with horror stories. 
 
Fortunately, the cash-back tax service industry has been cleaned 
up. The cleanup was lead by industry leaders and guided by 
legislation, legislation similar to that proposed in this Bill No. 
43 regarding the practice of payday loans. 
 
As well the provisions of this Act provide for licensing of those 
providing payday lender services, financial security provisions 
for the lender services, and provisions for suspension, 
cancellation and expiry of licences. Provisions that provide for 
written agreement within prescribed periods in a prescribed 
manner is an important part also of this legislation. This should 
put to an end or at the very least minimize some of the abuses 
that have been brought to our attention, among them surprise 
charges and fees, unexpected increases in rates charged, and 
requirements for customers to sign and commit to unreasonable 
commitments and so on. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill, in that it is a new Bill, a Bill 
addressing new ground, apparently has support — support of 
the association representing the payday loans industry and 
support of consumer rights advocacy groups. However we have 
not seen or been privy to the proposed regulations, and the 
regulations in many respects will ultimately determine the 
effectiveness and fairness of this Bill should it pass into law. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as this Bill is rather extensive in 
nature and lengthy, we will require more time to examine the 
Bill. And for that reason, I would move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 43 at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill 43. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 44 — The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to take a few moments this afternoon to 
speak to Bill No. 44, The Class Actions Amendment Act. 
 
The minister in his second readings speech mentioned that the 

reason for The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007 was to deal 
with situations where relief sought as a result of mass injuries. 
And he was talking about different areas where . . . and the fact 
that issues of class actions may not just impact people in one 
jurisdiction but indeed maybe in other jurisdictions across this 
country such as, say, a class action suit is initiated in the 
province of Saskatchewan but it may affect people across, right 
across . . . whether it’s in Manitoba or Ontario or another 
province here in Canada. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And if I understood the minister correctly, he was indicating 
that in many of these cases where a class action suit may be 
brought forward in one jurisdiction, it didn’t necessarily mean 
that that class action suit would apply in the next jurisdiction. In 
fact the understanding I had was that if a similar situation arose 
in another jurisdiction, that another class action suit had to be 
initiated. And if I understand the intent of this legislation 
correctly, it’s going to facilitate class action suits that would 
follow similar circumstances interprovincially, and it would 
save a lot of additional suits that would have to be moved 
forward with. 
 
And I think, Madam Speaker, we are reminded of class actions 
suits and how they impact people across the country in the 
residential schools class action suit that has been going on for 
the past number of years and in the last year or so was resolved. 
However to date I believe there’s a number of issues still 
outstanding in that suit in regards to payment and how that 
payment is being arrived at and paid out. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, it would seem to me that this legislation is 
certainly appropriate legislation. The one thing I would be 
concerned about, my colleagues and I, is that by expanding the 
way class action suits are moved forward and the fact that they 
can be moved forward jurisdictionally, would that we would 
want to be assured that this would not lead to frivolous class 
action suits by individuals that would . . . whereby they would 
be putting either companies or other individuals or groups of 
people at a conflict or in a difficult situation because of the 
broad expanse of these class action suits. 
 
The minister also pointed out that when a class action suit is 
initiated, that class action suit would automatically . . . For 
residents of a province, anyone who was involved would 
automatically be a part of a class action. However if they 
choose to, they can choose to opt out of that class action suit. So 
if a class action suit was raised and it just so happened it 
affected a certain individual and they felt they didn’t necessarily 
want to be involved in the class action suit, this legislation now 
gives them the opportunity to opt out. 
 
Conversely if a person outside of the province feels that the 
class action suit that is being undertaken in the province is one 
that would certainly be something that they would want to be 
involved in, and rather than having to initiate an additional class 
action suit, they could opt in to that class action. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it certainly appears that that would be 
appropriate, and that would seem to me that would be the 
appropriate action that would be taken. 
 
But the minister has indicated it’s also where they . . . given the 



April 11, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

opportunity for individuals to opt in or opt out and to ensure 
that their rights and their interests were addressed in a class 
action suit . . . So while it’s become a broader issue, it is also 
placing some onus on individuals themselves to take some 
responsibility in regards to class action suit as to whether they 
feel that it’s in their best interests to become involved in the 
class action, to opt in on the class action suit or to opt out. 
 
The minister also indicated that one of the biggest challenges in 
respect to multi-jurisdictional class actions concerns 
accessibility information. And he indicated that this Bill 
requires that a person who commences a class action in 
Saskatchewan gives notice of the application to the plaintiff and 
the class action elsewhere in Canada that involves the same or 
similar subject matter. And this would appear to be, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, only the appropriate and proper thing to do in 
ensuring that individuals right across this country are well 
informed of where a class action suit is going, what the purpose 
is, what the intent of the class action is, and that indeed that the 
appropriate information or all of the information that would be 
applicable to that action and would certainly be coming 
forward. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, it would appear at the outset 
as we look at the legislation that we have in front of us, Bill No. 
4, The Class Actions Amendment Act, that it is a . . . the 
changes are being brought forward are certainly appropriate. 
And however, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe they need to 
be looked at very carefully to ensure that the intent of the 
changes to this or the amendment to this legislation certainly 
meets the needs not only of the people of Saskatchewan but 
people across this country. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague, the member 
responsible for this, as critic for this piece of legislation, has 
sent out information on the legislation to a number of groups, 
the Law Society and Saskatchewan Trial Lawyers. And we are 
currently waiting — the fact that this piece of legislation is 
fairly recently introduced in the Assembly — we are currently 
waiting for further information coming back to our caucus in 
regards to the Bill before us and whether or not the Bill meets 
all the requirements of what its intent and purposes were. And 
therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, till we receive that 
information and are assured that the legislation meets all the 
requirements that the minister was addressing and raised with 
this Assembly, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 44. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the standing committees on Human Services as 
well as on the Economy, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 

Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does stand 
adjourned till tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:34.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1233 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1234 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Gratitude to Canadian Armed Forces 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 80th Anniversary of Girl Guide Cookies 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Samuel McLeod Prince Albert Business Awards 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Questions Regarding Carriere Settlement 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Judge Gerald Morin Receives Willy Hodgson Award 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Al Gore’s Presentation on Climate Change 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 Long-term Care Beds in Lloydminster 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
 Plans for Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1238 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
 Compensation for Former Deputy Minister 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1241 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1242 



 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Returns Nos. 4 — 20 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
 Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 
 Loi de 2007 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1244 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1244 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 53 — The Miscellaneous Environment Statutes (Inspections and Investigations) Amendment Act, 2007 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1244 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1246 
  Gantefoer (point of order)......................................................................................................................................................1246 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1246 
  Thomson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................1246 
  Hamilton (point of order).......................................................................................................................................................1246 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
 Bill No. 44 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


