






















































Hansard: April 04, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 42A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 4, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1181 
 April 4, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise on 
behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills to present a petition 
concerning the recent closure of the SaskPower office in the 
community of Shaunavon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s several pages of petitions are signed 
exclusively by individuals from the community of Shaunavon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the good people of 
Maryfield. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to maintain full service of the SaskPower office at 
Rosetown. The petitioners note that if the office closes, the 
citizens of Rosetown and surrounding communities will not 
have a personal contact with a SaskPower representative and 
there will not be immediate receipt of payment for customers. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Harris and Rosetown and I’m pleased to present 
it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chaplin and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And today I return 
to reading a petition of citizens concerned about safety when 
driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, 
Humboldt, Meacham, and Sunset Estates. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens opposed to possible 
reduction of health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Unity and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people from across 
Saskatchewan who for the past eight years have been lobbying 
this government for a dedicated children’s hospital within a 
hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as 
follows: 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners today come from the provincial constituencies of 
Saskatoon Riversdale, Saskatoon Fairview, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens who are very concerned that 
the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche and District 
Health Centre would cause undue hardship to residents, 
particularly seniors. And for relief, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from several 
communities that would be affected by such a closure. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of rural school closures: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Wood 
Mountain and Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition concerning the condition of Highway 368, 
starting 4 miles south of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. 
Brieux. And it has seriously endangered the safety of drivers 
and harms economic growth in the area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 

368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake 
Lenore and St. Brieux. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway No. 5, a highway that runs in perpendicular width 
through my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. I will read the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens of 
Saskatoon. I am pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank 
you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 47 move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
a return showing: 
 

For the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: please provide the Public Service 
Commission anti-harassment policy as it existed in the 
fiscal year ’91-92. 

 
I have the same questions going right up to this current year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for SaskPower: does SaskPower allow 
other companies to utilize the billing distribution network 
advertising? And if so, what remuneration does the 
corporation receive for this service? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance: has SGI invested in Western 
Financial Services? And if so, for what purpose, how 
much was invested, and what percentage of ownership 
does that investment represent? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
servers does the corporation have devoted to web hosting? 
 

I further give notice: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
servers does the corporation have devoted to web hosting 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many 
servers does the corporation have devoted to web hosting 
located out of the province, and where are they located? 
And how many servers does the corporation have devoted 
to web hosting located out of country, and where are they 
located? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: does the Saskatoon Health 
Authority have a current physician resource profile? And 
if so, how many doctors are currently practising in each 
area of specialty? And how many positions are currently 
vacant in each area of specialty, and what are the projected 
future needs in each area of practice? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many retroactive 
independence allowance payments to injured workers did 
the Workers’ Compensation Board make in fiscal year 
2002-03, and what was the total dollar value of those 
payments? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for all the fiscal years up 
to ’06-07. 
 

[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
actually have two groups to introduce. And I expect someone 
from the opposition may also want to respond at the close of 
these introductions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that April 9 is the 90th anniversary 
of the Battle of Vimy Ridge. It was on that day that thousands 
of people across Canada and across Europe . . . It’s on this April 
9 that people will gather to celebrate that 90th anniversary and 
to honour the soldiers who fought in that very historical battle. 
 
This Canadian victory marked a turning point in the First World 
War and, as has been observed by many, it marked a turning 
point in Canadian history. There will be many historians who 
will agree that after this battle, after the Battle of Vimy Ridge, 
Canada truly emerged as a sovereign nation. The battle was for 
many a symbol of Canada’s unity and secured our collective 
future. Earlier today in the rotunda we remembered and we 
honoured the brave soldiers who helped shape our nation and its 
destiny. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is first of all my pleasure to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly our 
special guests today from the following veterans’ associations. 
And I might ask that members of the association who are 
present might just wave as I recognize your particular 
association. And so, Mr. Speaker, we welcome today members 
of the Royal Canadian Legion, Branch 001. Mr. Speaker, we 
welcome the Royal Canadian Legion, Saskatchewan Command; 
the Army, Navy and Air Force Veterans’ Association; 
Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans Association; 
Saskatchewan Métis Veterans Association; the Polish Veterans 
Association; Korea Veterans Association; and the Canadian 
Association of Veterans in United Nations Peacekeeping. 
 
We thank you for your courage. We thank you for all those 
whom you represent in the Saskatchewan legislature today and 
in the history of our province and in the history of our nation. 
And we welcome you today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And now, Mr. Speaker, with your and 
members’ indulgence, I would like to make some further 
introductions. In celebration of the 90th of Vimy Ridge, young 
people from across Canada will be gathering in France for the 
anniversary. And we are very, very proud of the fact that a 
number of Saskatchewan young people will be there. Some of 
them, Mr. Speaker, have already left. These are young people 
engaged in the 41st Royal Canadian Air Cadets Hercules 
Squadron. They have left. I’m not sure if they’ve arrived yet at 
Vimy, but they’re on their way. 
 
But representing them here today and with us is Lieutenant Bob 
Bray from the . . . Bob, can you give us a wave. And, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — From the city of Regina, from the 
Roman Catholic school division, a number of high school 
students will be travelling to France, to Vimy Ridge, for the 
90th anniversary. And, Mr. Speaker, I was provided a list of the 
students who have been with us or continue to be in the gallery. 
This list, interestingly enough, tells me the size of the jacket 
they’re wearing. I’m hoping it also tells me accurately the 
students who are with us. 
 
And I would, Mr. Speaker, ask all members to greet the 
following students who will be travelling to Vimy: Sage 
Kuderewko, Tyler Braden, Patrick Reed, Braden Carnie, Kayla 
Turgeon, Melanie Krammer, Abby Putz — someone known to 
our Chamber — Bryan Brooks, Kristina Kaminski, Megan 
Kaminski — also known to members of the legislature — Justin 
Gallagher, Candis Smith, James Kleisinger, Alana Watson, 
Kaylee Puchala, Lysandra Pyle, and Isiah Dawson. Mr. 
Speaker, I invite all members to greet these students who will 
represent us and the province of Saskatchewan and their 
generation at Vimy Ridge. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to join with the Premier in welcoming our special guests 
to the Assembly here today on behalf of the official opposition. 
I see a number of people in the audience that I know very well 
and have known for a number of years, so it’s very nice to see 
them out to commemorate the Vimy Ridge Memorial Day. I 
know all of the good work that’s been done by these members, 
and it’s very, very nice to see you here. 
 
Also with the students, I would like to congratulate you on 
being selected to travel to Vimy Ridge. It’s an experience that I 
believe that you will hold dear to you forever. I’ve had the 
opportunity of visiting Vimy, and it’s something that’s 
embedded in my mind and will remain there for the rest of my 
life. It was a horrific war. It was a horrific battle. And you place 
yourself into the battlegrounds while you’re there and it will be 
a lifelong remembrance, I’m sure. 
 
On the cadets, the cadets that have left, I would like to 
congratulate the cadet organization on giving the cadets a 
chance to visit there. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
all members again to welcome our guests to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know all 
members would notice that today they’ve had a special way to 
be called to the Assembly in conjunction with the ringing of the 
bells, and that was the playing of the pipes and drums in honour 
of Tartan Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier I had the pleasure to welcome them, along with the 

member from Elphinstone, and hear from the member and Iain 
Mentiplay the significance of Tartan Day as a day for us to 
honour those of Scottish ancestry and their vast contributions to 
our great province. 
 
Today in the gallery we are joined by members of Camp 
Balmoral No. 177: Danny Matheson, the chief and pipe major, 
Marg Willette, and I believe a former chief, Wilma Matheson, 
has also joined them today. 
 
Now in another group, I’ve been trying to see if my eyes would 
focus that distance but I believe there’s another group also 
seated in the gallery who are part of the Sons of Scotland, Camp 
Balmoral. And I recognize the Mathesons and the Mentiplays. 
If there’s anyone else, if you would like to rise and be 
acknowledged. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in greeting 
the Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral, on this Tartan Day. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d wish on behalf of 
the official opposition also to welcome the Sons of Scotland, 
Camp Balmoral No. 177. Mr. Speaker, my family left Scotland 
after the collapse of the clans and it’s been very many 
generations since we could call ourselves actual Scots, but we 
first went to Ireland and then to Canada. 
 
And I can say that the music that we heard on the way in here is 
the sweetest way I’ve ever been ushered into the Legislative 
Assembly in the time that I’ve been here. And the skirl of the 
pipes still causes every hair on the back of my neck to stand up 
after all of those generations. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning the Premier and the cabinet had the great occasion to 
have some breakfast and some information sharing with the 
Consulting Engineers of Saskatchewan. This afternoon we’re 
joined by a couple of people that were at that breakfast. From 
the award-winning company in Saskatoon, ENGCOMP, we 
have Jason Mewis, the president and senior structural engineer; 
we have Brett Bonin, who’s the office manager — and 
interestingly enough commutes back and forth from Regina to 
Saskatoon to work — and he is joined by his wife, Bonita. They 
of course are brought here with the chief of staff in the 
Corrections and Public Safety office, Darcy Furber. 
 
I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that ENGCOMP is the 
Consulting Engineers of Saskatchewan 2006 Brian Eckel award 
of merit winner in the infrastructure category. They were also 
the 2006 Brian Eckel award of merit winner in the technology 
innovation category. 
 
So this is a knowledge economy corporation that’s based right 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

here in Saskatchewan — Saskatchewan young people doing a 
tremendous job in terms of value added in our economy. And 
the boom that we’ve got in this province is built on the back of 
people like Jason and Brett and Bonita. So please welcome 
them here to their Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’m pleased to introduce a lady who occupies a large part of 
my life, in the gallery today. In your gallery is my mother, 
Gladys Beasley from Medicine Hat. My mom and dad lived in 
Saskatchewan for over 50 years and then moved to Alberta. 
 
I think it’s a fitting day that she be in the Assembly as she is an 
English war bride. Her home was in Middlesbrough, England, 
and she moved here after the war in ’46. I know that seeing the 
veterans here today in uniform will make her miss dad even 
more. And please, everybody, join with me in welcoming my 
mother to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Remembering the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we celebrate 
Canada’s role in taking Vimy Ridge during World War I and 
we remember the cost. So much blood was shed, it should be 
red. Today, 90 years after the fact, we recognize the immensity 
of Canadian soldiers’ success. Many indeed have said that 
Canada became a nation at Vimy Ridge. 
 
For 20,000 Canadian soldiers — the first wave — that fateful 
battle began April 9, 1917. The lightest part of their load that 
day was the some 36 kilograms of equipment that each soldier 
was required to carry. The far heavier load was the very real 
prospect of failure to wrest control of the German stronghold in 
occupied France. History is so different for the action of these 
Canadian soldiers. 
 
Students from across Canada will be in France. Among them 
will be teacher Curtis Kleisinger and a group of grade 11 and 12 
students from O’Neill and Riffel high schools, as well as Major 
Reg Tweten and 25 air cadets. Their historic stops will include 
London, Vimy Ridge, Dieppe, Beaumont Hamel, and Paris. 
 
To celebrate Vimy Ridge, students will each represent a soldier 
who gave their life at Vimy Ridge. These students are 
experiencing history where it was made. They’re learning why 
it is said Vimy should be red. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Monday, April 9 is the 90th anniversary of the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge, the battle that many historians point to as a defining 
moment for Canada and one which served to strengthen feelings 
of nationhood across the country. 
 
After France lost more than 100,000 troops in its attempt to 
seize the German-occupied Vimy Ridge, the Canadian Corps 
were ordered to seize the heavily fortified, 7-kilometre-long 
ridge. Fighting together for the first time in history, all four 
divisions of the Canadian Corps launched their attack at 5:30 in 
the morning on Easter Monday, 1917. Mr. Speaker, 3,598 
Canadians lost their lives during the four days of battle that 
resulted in the seizure of Vimy Ridge. There were 49 Canadian 
divisions represented at the Battle of Vimy Ridge and four were 
from Saskatchewan: the 5th, 28th, 46th, and the 1st Canadian 
Mounted Rifles. 
 
Among the many that lost lives at Vimy over the course of the 
four-day battle was a young Saskatchewan soldier who served 
as a private in the 102nd Battalion, the North British 
Columbians. Joseph Peters was a member of the Standing 
Buffalo Band at Fort Qu’Appelle. He died at the young age of 
24 on the first day of battle, Easter Monday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this Assembly and 
this province to pause on Easter Monday to remember the many 
young men like Joseph Peters who lost their lives in this 
decisive battle 90 years ago. It was their valiant efforts that 
turned the tide on World War I. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Meadow Lake Junior Achievers Excel 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know our 
Premier, who was in attendance, will want to join me. He was 
in attendance to present awards in congratulating a group of 11 
students from Carpenter High School and Jonas Samson Junior 
High School in Meadow Lake whose company, All Decked Out 
Promotions, won Company of the Year honours at the 
Saskatchewan Junior Achievement Hall of Fame Awards 
recently held in Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, All Decked Out Promotions’ major 
product — playing cards featuring the logos of local businesses 
— also received the award for best product design and the 
company was a top four finalist in the Shareholders Report of 
the Year category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, All Decked Out Promotions was a first-year 
company competing with 13 other Junior Achievement 
companies for these honours. The success of the company 
speaks volumes about the talents and level of commitment of 
this group of students and the quality of the advisers working 
with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Amanda Hill served as president of the company 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

and was also nominated for Achiever of the Year. Brynn 
Villeneuve was VP [vice president] of finance. She was a top 
four finalist for Most Valued VP of Finance and was co-winner 
of the Salesperson of the Year award. Other company VPs 
include Corinne Hampton, Joe McKay, Kevin Yu, Brittney 
Bacon, Cole Thompson, and Megan Hewison. The company’s 
directors were Branden Huziak, Kelsey Obrigewitsch, and 
Nicky Zacharias. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these outstanding Junior Achievers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1992, then 
Kindersley MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] Bill 
Boyd introduced a private member’s Bill that designated April 
6 of every year as Tartan Day. Tartan Day is a day on which we 
appreciate and celebrate our Scottish clans and families and the 
many contributions they have made and continue to make in 
building our province and nation. Scotland was the birthplace of 
our nation’s first prime minister, Sir John A. Macdonald, and of 
tens of thousands of settlers and immigrants who came to 
Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 
Since the first Scottish settler families arrived in Saskatchewan 
in the 1880s, Scottish traditions and culture have been alive and 
well in Saskatchewan. From highland dancing to pipe bands, 
Robbie Burns Day to highland athletic competitions, and haggis 
to scotch whiskey, Saskatchewan people are familiar with many 
aspects of Scottish culture. 
 
I would like to thank the Sons of Scotland Benevolent 
Association for their excellent performance of piping and 
highland dancing in the rotunda of the legislature earlier this 
afternoon. I would also like to thank all of the volunteers who 
every year put on a fantastic Scottish pavilion at both 
Saskatoon’s Folk Fest and Regina’s Mosaic festival and for 
continuing to share their culture, traditions, and food with all of 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition Saskatchewan 
Party, I am pleased to wish all Saskatchewan citizens of 
Scottish descent a happy Tartan Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Loggie’s Shoe Store Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today one of Regina’s oldest locally owned, independent 
businesses is celebrating its 100th anniversary. In 1907 two 
New Brunswick businessmen, J.E. Nicol and H.N. Loggie, 
arrived here in Regina and established a shoe store. 
 

The city was young, Mr. Speaker — only four years old. The 
population was about 8,000. And there was a mile of paved 
street and 49 street lights. Their hope that the city would grow 
and prosper was rewarded and their business prospered along 
with it. 
 
In 1914 Loggie bought Nicol out. Bill Childs later joined the 
firm and bought the business in 1938. Harold Hague returned 
from serving in the navy in World War II and started with the 
firm, eventually becoming manager and part owner before 
buying it out in 1978. All told, Harold Hague has worked 61 
years at Loggie’s Shoes. In 1984, Harold’s son Kelly joined the 
business and purchased it from his father in 1989 and owns and 
operates the business to this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the pleasure of joining the 
Hague family, Mayor Pat Fiacco, Regina downtown business 
improvement Chair Dale Greisser, and many others in 
celebration and for a bit of birthday cake. It was great to see the 
Hague family in attendance, especially Kelly’s sisters, Maureen 
and Colleen, as well as staff members past and present. It was a 
special treat especially to see Jerry Rusconi and Dorothy Bell, 
who between them have decades of work experience at 
Loggie’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to recognize 
Harold and Kelly for their outstanding contribution to our 
community. They have made and continue to make a 
tremendous contribution in so many ways to life in Regina. 
Congratulations to the Hague family on the 100th anniversary 
of Loggie’s Shoes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Wishart Dancers Perform at Disney World 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, a trip to Disneyland is coveted by 
young people as well as those young at heart. In February a 
group of individuals from the community of Wishart, the 
Wishart Senior Hopak Dancers, not only enjoyed a trip to 
Disney World but they were representatives of their 
community, their province, and their country as they performed 
twice at the Dock Stage in Downtown Disney, Orlando, Florida. 
 
The Wishart dancers have been in existence for 31 years, and 
presently they have an enrolment of 54 dancers ranging in age 
from 4 to 37 years old. Dancers attend from Wishart, Wynyard, 
Kelliher, Raymore, Punnichy, Saskatoon, and Regina. And the 
instructors, Dwayne and Brenda Prokopetz, reside in White 
City. 
 
When the senior group was performing at the Veselka 
celebration in Foam Lake in 2006, the instructor of the dance 
ensemble from Edmonton, Mr. Ken Kachmar, was very 
impressed with their performance and offered to make 
arrangements for them to perform at Disney World. 
 
Hard work is required to achieve success at the various 
high-level competitions that this group would normally compete 
at. When the word was received, they realized they would have 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

to be raising a lot of money and would require a lot of hard 
work needed to raise $32,000 in six months in a community 
with a population of 80 people. 
 
That didn’t daunt them. They achieved this goal by making and 
selling 40,000 perogies, two perogy suppers, three steak nights, 
a game of change night, three auction sales, a Ukrainian golf 
tournament, and the list goes on. Mr. Speaker, we should be 
very proud of this group of dancers who showcased Ukrainian 
heritage at Disney World. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

SGI Auto Fund Rebate 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. This week, 
insured vehicle owners in Saskatchewan are receiving more 
than just great insurance from SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance]. Mr. Speaker, this week SGI is returning $100 
million to its customers through a rebate on their 2006 auto 
insurance premiums. A rebate, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
people need to know would not be received if the Saskatchewan 
Party were in government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s Finance critic has made it clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan that the SGI rebate customers are 
receiving in their mailboxes is $100 million that, in quotes, 
“they would not have spent . . . that they would have been more 
prudent with.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it alarming that at a time that the SGI’s Auto 
Fund is in its strongest financial position in its history, the 
Saskatchewan Party opposes rebates to SGI customers. Mr. 
Speaker, what is even more alarming is that the Saskatchewan 
Party knows that the SGI Auto Fund is prohibited by legislation 
to receive or contribute money into the General Revenue Fund, 
yet they would have spent it elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, the only 
question that remains is, if the Saskatchewan Party opposes 
your SGI rebate, what would they have rather spent your money 
on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Missing Funds 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, since the fall of 2001 the 
Provincial Auditor has been raising the alarm over lack of 
proper controls and financial supervision in the Department of 
Community Resources. The department was not following rules 
and procedures. Roughly half of the client files examined did 
not contain enough information to verify the eligibility of 
applications. There were repeated warnings that the department 
needed to improve its compliance with established financial 
procedures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this morning we learned that $26,000 is missing 
from the department’s Regina office. An eight-year employee 
has been fired and three managers have been disciplined. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: why is this still happening? Why is 
money still going missing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to point out as the minister that certainly when it comes to 
the department, the buck certainly stops here. And I want to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that I take that responsibility very, very 
seriously. And what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that as 
politicians we certainly develop policies and programs. And 
what we then do is we turn around and we allow the 
administrators — usually called a deputy minister and a series 
of managers — to implement the policies and procedures to 
make sure there’s an effective form of governance and certainly 
making sure that the services are being delivered. What I’ll 
point out, Mr. Speaker, is we put the policies in place, and they 
must be followed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my understanding on this particular incidence that the 
policies and practices were not always followed. And what I’d 
like to report is that my deputy took decisive action by 
terminating the employee in question and disciplining others 
that did not have the proper oversight in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the person at the centre of 
these allegations is a long-time employee with the Department 
of Community Resources. So was Evelyn Hynes who bilked the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan for over $1 million — money 
destined for the poorest of poor. Ms. Hynes was able to commit 
her fraud over a period of 12 years and no one knew that she 
had a previous conviction for bank fraud because no one did a 
criminal records check. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: was the employee at the centre of 
this investigation the subject of criminal records check? And if 
not, why not? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, Mr. Speaker, what I’ll point out 
that it is certainly something that is disheartening and 
disappointing. There’s no question about that, that there’s been 
some good progress made in this particular department. And 
certainly our deputy has worked very hard with a series of 
managers to make sure that problems, as they arose, are 
addressed. And certainly this is an issue that of course is not a 
very good public story. 
 
And as disappointing and disheartening that this is, we wanted 
the public to know. And, Mr. Speaker, we wanted the public to 
know as soon as possible. And as I mentioned in the past, as 
much as this is not a good news story, we welcome the scrutiny. 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that our deputy acted 
swiftly. Our deputy acted decisively. And the deputy filled his 
responsibility in his role because his responsibility’s role is to 
make sure that he hires and fires and disciplines staff. And, Mr. 
Speaker, our deputy done his job. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this morning the deputy 
minister of Community Resources said the new controls put in 
place to prevent fraud didn’t work. Also in what absolutely 
must be the understatement of the year, Mr. Duncan Fisher said 
this incident and another reported in the media this week will 
have an impact on the credibility of the department. Well no 
kidding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three managers have been suspended with pay for 
10 days as a result of this latest incident. Why were these 
employees suspended, and what further investigations will be 
undertaken in the wake of today’s revelations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out that 
again it is my understanding, it is my understanding, that 
policies and practices were not always followed, and obviously 
this is a weakness that we will address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our deputy minister has been instructed and will continue doing 
so in making sure that we look at all the accountability 
framework as dictated by the Minister of Finance to make sure 
that we tighten up and strengthen some of the rules and 
regulations and the processes attached to that to make sure we 
do become an efficient department. And certainly that all adds 
to the credibility, the good credibility of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would point out that my deputy took decisive action as soon as 
this problem was very apparent. We became very clear and 
were very public about it. The employee was terminated. We 
are now in the process of meeting with the city police. I believe 
the meeting is set up for Thursday. And, Mr. Speaker, let the 
city police do their jobs to investigate the matter further. Again 
I would point out we took decisive action and steps were taken 
to correct the situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that decisive 
action doesn’t happen in every department of this government. 
Yesterday the Minister for the Public Service Commission said 
that the NDP [New Democratic Party] government would 
review harassment complaints made to the deputy minister and 
associate deputy minister of the Environment back in 1994. 

What has she found out? Can she tell us why serious 
harassment complaints were being ignored? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the members 
read a letter from a woman or a statement from a woman. I 
guess my question is did they have the permission of that 
woman to read the statement? That’s question no. 1. So they 
have put it on the public record that they had the permission of 
the woman, so that’s important to understand. 
 
What I can say is the person, the person who wrote the 
information in this statement was one of nine complainants who 
reached a settlement with the government in 2004. The 
allegations in the statement were considered in the negotiations 
leading up to the settlement with the nine complainants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke yesterday 
about improvements needed in anti-harassment legislation. 
Public Service Commission’s anti-harassment policy states in 
section PS 807-C and I quote, “It is misconduct for managers 
and supervisors who know of workplace harassment not to take 
immediate corrective action.” 

 
Managers, supervisors, DMs [deputy minister], ADMs 
[associate deputy minister], ministers, and the Premier were all 
told but did not act upon harassment complaints brought 
forward by Murdoch Carriere’s victims. Can the minister 
explain why she needs new legislation when her government is 
ignoring current legislation? 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that 
every employer in the province of Saskatchewan is to — under 
the occupational health and safety legislation — to have an 
anti-harassment policy. And my understanding is that that 
anti-harassment policy is to be displayed in the workplace. We 
have asked the members of the opposition whether they have an 
anti-harassment policy in their caucus office. They’ve never 
answered that question, and they certainly never put on the 
public record whether or not this policy is displayed in the 
workplace. 
 
But I will say this, I will say this, that in the occupational health 
and safety legislation, in the occupational health and safety 
legislation there are provisions that . . . and there is a definition 
that outlines under what grounds people face harassment, Mr. 
Speaker. But there’s been a larger definition that’s been put in 
legislation in certainly Quebec and Manitoba that deals with 
personal harassment or psychological harassment. And, Mr. 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

Speaker, it’s our intention to amend our legislation to have that 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere’s victims 
went to deputy ministers, associate deputy ministers, 
supervisors, their union, ministers, and the Premier and still 
received no help. Today the Department of Community 
Services announced it suspended three managers for lack of 
oversight and insufficient monitoring. The DM said it’s a case 
of the proper policies being in place but not being followed. 
The government has suspended three managers for lack of 
oversight in that department. Why has this government refused 
to implement the same standards for those who refused to 
protect Murdoch Carriere’s victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I will say this, that as the members 
opposite may know, Mr. Terry Scott — who was the deputy 
minister at the time — is no longer in the employ of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. The policy certainly has been 
amended in terms of the complaints, and we are following that 
process, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the policy that is now in 
place. 
 
But I will say to the members opposite — and this is important 
— the members opposite did not agree to any provision when it 
came to harassment in the occupational health and safety 
legislation that was introduced in 1993. And it will be really 
interesting to see whether or not the opposition support a larger 
definition for harassment in this province so that workers can be 
protected for a variety of harassments that do take place in the 
workplace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition is more 
than willing to consider amendments to improve 
anti-harassment legislation. However the problem isn’t existing 
legislation. The problem is the NDP government’s 
unwillingness to enforce current legislation. The problem is this 
government’s refusal to find out exactly what went wrong in the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal and to make sure that it never 
happens again. The problem is that the NDP would rather . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Members are interfering with the member’s right to speak in the 
Assembly. The Chair recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the problem is that the NDP 

would rather write a big, fat cheque to their buddy, Murdoch 
Carriere, and hope that the problem just goes away. 
 
Will the Premier finally begin to set the record straight by 
allowing an all-party legislative committee to investigate the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think all of the facts are 
certainly known in . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
members of the opposition disagree. But I will say this: nine 
women complained. There was an investigation that took place 
in 2002. Mr. Carriere was suspended with pay. Then he was 
disciplined. He was suspended without pay on February 12, 
suspended for three months. He was demoted three levels, and 
he was sent to Regina, and he was red circled. And on April 2 
he was dismissed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the members know, The Public Service Act is very clear. 
The only person that can dismiss an employee is the permanent 
head. The permanent head was instructed by the Premier to 
dismiss Mr. Carriere. It was double jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. The 
process was not followed, and we ended up settling with Mr. 
Carriere instead of going to court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
is having a health human resources crisis, and here’s the effect 
the nursing shortage is having on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Arcola Health Centre has reduced services again. 
According to town council member Darren Grimes, this latest 
crisis developed when two of the six registered nurses retired. 
They haven’t received an application for an RN [registered 
nurse] in over six months. They’re hoping for some new grads. 
They’ve been advertising across Canada. They’re even trying to 
bring in nurses from Zambia. The community is worried that 
this will affect the ability to recruit doctors. 
 
Why is this Minister of Health abandoning rural Saskatchewan 
by failing to adequately address the nursing shortage across 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to address the question raised by the opposition’s new 
health care critic today. The member, the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, does not understand the nature of health human 
resources crisis across Canada. Mr. Speaker, any review of 
literature, media reports, magazine reports from across Canada, 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, would indicate very clearly what the crisis in work 
shortages are across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are aware, 30 beds in Calgary, Mr. Speaker, 
are closed every single day, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
shortage of nurses. Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia, the 
number of nurses right now, vacancies in the province of British 
Columbia — 2,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the 
Minister of Health’s comments, it’s plain that he doesn’t even 
know where the hospitals are in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Arcola and other communities are concerned that 
the inability to recruit nurses and doctors jeopardizes the 
existence of their health centres. Is this the NDP plan — to 
provide no nurses, to eliminate acute care, to reduce emergency 
services to a few hours? What happens when there’s an accident 
in agriculture, in the oil patch, or on the highways? Is this the 
NDP’s plan? Is this government trying to starve rural 
Saskatchewan of nurses so that hospitals and health centres are 
forced to close permanently? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
just continue the answer from where I left off a few moments 
ago. Mr. Speaker, in Calgary alone, Mr. Speaker, the shortage 
of nurses or the vacancies available — 650. Mr. Speaker, the 
point of my argument is quite clear: that there is a national 
problem, Mr. Speaker, as far as nurse shortages. 
 
The opposition is demonstrating that they don’t understand this 
crisis in human health resources, Mr. Speaker. And they’re also 
demonstrating that they do not understand what this province 
has done because, Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last year 
we have announced not only recruitment and retention 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker. We have put in this budget an incentive 
for graduates. And, Mr. Speaker, today — today, Mr. Speaker 
— I am announcing additional bursaries for students, Mr. 
Speaker, bursaries that on top of the incentives for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
October of last year, Spiritwood shut down its hospital services 
indefinitely because of a shortage of doctors. At the time the 
minister said that the government’s new recruitment strategy 
would help recruit doctors to rural areas. It’s been almost six 

months, and the hospital is still not able to provide full services. 
I would say that six months is not just a temporary closure. 
 
To the Minister of Health: when will services at Spiritwood 
Hospital return to normal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite is well aware of how hard the Prince Albert 
Parkland Regional Health Authority is working to overcome the 
temporary closure at Spiritwood and to ensure that those who 
live in that Big River-Shellbrook-Spiritwood area, Mr. Speaker, 
will have access to quality health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are also aware of the work 
that this government and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons have 
done and are doing, Mr. Speaker, on physician recruitment. Mr. 
Speaker, recruitment efforts are under way. Recruitment efforts 
will continue to be supported by this government, Mr. Speaker, 
and I have confidence in the Prince Albert Parkland Regional 
health care authority to complete the work that they have begun. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when services in Spiritwood were initially suspended, 
the Minister of Health said he was concerned that hospital 
services had not been provided for more than a week. It’s been 
six months. 
 
I have also learned that from May 1 to June 15, Big River will 
not have a doctor. That means that service . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I invite the 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook to continue his question. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been six 
months. I have also learned that from May 1 to June 15, Big 
River will have no doctor. That means that services cannot be 
provided at the Big River Hospital. Why has the minister 
allowed the doctor situation to deteriorate so badly in the Prince 
Albert Parkland region? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
as with nurses in the province, Mr. Speaker, there are areas of 
the province that have become hard-to-recruit-to areas, Mr. 
Speaker. We currently have two of those hard-to-recruit areas in 
the province with regards to physicians. One of them is that 
southern part of the P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland Health 
Region. Mr. Speaker, the government, the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Mr. Speaker, and the community are working closely hand in 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

hand to recruit to that specific hard-to-recruit area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to support these recruitment efforts 
through the budget tabled in this House and voted upon the 
other day. The member opposite specifically voted against that 
budget which puts additional resources to work to support 
physician recruitment across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not just hospitals in rural Saskatchewan that are being forced to 
reduce services. Unit 5E at the Regina General Hospital will be 
closing six beds effective April 10 because, from a memo that 
we received and I quote from the memo, “ongoing staff 
shortages.” Unit 5E provides patient care for general surgery 
and gynecology. The wait for these surgeries already is 
ridiculous. How is closing six more beds going to do anything 
to reduce the waiting lists? 
 
This minister talks every day that the waiting lists are being 
reduced, but that’s not what people in Saskatchewan are 
experiencing. How can he ever say that waiting lists are 
shortened when we’re seeing reduced services across 
Saskatchewan and in Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
again an emphasis on the opposition does not understand the 
nature of the crisis in the shortage of health care workers. Mr. 
Speaker, in the province of Alberta, in the city of Calgary, 
every day, Mr. Speaker, 30 beds are closed as a result of a 
shortage of nurses; Mr. Speaker, that Alberta government and 
British Columbia government, where they’re 2,000 short, Mr. 
Speaker, every day those provinces are recruiting in this 
province, trying to take Saskatchewan graduates and 
Saskatchewan nurses out to other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to be competitive, not only to 
retain our graduates but to retain the nurses that are working in 
the units currently, Mr. Speaker, and to recruit from other 
jurisdictions to fill the vacancies that we have. Mr. Speaker, the 
recruitment agency is assisting the regional health authorities to 
do this work, Mr. Speaker. On a policy and fiscal basis, Mr. 
Speaker, we are doing all that we can to provide the assistance 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is under this minister’s 
watch and under this NDP government that we’ve got the worst 
nursing retention rate of anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s not a wonder when I read from the memo that 
I received regarding unit 5E, it talks about staff that are being 
run off their feet to try and keep these beds open. I go on to 
quote the memo. It says: 
 

This was challenging for everyone involved and the 
decision to close has not been made without a lot of 
thought and consultation. 

 
But frankly it’s a matter of safety. We do not have enough 
staff to provide safe patient conditions in our main hospitals 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s absolutely ridiculous. 
Under the worst nurse retention rate of anywhere in Canada, 
how can he stand in his spot and defend his record? 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again the opposition demonstrates that they aren’t willing to 
listen to or pay attention to the newest numbers that are coming 
forward, and they keep relying on old numbers and old 
circumstances. Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of current graduates, 
Mr. Speaker, are working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s a heck of a change over the years, Mr. Speaker, under 
the watch of this government. 
 
And let’s deal with some other numbers, Mr. Speaker. In 
October we announced a recruitment and retention strategy, Mr. 
Speaker — $25 million over three years. We put that in place 
less than six months ago. Mr. Speaker, the latest numbers as of 
the end of March, 120 individuals have been recruited to the 
province of Saskatchewan from this initiative in just the last six 
months. Mr. Speaker, 56 per cent of those are nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear this minister does 
not understand the impact of human resource shortages that 
we’re facing in Saskatchewan. And they failed to address it 
completely in the budget. 
 
According to the Saskatchewan Health employee pension plan, 
we have 485 nurses that are eligible for retirement. We also 
have 523 nursing positions that are vacant. That’s over 1,000 
nurses short in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, what did this 
minister do to address that problem? He increased the number 
of seats by a whopping 18. He ought to be ashamed of himself. 
 
What is even worse is when we talk about doctor shortages. 
What did they do in that area? They increased it by a whopping 
of four seats. It comes nowhere close to what is needed in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at other provinces, such as Manitoba, they have 
twice as many seats in that province for nursing training. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re far short of what we need in this area, and it’s 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

under that minister’s watch. Decisions they made through the 
’90s has caused problems that we’re seeing today. What is he 
going to do to fix it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair . . . Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite conveniently ignores all of the initiatives that 
have been taken by this government — recruitment, retention, 
and training. But, Mr. Speaker, this budget wasn’t just for 
forecasting for the next 12 months, Mr. Speaker. This budget 
was forecasting for the next four years, and this budget contains 
funding for 152 additional nursing seats. Mr. Speaker, currently 
this budget supports 1,500 students, and over the course of the 
next four years, Mr. Speaker, on an annual basis, this budget 
projection supports annually 1,600 nursing seats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 

Bursaries for Health Care Providers 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as I made reference in the question period today, the 
Saskatchewan government believes in a high-quality health care 
system accessible to all Saskatchewan residents, and one that is 
sustainable into the future with the resources available to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a key ingredient for a strong health care system is 
having an adequate number of health care providers. Like many 
other jurisdictions, Saskatchewan is experiencing shortages of 
key health care professions. Keeping and attracting key health 
care providers is one of the biggest challenges facing our health 
care system, and addressing this challenge is one of the top 
priorities of this government. 
 
Since 2001 we have directly addressed the retention and 
recruitment issue in our action plan for Saskatchewan health 
care and in our health workforce action plan. Mr. Speaker, 
today it is my pleasure to announce funding for 600 new and 
continuing and return-in-service bursaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In support of this program the provincial 
government is devoting more than $6 million this year to 
support return-in-service bursary programs in the health care 
field. Health bursaries will be awarded to Saskatchewan 
students studying in health-related areas where shortages exist 
or are anticipated. In exchange, these students agree to work in 
Saskatchewan’s publicly funded health care system upon 
completion of their studies. 
 
Combined with the recent budget announcement giving a tax 
break to graduates who settle in this province, we believe that 
our bursary program is a powerful incentive to keep young 

people in Saskatchewan after they’ve completed their studies. 
Saskatchewan’s lower housing costs are also a big drawing card 
for young people, as are our short commutes to work, closer 
proximity to family and friends, and great lifestyle 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are targeting our bursaries to Saskatchewan 
students studying to be nurses. These include licensed practical 
nurses, registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, nurse 
educators, primary care nurse practitioners, advanced practical 
nurses, and those studying to re-enter the nursing profession. In 
addition, the government, in partnership with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, will offer bursaries to students and 
residents studying medicine. 
 
Also benefiting from bursaries are Saskatchewan students 
studying in a broad array of health services professions. These 
disciplines would include audiology, combined laboratory and 
x-ray technology, cytology, dental therapy, dietetics and 
nutrition, public health inspection, MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging] technology, medical laboratory and medical radiation 
technology, midwifery, nuclear medicine; physical, 
occupational, and respiratory therapy; pharmacy, prosthetic and 
orthotic technology, speech-language pathology, clinical 
psychology, clinical social work, and ultrasonography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that investing in students through 
bursaries is a very effective way of encouraging them to remain 
in Saskatchewan after they complete their studies. At the same 
time, investing in our young people supports good health care 
system planning and follows through on our commitment of 
making our province a great place to live and work. I commend 
all bursary applicants for their commitment to health care in 
Saskatchewan and I look forward to their work and service to 
the people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
rise and respond to the ministerial statement, and I would thank 
the minister for sending the statement over prior to hearing it. 
 
I do want to first of all talk about the bursary program to begin 
with. And well, that will be my remarks around the whole 
program and the return in service — the bursaries. And it is a 
good start. Bringing people or keeping people in Saskatchewan 
is what we need to do. 
 
And it’s exactly what I said during question period, that we had 
the worst nurse retention record of anywhere in Canada. And 
he’s saying, well now it’s starting to turn around. And perhaps 
it is by programs like this, but the problem is is that we’ve had 
16 years of NDP government ignoring the issue. And because 
we’ve had 16 years of NDP government and various health 
ministers over there ignoring the issue, we have fallen so far 
behind. And we’ve fallen so far behind that we’re seeing 
hospitals around the province — whether it’s in Arcola, 
whether it’s in Spiritwood, it’s been in Kamsack — there are 
hospitals around the province that are closing because they 
don’t have the proper complement of health care professionals. 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

But what’s as alarming as that is now we’re seeing our acute 
care facilities in our major centres like the Regina General 
Hospital that are having to close six beds because they simply 
don’t have the staff. You know, it’s very hard to recruit health 
care professionals when you hear stories like what we heard 
from the memo that I read from earlier today where nurses — 
and all the health care professionals, but nurses — are being run 
off their feet because they don’t have the proper complement of 
nurses. 
 
We see workers’ compensation rates increasing. We see 
overtime increasing, payments increasing. It’s all because of 
decisions that this government has made over the last 16 years. 
 
Over the last 16 years we had cut the number of nurse training 
seats significantly down to, I believe, about 120 nurse training 
seats graduating in one year. Well that doesn’t even come close 
to covering off the number of retirements. So you run with 
about 120 or 30 nurse training seats for a couple of years, and 
you have 4 or 500 nurses retiring, you get yourself into the 
position that we find ourselves in today. We find ourselves in 
the position where we have 500-and-some seats, 500-and-some 
vacancies in our health . . . as far as registered nurses. We have 
480 eligible to retire. 
 
And the minister in all his wisdom decided that we’d increase 
the number of training seats by 18. Well that increase, to try and 
meet the demand of 1,000 in the next year or two that could be 
vacant — those positions could be vacant — at that rate, within 
50 years this government, retaining all their trainees, may 
finally start to address the issue. It’s a sad state of affairs that 
under this NDP government and under that minister, they would 
let our health care system fall in such disrepair because they’ve 
ignored the human resources problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that Bill No. 61, the vital statistics amendment Act, 
2007 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 61, The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that Bill No. 62, The Vital Statistics Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 62, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment 
Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip, 
the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
we will be tabling responses to written questions no. 964 to 979 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 964 through to 979 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return No. 3 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
we will be converting it to a motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Return no. 3 has been converted to a motions 
for return (debatable). 
 
[14:45] 
 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. At the conclusion of my remarks it will be my 
pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 57, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments continue this government’s 
commitment to provide a fair and equitable assessment system 
for property tax payers in this province. This fairness and equity 
will be ensured through the necessary amendment to implement 
a new funding scheme for the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, more commonly referred to as SAMA. 
 
This new funding scheme will provide the necessary funding 
from the stakeholder groups of the assessment system to 
implement the 2009 market value assessment system, and to get 
on track to meet the legislated property re-inspection 
requirements. The stakeholders of the property assessment 
system are the province, municipalities, and school divisions. 
This funding scheme was developed jointly among government 
departments and SAMA. Their mandate was to determine a 
long-term, sustainable, and principle-based funding plan for 
SAMA. 
 
This new funding plan has been discussed with the assessment 
system stakeholders in the municipal and education sectors. 
These consultations have been with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, SUMA; the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM; the New North; 
and the Saskatchewan School Boards Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments implementing a new funding 
scheme for SAMA recognize the substantial stake each of the 
three stakeholders has in maintaining the overall integrity of the 
property tax revenue base. The property assessment system 
provides $1.281 billion in revenue to fund school divisions and 
municipalities, and is a significant component in determining 
the allocation of $594 million in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] operating grants to the education sector. Ensuring a 
sustainable assessment system is paramount in making certain 
that property taxes are collected and grant calculations are done 
in a fair and equitable fashion. 
 
I want to take just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to highlight the 
significant characteristics of this long-term funding plan for 
SAMA. Funding will be a shared responsibility among all 
stakeholders — the province, municipalities, and school 
division. Over time, funding proportions will reach 40 per cent, 
30 per cent, and 30 per cent for the province, municipalities, 
and school division respectively for funding SAMA. 
 
Municipalities should not see an increase in their SAMA 
requisitions until the provincial and school division shares reach 
their targeted 40 per cent and 30 per cent levels. Until that time, 

the increased funding requirements for SAMA will be borne 
equally by the province and school divisions. 
 
SAMA’s future funding requirements will be determined based 
on a four-year funding plan which coincides with the legislated 
four-year revaluation cycle. For 2007-08 requisitions for 
SAMA client school divisions will be funded from the K to 12 
operating grant. The future funding mechanism will be 
reviewed by Learning. 
 
Accountability measures will be developed to ensure the 
funding partners have timely and meaningful information both 
about plans and actual results. The plan also envisions an 
eventual restructuring of the composition of the SAMA board 
of directors to reflect the new funding shares. However, Mr. 
Speaker, this will not occur until sometime in the future when 
the 40 per cent, 30 per cent, and 30 per cent funding shares are 
reached and after further consultations with stakeholders. At 
that future time, additional amendments to this legislation 
related to governance will be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province’s new funding requirements under 
this plan will be set out in this Act’s regulations subject to 
review and approval by government. Government will also 
finish its previous commitments to fund the development of the 
Saskatchewan Property Assessment Network, SPAN, and the 
rental income approach to commercial property assessment 
required for the 2009 revaluation. This is in addition to annual 
funding. 
 
The proposed approach, Mr. Speaker, is principals-based. The 
province will maintain and increase its commitment to SAMA 
and provide the necessary funding to ensure that the province’s 
interests in the assessment system are addressed. The proposals 
are built on the principle of attaining an equal relationship in 
terms of funding responsibilities for SAMA between two local 
government sectors, municipalities and school divisions, that 
rely on the property tax base as requested by the Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association. 
 
It is anticipated, Mr. Speaker, that reaching the 40/30/30 cost 
sharing could take some years. The transition to 40/30/30 
stakeholder funding means that once achieved, each of the 
stakeholders will share proportionately in any required funding 
changes which should result in maximum levels of transparency 
and accountability to all stakeholders for SAMA. 
 
The concept of fixed funding shares based on the interests of 
each of the funding partners will provide greater certainty and 
equity for all parties into the future. Mr. Speaker, these 
amendments will require SAMA to prepare for consideration by 
stakeholders a four-year funding plan tied to the assessment 
revaluation cycle. One of the primary benefits of this approach 
will be to provide the necessary level of certainty to SAMA for 
successfully implementing revaluations. It also places the onus 
on SAMA to manage the year-to-year variations in required 
assessment activities and expenditures within the plan over the 
four-year revaluation cycle. 
 
The approach will provide more certainty to the funding 
stakeholders. It will improve transparency and accountability. 
Provincial funding will remain subject to the annual provincial 
budget process and consideration by the legislature. 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

SAMA is currently required to consult with the funding 
stakeholders annually as part of its budget process. The 
multi-year funding plan approach means that the stakeholders 
will have an opportunity to review SAMA’s objectives and 
planned expenditure at the start of each revaluation cycle in the 
context of what the agency hopes to achieve for that 
revaluation. 
 
SAMA will have to anticipate and plan for major capital or 
operational changes well in advance of their implementation so 
that the appropriate approvals and funding are in place. 
 
SAMA will have to propose and justify expenditure 
requirements for the next four-year budgetary period in the 
context of a plan for the revaluation cycle. The specific 40, 30, 
and 30 allocation formula will ultimately enable each 
stakeholder to clearly identify the impact of the SAMA budget 
proposal on their sector as soon as they receive the proposed 
budget. To ensure, Mr. Speaker, a high level of accountability 
to stakeholders, the new funding arrangement will necessitate 
the development of additional accountability measures for 
SAMA including, but not limited to, the annual reporting of 
SAMA’s progress within the four-year plan. 
 
This builds, Mr. Speaker, on SAMA’s current practices and will 
not only identify financial and staffing variances but will also 
provide an explanation of the changes relative to their 
implications for meeting the goals and objectives of the 
revaluation cycle that is underway. The measures would be 
developed in consultation with the stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have consulted on this funding plan 
with the local government associations. Comments received 
from the SAMA board and associations representing local 
governments have been generally favourable. However, Mr. 
Speaker, both the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association suggest that the provincial share of SAMA’s 
funding should be greater than 40 per cent. This current 
percentage is linked to provincial interests in the assessment 
system that have been in the Act since 1994 and that provide a 
rational policy basis for determining what the appropriate 
provincial share of the costs of funding SAMA should be. The 
cost outside of the provincial interests are for the most part for 
assessment valuation services to continue to be funded by 
SAMA client local governments. 
 
In 2004 a review of SAMA operations determined that the 
education sector was a major benefactor of the assessment 
system and that they should begin to fund a portion of SAMA’s 
costs. This change was made with the endorsement of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association. School divisions rely 
heavily on property assessments whether to levy their own 
property taxes or to distribute provincial grants among school 
divisions. Given this interest, education sector funding for 
SAMA is entirely appropriate. It is proposed that this should be 
on a par with municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments, I believe, will serve to 
strengthen The Assessment Management Agency Act and form 
a strong financial planning base for achievement of the next 
revaluation in 2009 and beyond. Mr. Speaker, this government 
recognizes the importance of a fair and equitable property 

assessment system. To provide such a system, it is important 
that SAMA has sustainable and long-term funding from the 
province, municipalities, and school divisions. And these 
amendments will ensure this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 57, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 57, The Assessment 
Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After that 
scintillating presentation by the minister, I’m at a loss as what I 
could possibly add to the Act, Bill No. 57, to amend the 
assessment management agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the minister’s comments, he certainly 
alluded to the fact that accurate assessments are an important 
function of property tax formulas and that all three levels of 
jurisdictions — the school boards, the municipal associations, 
and the province, all benefit and have a responsibility to share 
in the costs. 
 
I note, as well as the minister did, that the formula that was 
adopted by the government is certainly not one that was asked 
for by either of SUMA or SARM. SUMA I understand asked 
that 60 per cent of the funding come from the province and 20 
per cent each from the municipalities and school divisions. 
SARM offered a suggestion of 50 per cent from the province 
and 25 per cent each from the municipalities and school 
divisions. 
 
And of course the government, in its infinite wisdom of 
unloading more costs onto municipalities and school divisions, 
decided on a 40/30/30 basis. And this will be an extra cost for 
both of these other jurisdictions which take away from funds 
they would have available for important programs delivered 
elsewhere. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do understand that these regulations have to 
be updated, but certainly I note that the consultation process 
that occurred between SUMA and SARM was largely ignored 
in terms of the funding. And I hope that in other areas where 
amendments are being made and contemplated that the advice 
of SUMA and SARM haven’t been ignored as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order for us to properly consult with SUMA, 
SARM, and the school boards, I at this time would now move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 57 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
fortunate day for the members because I have the opportunity to 
move, at the conclusion of my remarks, second reading of Bill 
No. 58, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 
2007. 
 
As many members will know, Mr. Speaker, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Act provides the authority for a key element 
of the provincial financial assistance for urban and rural 
municipalities. The Bill establishes the amount of funds 
available this year to both the urban revenue-sharing pool and 
the rural revenue-sharing pool. It also determines the split in 
funding within the urban pool between cities and towns, 
villages and resort villages. These amendments will give legal 
effect to decisions announced in the 2007-2008 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has committed to increased 
revenue sharing, as resources permit, to ensure stable, 
sustainable, long-term funding for municipalities. This Bill and 
the budget decisions it enacts demonstrate our commitment to 
municipal governments across this province. 
 
For 2007-08, Mr. Speaker, we are providing an historic increase 
of $30 million in revenue sharing to municipalities. This is a 31 
per cent increase, which brings the total revenue-sharing pool to 
$127.3 million, its highest level in the history of the program. 
This increase means an additional $11.7 million in 
unconditional funding for cities. For towns, villages, and resort 
villages, the increase is $4.2 million. For rural municipalities, 
Mr. Speaker, the increase in revenue sharing is $11.7 million, 
including both unconditional and conditional infrastructure 
grants. 
 
Throughout the past year my officials and I have consulted with 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the cities, 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and at the 
municipal forum on how to distribute the funds this year. Their 
views have been considered and acted on where consensus with 
the province and each other could be reached. 
 
Our priorities with regard to revenue sharing address three 
specific areas: increasing operational funding across the board, 
addressing inequities among communities, and providing 
funding for infrastructure and transitional issues. 
 
The cities will now receive a total of $46.8 million. In 2007-08, 
all cities will receive an increase of $12.84 per capita in their 
revenue-sharing grants. Saskatoon and Regina will each receive 
an additional $12 per capita. This will provide a total per capita 
payment of $87.85 to all cities. This adjustment brings all cities 
to the same level of funding per capita and removes an inequity 
in the distribution of revenue sharing to the cities that had 
existed until now. 
 
Towns and villages will receive an additional $4.2 million in 

unconditional operating funding. This will bring the maximum 
amount payable to towns, villages, and resort villages to nearly 
$20.7 million. These funds will be distributed according to an 
updated formula for small urban communities. 
 
The updated formula will use the new 2006 census Canada 
population figures. Mr. Speaker, here again we will address the 
inequities in the distribution of revenue sharing. Previously the 
distribution made use of both the 1996 and 2001 census data as 
well as municipal assessments and financial information dating 
back to prior to the 1997 province-wide re-evaluation, 
information that was a decade old or more. 
 
Rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, will receive an increase of 
almost $11.7 million. This will provide rural municipalities 
with a total of $49.6 million in revenue sharing. Of the increase, 
$7.36 million will be allocated to the conditional grant 
programs, of which $5 million has been set aside for the 
municipal primary weight corridors program. With the addition 
of another $5 million next year, this program will receive $10 
million in targeted funding. 
 
About $1.65 million will be available to the bridge program. 
And $700,000 has been allocated to a program we have named 
Communities in Transition, which is intended to assist those 
municipalities dealing with the infrastructure and environmental 
liabilities they assume when a village reverts back into an RM 
[rural municipality]. The details of these programs will be 
developed in consultation with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities. 
 
The remainder of the increase, $4.34 million, will be allocated 
to unconditional grants for RMs and organized hamlets, 
bringing the total unconditional portion of the rural 
revenue-sharing pool to $38.7 million. This will be provided to 
individual RMs based on a formula that includes a 
transportation and a service component. It is estimated, Mr. 
Speaker . . . It is based 85 per cent on the road system in each 
RM while the remaining 15 per cent is based on a three-year 
rolling average of expenditures such as protective services or 
culture and recreation services. 
 
In addition to the urban and rural revenue-sharing amounts set 
by this Bill, northern municipalities also receive part of the total 
$127.3 million. This is provided for by regulation under The 
Northern Municipalities Act, so it does not appear in this Bill. 
 
Once it has been passed and received the assent of the 
Lieutenant Governor, this Bill will come into force 
retroactively. It will be effective as of April 1, 2007, the first 
day of the province’s 2007-08 fiscal year. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I remind all members that this Bill will 
help to provide more than $127.3 million of revenue-sharing 
grants for municipalities. All urban communities will receive an 
increase in their grants. We will address some historical 
inequities and we will provide increased funding for critical 
infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, this funding is critical to the 
prosperity and well-being of all communities and municipalities 
in Saskatchewan and I urge all members to support this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, I move second reading of Bill 
No. 58, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 58, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have to say that I 
stand in awe of the minister. This legislation is 12 lines long 
and the explanation took more than 10 minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly think that adjustments from time to 
time in the municipal revenue-sharing formula is important, and 
it is also important to note that while this legislation is in total, 
gives us summary totals, many of the individual RMs and cities 
and communities are going to be very interested in what it 
means specifically for them. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that 
many of them are anxiously looking forward to what the 
specific amounts of their revenue-sharing grants are going to be 
in their specific jurisdiction, and I know they’re going to want 
to communicate and transmit this information and their 
concerns to the official opposition. In order to allow them to do 
that, at this point I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 58 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Gaming Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This afternoon I’m pleased to introduce the amendments 
contained in Bill No. 59, The Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2007. By introducing this 
legislation, our government recognizes that the highly regulated 
gaming industry is in fact a commercial industry and that the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation is one of the most 
commercial entities under the provincial government’s purview, 
generating profits that benefit all Saskatchewan people through 
programs and services. 
 
This Bill will allow the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation or 
SGC to be designated as a Crown Investments Corporation 
entity and allow it to be integrated into the Crown Investment 
Corporation’s subsidiary governance model and capital 
allocation framework. This legislation, changing the status of 
SGC from a Treasury Board Crown to that of a wholly owned 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 
subsidiary, better reflects the corporation’s commercial nature 
as a dynamic and innovative player in our province’s economy 
generally, and a growing tourism industry in particular. And of 
course in particular in the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 

The corporation will benefit specifically from the governance 
framework of a CIC Crown. This government’s Crown 
governance model has received national recognition. The 
Conference Board of Canada has stated that the governance 
practices of our Crown boards are among the best in Canada — 
public or private. The Institute of Public Administration of 
Canada Governor General’s Award for Excellence in Public 
Service went to CIC in 2000, in the year 2000, in recognition of 
the governance, strategic planning, and performance 
management systems developed for use in our Crown sector. 
Our Crown corporations play such an important role in 
Saskatchewan’s economy and society because they very 
effectively maintain that critical balance, Mr. Speaker, that 
critical balance between business success, good governance, 
and good public policy. 
 
This designation will be effective January 1, 2008. And the 
transition, from the perspective of SGC stakeholders, will be 
transparent and rather innocuous. 
 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act currently requires 
that SGC transfer 100 per cent of its annual net income to the 
General Revenue Fund. The government then distributes an 
amount equal to 25 per cent of the SGC’s net income to each of 
the Community Initiatives Fund or the CIF and the First 
Nations Trust or FNT. The $2 million of the annual payments 
that flow to the CIF are then allocated to the Clarence Campeau 
Development Fund. All of these, Mr. Speaker, for positive 
social purposes as a result of profits received in the Gaming 
Corporation to assist people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The change in status of the corporation to a CIC Crown will not 
impact the funding obligations to the Community Initiatives 
Fund or the First Nations Trust. In fact this Bill specifies that 
SGC will continue to provide direct payment to the General 
Revenue Fund in accordance with the 2004 Gaming Framework 
Agreement. 
 
SGC will continue to pay 50 per cent of net income directly to 
the GRF [General Revenue Fund] for its distribution to the 
Community Initiatives Fund and the First Nations Trust. The 
net income after these fund payments will be subject to CIC’s 
dividend policy. 
 
SGC requires an appropriate financial structure so as not to 
impede its ability to operate in such a commercial environment. 
Since its inception, the Gaming Corporation has been financed 
solely by debt capital. It has not received any equity financing 
from the government, nor has it been allowed to build up any 
retained earnings. And this financing structure is not conducive 
to a commercial entity needing capital for renovations, asset 
replacement and upgrades, and the introduction of new 
technologies and product offerings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government is proud to report that the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation enjoys a workforce that is 
near 50 per cent Aboriginal representation. That’s very 
important to us. SGC can boast having one of the most 
inclusive workforces in the country — in the country. 
Furthermore, the corporation’s current workforce of 1,008 has 
an average age of only 32. An average age of only 32, Mr. 
Speaker. And this track record for attracting and retaining 
youthful workers generally and Aboriginal people specifically 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

must be maintained. And expanded business opportunities for 
SGC translate into advanced opportunities for this relatively 
young and diversified workforce. 
 
This transfer of SGC from a Treasury Board Crown to a CIC 
Crown is intended to facilitate SGC’s need to develop business 
growth opportunities that will translate into greater 
opportunities for employee advancement and job growth. And 
for example, Mr. Speaker, a responsible gaming software 
product called iCare, that’s small I, capital C, iCare, has been 
developed by SGC for its own internal use and is in full 
operation. This software allows casino operators to interact with 
those gaming patrons who may be at risk in terms of developing 
problem gaming behaviours. 
 
This software product and the associated program represents 
leading-edge thinking in terms of social responsibility aspect of 
gaming and today is the only — I underline only — automated 
system available for this purpose in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
SGC believes there is a global market potential for this product. 
However, SGC has insufficient personnel and financial 
resources to devote to the marketing, sales, and development of 
the iCare software and program. 
 
Unlike other commercial Crowns, which are traditionally 
financed through some combination of debt and equity, SGC as 
a Treasury Board Crown currently sees 100 per cent of its 
profits paid directly to the General Revenue Fund. This leaves 
no internally generated capital for strategic business 
opportunities, and hence limited opportunities for employment 
advancement. By amending the legislation to convert the 
Gaming Corporation to a CIC Crown, the corporation will be in 
a better position to respond to future opportunities, thereby 
creating further jobs and advancement opportunities for SGC’s 
relatively young and diversified workforce. 
 
As a wholly owned subsidiary of CIC, the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation will operate within an award-winning 
governance model and will continue to ensure its processes are 
transparent, placing the highest emphasis on being accountable 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Following the conversion of SGC to a CIC Crown, the gaming 
framework agreement will be kept whole — that’s important — 
with the First Nations Trust and the Community Initiatives 
Fund continuing to receive the same level of funding. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move that Bill No. 59, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Gaming Corporation that Bill No. 59, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
arise and speak briefly today on Bill 59, an Act to amend the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. Mr. Speaker, the 

substantive change that’s going to occur in this piece of 
legislation is that the Gaming Corporation is going to move 
from a Treasury Board Crown to a Crown Investments 
Corporation Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister outlined some of the important 
considerations that have gone into the restructuring of the 
Gaming Corporation in this manner, and it’s important that the 
commitments that have been made to the funding commitments 
are substantial and are completed. I understand that from the 
minister’s comments they are going to be maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important because the activities 
that the Gaming Corporation does is quite socially sensitive, 
and there has to be an extra level of transparency and 
accountability to make sure that this agency is meeting the 
greater social good for the province of Saskatchewan and 
simply is not putting our citizens in jeopardy as they try to 
enhance their bottom line and enhance the net worth of the 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many implications in this legislative 
change, and I know that the people affected are going to want to 
consult with the official opposition about these changes. And in 
order to facilitate that at this time, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 59 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
can tell members if they liked the Assessment Management 
Agency Act and they liked The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act, they are going to love The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am very pleased today to be able to 
rise and move second reading of Bill No. 60, The Revenue and 
Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Part III of The Revenue and Financial Services 
Act governs the administration and enforcement of most of the 
province’s taxes. This includes the PST [provincial sales tax], 
our fuel tax, tobacco tax, liquor consumption tax, and 
corporation capital tax. We are going to, through this 
legislation, consolidate all these provisions. And as such we 
have greatly reduced the volume of legislation required, and we 
have established a simplified, more consistent administration 
for all of these taxes. 
 



April 4, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

Several of the provisions which are contained in the Act are 
being made to update old provisions that may, in some cases, 
not have been dealt with in over a decade. For example, most 
businesses now maintain their accounting and tax records in an 
electronic format. Therefore we need to update our record 
keeping requirements to specifically address electronic records. 
This will be of obvious benefit to businesses as they comply 
with their tax obligations, and Finance staff will be able to 
complete the reviews and audits more quickly. 
 
We’re also going to modernize the penalties that apply to audit 
assessments. While retaining the current 10 per cent penalty 
that applies to audit assessments, we are however going to make 
an amendment to the section to remove the $25,000 maximum 
penalty cap. This change will affect very few people and very 
few businesses, but it is intended to address problems we have 
encountered with a few very large corporations that have 
concluded it is less expensive to wait for an audit and pay then 
the maximum penalty than it is to maintain proper records. For 
obvious reasons, we cannot allow this practice to continue. 
 
We are also going to increase the amount of the penalty 
applicable to audit assessments for taxes collected and not 
remitted. When a business collects tax from its customers on 
behalf of the province, it is essential to hold those funds in trust 
until they are remitted to the province. Unfortunately some 
businesses experience cash flow problems, and there is the 
temptation to use tax collections to pay for other obligations. 
Obviously it’s important that there be an effective deterrent in 
place to discourage this practice. 
 
Therefore we are going to increase, through this legislation, the 
penalty applicable to audit assessments for tax collected but not 
remitted to 25 per cent of the amount assessed. We are going to 
add an additional penalty equal to 100 per cent of the amount 
assessed if a business has collected the tax and deliberately 
diverted those funds for other use. This is a much more severe 
penalty and a much more effective deterrent should business 
consider using taxes that they have collected from their 
customers to pay other debts. Its use will obviously be reserved 
for repeat offenders and situations involving serious or blatant 
tax evasion. 
 
This Bill is also going to revise the provision that governs the 
disclosure of tax information. The current tax provisions do not 
provide for us to share information with other government 
agencies or departments. We do believe that in select 
circumstances it is in the public interest to ensure that the 
government be able to carry out all of its programs and 
initiatives in the most efficient way possible for those people 
that are taking part of it. This is particularly true, particularly 
true for income-tested programs. 
 
Therefore we are going to amend this section to allow 
information obtained by Finance to be shared with other 
departments and agencies on a select basis that require the 
information for use in administering provincial programs. 
 
Finance also occasionally gets requests for statistical or general 
information that could be helpful to a business organization or 
regulatory agency. To accommodate these requests, we are 
going to propose amendments that will allow us to provide this 
kind of information. 

The final change being made in this Bill is to add authority for 
the government to enter into particular tax agreements with 
First Nations. The purpose and nature of these agreements 
would be to substitute provincial sales taxes on-reserve with a 
similar tax imposed by the First Nation itself. This provision we 
believe will provide a more level playing field by establishing 
the same price for goods on-reserve and off-reserve and provide 
for a more level playing field between businesses on-reserve 
and off-reserve. This co-operative approach to taxation is 
similar to a program currently being used by the federal 
government with respect to the GST [goods and services tax] on 
several reserves, and we’d like to be able to explore this 
approach with Saskatchewan First Nations. The amendments 
contained in this Act would allow us to do so. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will help us to 
carry out our tax administration duties more effectively and 
more efficiently. And I would invite all members to scrutinize 
the Bill and to support it when it comes time. As such, I move 
second reading of The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 60, The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak on Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The Revenue 
and Financial Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the intent of this legislation is indeed 
worthwhile in that the stated objective is to update and 
modernize and to consolidate some of the taxing provisions that 
currently exist in regard to provincial tax collection from a 
number of sources. Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a 
worthwhile exercise as long as the affected businesses and 
jurisdictions have been properly consulted. 
 
I also note that, in the information that I’ve received, it also 
contains special provisions to allow for the electronic 
transmittal of information and to make sure that the electronic 
records, if they’re done in computerized bookkeeping systems, 
are also maintained appropriately and accurately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well there is increased fines or penalties for 
serious broaches of remitting taxes in an appropriate way. And I 
very much hope that the provisions that are in this legislation 
are consistent with legislation in other provinces, so we don’t 
again create an unfair advantage for other provinces as 
compared to our businesses in recognizing that businesses have 
a social responsibility to keep proper and accurate records and 
to submit those taxes that are appropriate. However I think it’s 
important that we don’t create an environment here that is more 
onerous than in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the provision in terms of the possibility of 
consulting with First Nations reservations in regard to a 
harmonization of taxes is a good idea. I think that the stated 
objectives are worthwhile as long as the consultations between 
the Government of Saskatchewan and the First Nations 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2007 

governments are respectful and inclusive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of aspects of this legislation 
that are going to require consultation between the official 
opposition and stakeholders, and in order to allow that to 
happen, at this time I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 60 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the standing committees on the Economy and on 
Human Services, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:22.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1182 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembering the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Meadow Lake Junior Achievers Excel 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Tartan Day 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Loggie’s Shoe Store Celebrates 100th Birthday 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Wishart Dancers Perform at Disney World 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 SGI Auto Fund Rebate 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Missing Funds 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
 Recruiting and Retaining Health Care Professionals 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1189 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1189 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1191 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Bursaries for Health Care Providers 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 61 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 62 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendment Act, 2007 
 Loi de 2007 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Vital Statistics Act, 2007 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return No. 3 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1194 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1195 
 Bill No. 58 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1196 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1197 
 Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2007 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1197 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1198 
 Bill No. 60 — The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1198 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


