






















































Hansard: March 27, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 37B  TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2007, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1035 
 March 27, 2007 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Debate will resume on the special 
order which is the motion moved by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the Minister of the Public Service Commission: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

And the amendment moved by the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, seconded by the member for Martensville: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 
 
condemn the government for plunging the province back 
into a deficit without creating a real growth agenda or 
addressing the most pressing needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to be able to rise and enter into the debate on the 
budget. I want to thank those members on both sides of the 
House that accommodated me because my family was to be 
attending here this evening, but my wife got stuck in Saskatoon. 
The aircraft broke down so she’s not able to bring my children. 
 
But I want to say to them, who I know are watching, Mayson 
and Meika, thank you very much for their support. All of us in 
this legislature know that we need the support of our families. 
And Mayson and Meika are back at home with our sitter, 
Justina, watching at this very minute. And I want to thank as 
well Virginia, who has been tremendous support for me through 
all the years. 
 
I was thinking a bit — this is a bit ironic. A number of sessions 
back, most of my colleagues here will know this, but I used to 
get asked a lot of questions in this House. This last number of 
sessions nobody’s asked me any questions in this House any 
more. Now all of the questions come from my house back at my 
place and they’re tough questions, Mr. Speaker, they’re tough 
questions from Mayson and Meika. And the supplementaries 
are like why, and another supplementary, why, and why and 

why and why. And those are hard questions to answer. And the 
difference here is that you actually have to answer the 
questions. And so high-quality questions from my son and 
daughter unlike what I used to get from members opposite. So 
good for them. 
 
Anyway I also want to take the opportunity to thank my family 
back at home, my parents John and Dorothy Sonntag, who have 
been tremendous support for me and real role models. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Meadow Lake, the Minister for CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see the 
members opposite are learning from my son and daughter. 
Their quality of questions has already gone up a notch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I as well want to just very quickly thank my 
constituency assistants back in Meadow Lake, Elaine Yaychuk 
and Billy Dawn Derocher, and of course all of my staff here, 
Sheila and Sheila and Deanna and Gaylene and Marmie. They 
all do a wonderful job for me and I thank them very much for 
their support. 
 
I want to as well acknowledge and congratulate the new 
member from Martensville and I wish her well in her time in 
the legislature. I certainly enjoyed working with her father as 
well. 
 
And I want to say what a great pleasure it is to represent the 
constituency of Meadow Lake, truly in my view one of the most 
diversified constituencies in the province. It’s covered with 
lakes and trees and rivers. There’s farming. There’s forestry. 
Agriculture, as I mentioned. We have a wonderful abundance of 
tourism, obviously, with those assets. We have six different 
First Nations in our community, lots of Métis culture and a lot 
of different ethnic groups in our community who are all 
strongly and very culturally diversified, and they do lots to keep 
their culture alive and well. 
 
And that’s why I’m so proud to be able to support this budget. 
It’s so good for my riding, Mr. Speaker. It proves to me once 
again that Saskatchewan really is the best place to live, to work, 
and to raise your families. 
 
I want to touch on just a couple of the highlights, Mr. Speaker, 
in this budget. First of all, the 14th consecutive balanced budget 
— that is truly amazing, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen consecutive 
credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker, sixteen consecutive credit 
rating upgrades. I think that puts us on par now with the rating 
equivalent to probably Ontario, and I think that’s something 
that we should be extremely proud of. 
 
Record job numbers. Record job numbers. And I noticed, I 
think it was in the paper just the other day, they talked about the 
job numbers, January of this past year — ’07 over January of 
’06 — phenomenal growth. Close to 10 per cent growth in 
those numbers, my recollection is. And in January, those are 
hard numbers to meet because January is traditionally not a big 
month for job growth numbers, so that’s extremely good. 
 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

Our debt/GDP [gross domestic product] ratio: 15.6 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, 15.6 per cent. That’s the third lowest in all of 
Canada. I remember when we formed government back in 
1991, the debt/GDP ratio, to the best of my recollection, was 
very close to 70 per cent — virtually bankrupt. And again, if 
my memory serves me right, I think Newfoundland was the 
only other jurisdiction that had debt/GDP ratio as awful as ours. 
 
In the past four years, Mr. Speaker, we paid off 820 million in 
debt. And I just saw on the news tonight; the federal budget has 
passed. That means that Saskatchewan will get an additional 
226 million one-time. We grudgingly accept that. Seventy per 
cent of that will go to debt as well. And so that means, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the last four years alone this province will have 
reduced the debt of our province by nearly $1 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s a significant amount. A 
significant amount. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say, and to 
members in the House, I would say that’s to a large degree why 
the credit rating of this province continues to go up and to a 
large degree why the banks and bond rating agencies refer to 
this province as having one of the best-managed budgets in all 
of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sales tax for me, clearly, representing a constituency close to 
the west side of the border, west side of our province, is a big 
issue. And the reduction from 7 to 5 per cent really made a big 
difference. That saved 340 million out of the taxpayers’ pocket. 
And in the last few years since our Premier has been Premier of 
this province, there have been over $650 million in tax cuts 
alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last little while, in the announcement of the 
budget, I’ve travelled around the province. And one of the 
highlights that clearly was a highlight of this budget is the 
graduate tax credit. And if the early response is any indication, 
this will be extremely well received. Students can receive, over 
a five-year period, benefits of being able to earn up to $100,000 
income tax free. And that is remarkable. 
 
All you need to do is have completed a program and have your 
diploma or your certificate or a degree or in fact even a 
journeyman’s certificate. As long as your course has been six 
months or longer, you can receive that tax benefit and you don’t 
have to have received that education here in Saskatchewan. So 
we are encouraging young people — and anyone for that 
matter, who has just received a certificate or a degree or a 
diploma — to stay in Saskatchewan or to move back to 
Saskatchewan or in fact come and live here in Saskatchewan for 
the very first time. 
 
And I know from the students who were here from the regional 
college, a number of young Aboriginal students from the 
regional college in Meadow Lake on the budget day, after the 
budget was over they were asking me about it and we talked a 
bit about it and they were really enthused. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this is a little-known fact, but in 
Saskatchewan as it relates to personal income tax, while still not 
significant in absolute numbers, one of the fastest growing tax 
base in our province is Aboriginal people paying tax. One of the 

fastest growing tax bases at a personal level. And I know the 
young folks I talked to were very, very interested in the 
graduate tax credit and they are very interested in working and 
contributing their share to our province as well. And they have 
much to contribute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other hallmark of the budget clearly was the 
seniors’ drug plan. And I had the good fortune of being able to 
be in Lloydminster the day after the budget to talk a bit about 
the budget. I met with somewhere between I think it was 40 to 
50 to 60 seniors at one of the centres, and this was something 
we spent a lot of time talking about. I know it was well received 
there. There was a few who had some concerns about it, but 
overall it was extremely well received. And I know a number of 
them came up to me afterwards talking about it, just to say how 
much they appreciated it and how much difference it would 
make in their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some of the reasons why we can do it. 
After 10 years of trying to get our debt under control, we finally 
got it under control. And under this Premier, the last five years 
we spent getting the economy in shape. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
in such good shape now to the point where now, where we’re 
anticipating our GDP to hit 2.9 per cent, which is fully a half a 
per cent above the national average. And that is remarkable for 
a province like Saskatchewan. It used to be solely reliant on 
agriculture and now we have a very, very diversified economy. 
And that’s part of the reason, while it’s unfortunate what my 
friends and neighbours and family are experiencing in 
agriculture, it also says that we’re so diversified in 
Saskatchewan’s economy that we still have growth of 2.9 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that we’ve indexed the income tax 
benefits again — very good news for everyone. The seniors as 
well talked about the income tax splittings. The federal 
government agreed to income tax, to income splitting, I should 
say. We’ve essentially mirrored that initiative by the federal 
government — and I know that’s much appreciated — now to 
the point where the average person in the last few years is 
paying in fact up to $1,200 per year less. And that is really 
remarkable. 
 
I know that transportation is a big issue for lots of the 
constituents that I represent, and I know across the province. 
And I’m extremely pleased to see our budget this year to hit 
$433 million. And in my view that is remarkable. I know when 
I was the minister, the first time I held that portfolio, I think we 
were something just below $200 million, so to see this budget 
now more than doubled in the last few years is . . . You will see 
significant improvements in the roadways across our province. 
And I know this year we’ll complete the highway twinning on 
Highway No. 1 and No. 16 West. 
 
In addition to that, I put on my minister’s hat at First Nations 
and Métis Relations. I’m extremely pleased to see the continued 
support for access to First Nations. I know that Mistawasis has 
been added to the list, and I know the chief and council are 
extremely pleased with that. And we continue to work on other 
communities — Onion Lake and others — and all of these are, 
all of these communities are vital to the growth of our province, 
and I am optimistic that we’ll be able to continue to support that 
initiative. 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

[19:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
benefits to the municipalities. This last while there has been 
some concern about the level of funding, but there have been 
significant increases in funding to municipalities. In this budget 
alone an additional $30 million will go to municipalities by way 
of unconditional grants to the revenue-sharing pools. And I 
know again, with the budget having passed tonight federally, 
another 30 per cent there will add a significant amount to the 
reduction of education portion of property tax. 
 
In addition to that, we’ve added child care spaces, 500 new 
licensed spaces, which now brings it to 9,300 in our province; 
15 new pre-kindergarten programs, which now brings the 
number of programs all the way up to 134. 
 
And also I think an initiative that will maybe not go too noticed 
now, but I think in years to come people will see this as a very 
good initiative, that is the new dental sealant program for kids 
in grades 1 and 7. And I know there’s a lot of parents see this as 
a very worthwhile initiative. 
 
We’ve added 2,100 new training spaces, which now brings us 
to over 31,000 training spaces in our province, which represents 
fully a 24 per cent increase in training spaces since 2003. 
 
In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we’ve added $118 million for 
CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] again, which 
is very important to many of my constituents. That’s for ’07. 
For ’06 we’ve done the top-up, another $60 million. We’ve 
added 104 million for crop insurance — all of these extremely 
important initiatives. And I know I saw some of the headlines in 
a number of the papers. And while there was still concern in the 
agricultural community, there is much appreciation for what 
this government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit now about the portfolio 
that I have of First Nations and Métis Relations. An issue that 
has been front and centre for many First Nations and Métis 
communities across the province, is a complex issue but a very 
important issue for those it directly affected — that is the issue 
of the duty to consult. 
 
Many First Nations as a result, and Métis communities, as a 
result of the Supreme Court decision now have a ruling that 
requires federal and provincial governments, where Crown land 
is involved and where their communities are affected, there is a 
legal responsibility for us as a government to consult and 
accommodate on issues that might affect them and their 
communities, and in fact as it relates to First Nations people, to 
their traditional hunting and gathering areas. 
 
Many First Nations and Métis communities said to me and to 
our government that they simply didn’t have the capacity to 
negotiate. So if in fact there was a major industrial development 
taking place in their community, they may well be notified but 
they couldn’t hire a lawyer or they couldn’t hire a consultant to 
actually sit down and do the analysis of what impact it might 
actually have on their community. 
 
So as a result, in this budget we allocated $2.3 million 
specifically for the capacity for First Nations and Métis 

communities across the province — 300,000 of that will go to 
new positions in the Department of First Nations to actually 
deal with the issue of consultation, and the other 2 million is 
entirely for the First Nations and Métis communities as their 
communities are impacted. That money will only be allocated 
when their communities would be impacted. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we have allocated an additional 
1 million to fund an additional estimated 100 seats for skills 
training. And I know many communities, Aboriginal 
communities across the province, are extremely appreciative of 
the fact that we now have mobile units that are going directly 
out into the communities and providing training as it relates to 
trades. And in my view this is one of the most unique ideas and 
one of the benefits of this budget that will help communities, I 
think, much beyond what we can currently anticipate. 
 
There’s a number of initiatives we could go through but I think 
I won’t have a lot more time. But I do want to say that, I want 
to highlight just a couple of them yet. We’ve added $300,000 
for First Nations training and emergency preparedness. And in 
addition to that, we’ve again allocated our responsibility for 
treaty land entitlement, $4.6 million. There’s 822,000 for the 
Aboriginal employment development program, and I know this 
has been an extremely successful initiative. Just recently I was 
out at Kawacatoose where we did a significant Aboriginal 
employment signing there. Lots of people in attendance, 
tremendous excitement, and they’re doing lots of training right 
on that First Nation. And I know Chief Dustyhorn and others 
should be congratulated for all the wonderful work that they 
have done out there. 
 
We’ve again committed our allocation of 1.5 million to the First 
Nations and Métis economic development program. And by the 
way, while I’m speaking of Métis, I’m pleased as well . . . 
There’s been a lot of work done on this by a lot of people and 
today we just announced that the Métis election is back on. So 
that funds for that will flow not to the Métis Nation yet, but the 
election is, the Métis election is now back on track. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I spoke with a number of First Nations 
people, and I want to just say that I’m hugely disappointed by 
the federal government’s budget as it relates to Aboriginal 
people across our country. There’s been hardly a mention, 
hardly a mention, even though we had a commitment from the 
federal government that if the Kelowna accord, even though the 
Kelowna accord wasn’t being supported that they would 
essentially support all the initiatives in that accord. 
 
Well you would have thought in the federal budget at least 
there’d have been some mention. There was not a mention at 
all. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, here’s what I read on the Net. It 
says as follows. This was Andrew Scheer, the MP [Member of 
Parliament] who represents the area close by Regina here. He 
was on . . . Regina-Qu’Appelle. He was on the John Gormley 
show. And here’s what he thinks about it, and I think it’s 
reflective of what the federal Conservative government thinks 
and I think to a large degree what the opposition Sask Party 
thinks. He says, and I quote, he says: 
 

We know that taxpayers in Saskatchewan don’t want to 
throw [away, throw away, if you can imagine] another $5 
billion at the problems [he describes them as problems] of 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

First Nations people through the Kelowna accord. They 
know that if throwing money at the problem was the 
answer, it would have been fixed four years ago. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you draw that conclusion, that First 
Nations people are a problem, Mr. Speaker, and that throwing 
money away — if this is throwing money away, the Kelowna 
accord — no wonder we have problems with this federal 
government. And we have problems with the opposition Sask 
Party when they won’t even stand up in the House and debate 
the issues of equalization. They won’t even tell their federal 
cousins that they should vote against this budget as it relates to 
equalization, but to tell them to vote against it on this principle 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting today. I listened to — on this 
notion as well — I listened out of the Canadian Press, the 
federal minister, the federal minister of INAC [Indian and 
Northern Affairs Canada], Mr. Speaker, says that he will not 
apologize to First Nations people. Mr. Speaker, here’s what it 
says. It says: 
 

Indian Affairs Minister Jim Prentice said Monday 
[Monday, that’s yesterday] that the $2-billion 
compensation package finalized by the Conservatives does 
not [I repeat, does not] include an apology, so none is 
forthcoming. 
 

I think that’s appalling, Mr. Speaker. First of all you don’t 
honour commitments that have been made by previous 
governments as it relates to an extremely important initiative. 
And then on something like this that is not big dollars but, Mr. 
Speaker, means a tremendous amount, that you won’t have the 
decency to apologize to these affected people, Mr. Speaker, I 
think is a travesty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I listened to, I listened to the . . . I think I 
need to wrap this up here pretty quickly. I listened to the 
Finance critic — and I’ll close on this — I listened to the 
Finance critic on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] a 
couple of mornings ago. And, Mr. Speaker, he talked about the 
Auto Fund. Well as the Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] for quite a number of years I know that 
you can’t take $100 million out of the Auto Fund and reduce 
taxes. You can’t take it out of the Auto Fund and afford all 
kinds of programming to people because that money belongs, 
Mr. Speaker, that money belongs to the people who paid those 
premiums. So you can’t do that. 
 
Now I’m reminded as well, this is the same Finance critic that 
was going to reduce the sales tax on groceries last year, so I’m 
not too surprised that he might propose something like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length, Mr. Speaker, I have so 
many wonderful, I have so many wonderful things that I could 
talk about but I am being told that I’m coming very close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, I’ll say just one more thing. I’ll say just 
one more thing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. The 
recommendation, the recommendation, Mr. Speaker, also the 
Finance critic suggested that what he would do as well in 
addition to all this — because he was being asked where he 
would get all this money from — he said he would take $50 

million out of Investment Saskatchewan. There’s a $50 million 
allocation to Investment Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who don’t understand accounting, that 
sounds logical. But, Mr. Speaker, it is the Devine school of 
economics because what it is — it’s equity stripping. Because 
what you’re doing is you’re taking 50 million, you’re taking 
$50 million cash that would have — essentially is an asset — 
that would have gone into another investment that could have 
earned money for the people of Saskatchewan. He’s saying he’d 
take that $50 million and put it into the General Revenue Fund. 
That’s what Devine did in the ’80s and that’s why our Crowns 
and the Crown Investments Corporation was in such deep 
financial trouble almost as well to the point of bankruptcy. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, when we listen to our Minister of 
Finance talking about our budget and when you listen to the 
opposition talking about the budget and when you listen to the 
bankers and the investment dealers across Canada and North 
America talking of our budgets and how sustainable they are 
and how fiscally prudent this government is, it’s easy to 
understand why the people of Saskatchewan have belief and 
trust in this government and why they do not have any belief or 
believe there’s any credibility in what the opposition says. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget 
and voting against the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak again 
for the people of Batoche. The people of Batoche are not very 
happy with this deficit budget. They see it as a sellout. The 
people of Batoche were upset to hear that this NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government had blown that mountain of 
money received from the increased profits of resource revenues. 
They were enraged to hear that not only they blew the mountain 
of money, but a deficit, Mr. Speaker. How dare they — a 
deficit? 
 
This government has disappointed the people to the point they 
are desperate to have an election. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is 
just about daily meeting with business groups and community 
groups that are asking for help and want a change of 
government, Mr. Speaker. Some of the groups are even unions 
who have had enough. They’ve had enough of this NDP 
government mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a story about how the member from 
Regina South became Finance minister. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 
is just a rumour I’ve heard. The story goes that the Premier was 
looking for a new Finance minister so they were interviewing 
potential members. The first member they called forward was 
the member for Regina Dewdney. The first question asked was, 
how much is one plus one? The member from Regina Dewdney 
said two. 
 
There were other questions. Then they called on the member 
from Regina South. They also asked him what is one plus one. 
His reply was, what would you like it to be? And he got the job. 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

That, Mr. Speaker, is possibly why the Finance minister 
believes he has a balanced budget. 
 
This is not a balanced budget. It is a deficit. Mr. Speaker, when 
you do your books, when you do your income tax, when you do 
your investments, who do you ask? Your accountant. 
 
Who does the government hire to do their books? Accountants. 
Mr. Speaker, the chartered accountants of Saskatchewan says 
that the budget is not balanced. It is a deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon, former member of this House 
and Finance minister of that party, says that this budget is not 
balanced. David MacLean of the taxpayers federation, who is 
heard well across the country with the taxpayers federation, 
says it is not balanced. 
 
Look at this tired, old government’s record. Last election they 
said the Sask Party would lay off government employees if 
elected. They went around and yelled us up and down that we 
would be laying off SaskTel employees if we were elected. And 
then when they were elected, they immediately laid off 44 
employees. 
 
Who promised during the election no tax increase? That was 
part of their platform — no tax increase. And yet once the NDP 
were elected, they moved the PST [provincial sales tax] up two 
points — not just one, but two points. They moved it up after a 
promise of no tax increase. 
 
[19:30] 
 
And then when they, after the oil revenues started coming in 
several years later, they moved it down. And gloriously, we’ve 
moved it down two points, they yell. They’d just gotten it back 
to where they originally were. They haven’t gained anything, 
and it’s the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture in Batoche, which is predominantly the 
business of the area, this budget cut to the bone — 68 million 
less for agriculture. What does the government expect to 
happen with 68 million less? That is actual dollars. That’s not 
the fancy numbers with the frills. That’s actual dollars from last 
year’s budget to this year’s budget is $68 million less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rural communities are desperate. They’re in 
terrible state of affairs. They don’t know which way to turn, and 
the government — $68 million less. Farmers are working out. 
Their wives are working out on the side, and they’re trying to 
keep the farm running. Families are suffering. Communities are 
suffering. And they’re looking for help. And what does the 
government give agriculture? $68 million less. 
 
The government has to work out programs to help agriculture. 
Not just dollars programs, but programs with the feds. And we 
have to establish some form of communication to let these 
farmers know that we are there to help them and there is hope 
for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at biodiesel and ethanol and how it is 
happening in other provinces, and it’s just not on the move here 
yet. It would be nice to see some action taken and get biodiesel 
and ethanol going, which could be the turnaround points for 

agriculture in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue I’d like to dwell on is forestry. Mr. 
Speaker, what is the deal in P.A. [Prince Albert]? On again, or 
off again? After the minister got up and said to the press that the 
deal was imminent, that it just had to be verified, then he tries to 
pull the deal, say it isn’t happening. What’s happening to the 
people’s emotions, the people of that community? It’s on again, 
off again, and they just don’t know. It’s not fair to the people. 
 
And now we hear that they’re going to be moving out the 
paper-making equipment from the former Weyerhaeuser mill in 
P.A. Nothing is said about that. People are wondering. They 
don’t know. We should have confirmation of what is happening 
there. 
 
And then we hear that the deal up at Meadow Lake, the 
Meadow Lake mill that we still have 20 per cent ownership . . . 
All these years, trying to get rid of the mill. They finally get rid 
of it but they hang on to 20 per cent. And we hear that there’s 
actually a five-year walk-away clause, which means in five 
years time we could have the whole mess back in our lap again 
— no solutions, nothing done. 
 
It’s time to get some serious answers for what must be done in 
forestry. Forestry could be a very viable industry, especially 
when you look at what is happening to the other provinces with 
the lodgepole pine beetle, how it’s devastating the BC [British 
Columbia] forest. And I’ve heard some estimates that it could 
decimate up to 80 per cent of the BC forest. 
 
Saskatchewan has to get their act together. The time will come 
where they’re going to be looking at Saskatchewan forest and 
we should be ready for it. The lodgepole pine beetle of course 
has moved into Alberta already too, so we hope it can be 
stopped and that Saskatchewan forestry can be ahead of the 
game and grow strong and tall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue I want to talk about is health care. In 
my community, Humboldt hospital has been promised for three 
elections. Three elections on the same promise and guess what? 
This election they’ll be promising that this time for sure you’ll 
get the Humboldt hospital, for sure this time — four elections. 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been no sod turning, no ribbon cutting, 
none of the details have been done. It’s just, we’re going to 
promise you another hospital. It’s time, it’s time for that 
promise to be kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in my constituency is Wakaw Hospital and it 
is now closed for emergency service. What does this say to the 
people of the community? How can a community grow when 
their hospital has a sign that it’s closed for emergency service? 
Anyone looking at possibly moving into a community says, 
how long will we even have a hospital? Do we even have a 
hospital now? These issues have to be addressed. 
 
The government, our present government when they took 
power, closed 45 hospitals. And they took so much heat over 
that that they decided that they’re not going to close any more 
hospitals. They’re just going to cut the legs out from underneath 
them and watch them close themselves. And now we sit on the 
longest waiting list in Canada by the party that claims to be the 
founder of medicare, and we sit on the longest waiting list in all 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

of Canada. The issue’s not being addressed; it’s not clear. 
 
And now we talk about this new drug plan. Well there already 
is a drug plan, and it’s one we can afford. The new drug plan, 
all the experts say, isn’t affordable. We can’t handle it. And 
then the big question also about the big, new drug deal is, what 
about the drug list? How many of these drugs aren’t on the list? 
It won’t benefit people anyhow if the drugs aren’t on the list. 
 
And then there’s the nursing shortage. SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] came to this Assembly the day of the budget 
looking for 200 nurses. And what did the deficit say? Eighteen. 
Now that’s an insult to SUN, and they were very upset by it. 
And our communities are not happy once again. 
 
And then the government has gone to our rural communities 
and said, schools — 50 schools scheduled for closure. Fifty, 
Mr. Speaker. And they said before that that school board 
amalgamations, that would be the thing. They’d put all these 
school boards together, and they would save so much money 
that they could afford to do anything. Well, Mr. Speaker, they 
didn’t save anything. In fact it’s costing more money. Not less 
money — more money. And the future looks as though it’s 
going to get worse and worse. 
 
We’ve brought forward the proposal of schools of opportunity 
and schools of necessity, and people have taken to this very 
much. But in order for the school boards to do this, the 
government has to finance it. Yes, the school boards have the 
decision to make. But when they look at their budgets, it’s 
dollars they’re looking at. And they don’t have enough dollars 
to do what they need to keep some of these schools open. In my 
area there’s a school, Osborne School which is just a little ways 
out of P.A. — and beautiful little school — and they have to 
look at that one seriously as one of these schools. 
 
And then of course, Mr. Speaker, there’s one of my favourite 
issues, and every year I get up and I talk about highways and 
Highway 368. So now the government says they’re coming out 
with a 10-year plan. Well where were they for the last 16 years? 
Where was the plan then? This plan admits failure. This plan 
shows and admits that they had nothing. And the plan that 
they’re proposing, when you start crunching the numbers looks 
like it would come out to maybe even less in 10 years — if you 
consider inflation — than what they’re getting now. So where’s 
the gain? Where’s the gain? 
 
I want to quote Hollywood now and Kevin Costner in his 
movie, Field of Dreams, and he said, build it and they will 
come. Mr. Speaker, build it and they will come. And that 
applies to our highways. If you don’t build it, they can’t come. 
 
Highway 368 is a detriment to our economic growth, to the 
growth of this whole province. Seventy million dollars worth of 
taxes collected from that area each year, and all they’re asking 
for is a stretch of highway. That’s all they’re requiring. They 
don’t ask for any government help or intervention. They’ll do it 
all on their own. Just give them a highway. 
 
Also in my constituency now — is getting worse and worse 
every year — is Highway 20. It’s a disgrace from Middle Lake 
north to the junction of Highway 3 at Birch Hills. I think to 
drive a 10-mile stretch you’ve got to go just about 12 miles 

because you’re zigzagging back and forth around the holes, so 
the travel distance I think is increased. And it’s a constant 
dodge hole, dodge hole. And the people of my area use this 
highway a lot in order to travel to P.A. to do business there, so 
it’s a detriment to the business in P.A. 
 
The people of my area also use Highway 27, which runs 
Prud’homme, Vonda, and Aberdeen. This highway also is 
another one that you have to be continually, continually 
dodging holes. You can’t drive on a straight stretch. 
 
And what’s going to happen there, Mr. Speaker? On these 
highways we’re looking for an accident. It’s just not safe, and 
one of these times there’s going to be a serious accident. And 
what will the coroner’s report say? Due to unsafe highway 
conditions. We can’t have this; it must be addressed. But the 
highways have been left in neglect for so long, there’s just so 
much to do all at once, that it’s more than most people are 
willing to stand for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the positive side, Weyburn-Big Muddy 
by-election — Tommy Douglas’s home seat. And did we win 
that? I heard a member say, did we win that. Boy, did we win 
that one in a big way. People have had enough. They wanted a 
change and they made that change. Even the poll where, the 
little church that Tommy Douglas used to preach from, even 
that poll went to the Saskatchewan Party. The time has come, 
people looking for a serious change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Martensville by-election was also great news. 
That’s another one, another big victory, and this time the 
biggest victory. And to the NDP it was the largest defeat they 
have ever had in history. They forfeited their deposit even. 
Never in history before have they gone to that point where they 
even forfeited their deposit. 
 
It confirmed what we’ve all expected. People have had enough. 
People all across this province saw the result and as a positive 
step in the right direction. And, Mr. Speaker, they want to move 
this whole province in that direction. They want to see things 
happen in this province. They want to see industries open up. 
They want to see their children have jobs in this province. 
They’re tired of travelling these broken-down roads and going 
to Alberta to visit their children. It’s time to make that 
opportunity to have them home. Therefore at this time I cannot 
support this budget and I support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to be able to enter into the budget debate this 
evening. And I’ve always enjoyed budget debates because I 
always have in my mind the idea that my colleagues will share 
with me some of their priorities, the good points they see from 
the budget, and there’s so much. There’s enough to cover all of 
the members on this side putting forward their ideas. And to see 
them reflected in the budget before us after many, many months 
of debate and tough decision making in some instances, but 
some good priority setting and some goals in some areas that 
we’ll be working in a positive way over the year ahead. 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

And I’ve been straining and listening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
trying to hear from the members opposite what they would do 
in their budget. You know, community does an alternative 
budget. You’d expect that people who want to one day form a 
government would want to put forward to community what they 
would want to see happen to make their communities a better 
quality of life, to see them grow, to be able to put forward a 
positive alternative. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and also when they’re going to be able to 
say that they’re going to add something to the budget, know 
that they have to remove something. And I haven’t heard yet 
from the members opposite. If they’re not going to want to see 
something happening in the budget, what would they cut? 
Where would they cut money to add the things that they’re 
going to add to the budget? And I have yet to hear that during 
this budget debate. 
 
And it’s clear that the members opposite have been singing 
from their leader’s gloom and doom songbook. As a matter of 
fact, the leader, the member from Swift Current, in responding 
to an email from a young person who was looking for some 
positive leadership from that member, and whether or not 
Saskatchewan would be a good place to come to live, to make a 
home, that member sent back the gloomy message about what 
it’s like to be in Saskatchewan — actually the same gloomy 
message I heard that they take to their steak night in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard from some members of the 
legislative in Alberta who said, I don’t know, I was listening to 
the Leader of the Opposition from your province, and why is he 
so down on your province? Why so down on Saskatchewan? 
 
Everything is gloom and doom here. They don’t offer positive 
alternatives on how they would turn things around or they don’t 
recognize that there are things happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
[19:45] 
 
But I’d like to contrast that with when you get out in your 
community, when you get out and you talk to real people that 
are out there working, coming back to Saskatchewan, raising a 
family. They know that Saskatchewan is attracting young 
people because Saskatchewan is a happening place. 
Saskatchewan is a showcase to the world. Not one Rolling 
Stones concert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but two. And two 
successful concerts packed with people coming to see a concert 
in one of our facilities that we have to showcase. And this year 
we’ll follow that with music festival par none. There’s the 
Junos, the country music awards, the Aboriginal Music Awards. 
 
We host sporting events. They’re premier events in this 
province. We set a new bar for the Grey Cups, for the Briers, 
for Tournaments of Hearts. We’re a province of festivals and 
fairs, museums, arts, and culture. To name just a few just in our 
own community, there’s the new RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] heritage cultural centre and museum. And the 
tattoo is coming — a huge extravaganza of protective services 
and the musical ride, drawing people from all over but 
showcasing to the rest of this country what we can do right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only that, we’re a community with heart. We show that 

heart in many ways but one of them that’s just been very 
successful is the Kinsmen Telemiracle. There’s been radiothons 
some of our colleagues have talked about. There’s snowmobile 
rallies across the province and all kinds of local fundraisers 
where people get together and display their commitment to the 
community, their caring, their neighbourly interest in each other 
and to come together to show that they have a spirit of caring 
about Saskatchewan. 
 
The agricultural world comes here. The world comes here. It’s 
showcased by Agribition, the Farm Progress Show, the Royal 
Reds. 
 
All of those things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bring me to something 
that’s very near and dear to my heart because none of those 
things happen without the commitment of people who want to 
give back to their community, who serve in their community, 
see a need there, who want to respond by making their quality 
of life and their community better for everyone, from those 
people who have much to those people who need to have much 
help and support to be actively involved in community. And 
that’s the Premier’s voluntary sector initiative. 
 
Now when the Premier asked me, following the Canadian 
volunteerism initiative, what we could do in Saskatchewan, I 
quickly got people together and found that there’s a lot we 
could do. The federal government was doing the Canadian 
volunteerism initiative, and they had a local advisory. They 
were going to mainly focus on capacity building. 
 
The Premier challenged us to say, what structure could we 
deploy that would bring together a partnership with 
collaborative efforts between the voluntary sector and the public 
sector, and also to appoint a legislative secretary role so that we 
could profile, we could profile and have awareness of the work 
of the voluntary sector because we all know that Saskatchewan 
people enjoy a high quality of life in a vibrant and inclusive 
province. And it’s because of the benefits of those people who 
come together to provide those kinds of supports that we’re able 
to say that. 
 
So we know that . . . how does the voluntary sector impact on a 
powerful economic force in this province? Well we have 7,963 
voluntary organizations in Saskatchewan that see volunteers 
donate 80.6 million hours or the equivalent of 41,979 full-time 
jobs per year in the province. It’s 13 per cent of the labour 
force, and they have revenues of nearly $3.7 billion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The voluntary sector initiative had worked very closely with the 
Canadian volunteerism initiative and recognized capacity 
building was occurring throughout the regions of the province, 
and of course we were finding it was quite a blow to the 
initiative when that was cancelled by the federal government. 
We’re wanting to see how they’re going to bring back some of 
that support in the long term for communities. 
 
We know that many, many of the organizations have some 
supports from the province that are very historical. They’re 
longstanding commitments through the lottery funds, and 
there’s sport, culture and youth recreation groups that are all 
over this province that have support from the lottery funds. 
 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

And we also know that there are groups who, throughout this 
province, provide human services through the NGOs 
[non-governmental organization] or the CBOs 
[community-based organization] that are hard at work when 
they’ve identified the needs in community and pull themselves 
together and have voluntary sector boards who are addressing 
those concerns. And as government we wouldn’t want to take 
over the work that they’re doing. As a matter of fact rather than 
doing that, we want to work in partnership and in a 
collaborative way to understand how we can better address their 
concerns and their issues. 
 
And I’d urge all members to look for our annual report to the 
Premier this year. It will be happening close to National 
Volunteer Week. Much, much work has been done. We’re 
laying the foundation for that collaborative relationship into the 
future, the way the partnership can work to address some of the 
issues that have been identified now through a forum we held 
last fall and through the work we did in community to survey 
community. And so I’m looking forward to the year ahead 
where we’re going to further that relationship and begin to 
address those issues in a very positive way. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will always have a song in my heart 
to sing about the hard work, the dedication, the courage, and the 
caring of the Saskatchewan voluntary sector. And there’s so 
much more that I would like to be able to highlight of 
importance there. There’s so much in this budget that helps to 
make quality of life better for Saskatchewan families, and the 
voluntary sector is a critical and a key part of that. 
 
Well the members opposite have characterized the budget in 
one way. And they keep saying that, oh well, this is a deficit 
budget. Well I was talking to a community, and they were 
saying, well what is this Fiscal Stabilization Fund and why are 
the members opposite going directly in opposition to banks, 
bond raters credit agencies, you know, the councils, the 
economic councils in Canada saying this is a good, balanced 
budget? 
 
And I said, well they have a real problem. I don’t know. Some 
of them must have a real problem in their own lives thinking 
this through in that you have your ongoing money for your 
household. Some years are very, very good years in your 
household. There’s good income. There’s maybe some things 
that have happened that have been able to give us a chance in 
your household accounting to have a bit more money. Most 
people do what we’ve done. They set aside some money for the 
times maybe that aren’t going to be so good or when 
expectations of people are high and they set aside a savings 
account. That savings account is part of the household income. 
It’s part of what you do for budgeting. 
 
It just bothers them so much that they don’t have the old Liquor 
and Gaming Fund that they spent ten times over every year we 
brought it forward. Instead we have a Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
to do just that. In times of drought, in times of difficult times in 
agriculture, we’ve been able to rely on that fund. And as a 
matter of fact when there’s good times, we take that money 
from the fund and we’ve been able to — rather than go outside 
and borrow — borrow sometimes from that fund to save 
interest costs. This is not a difficult concept. Banks know that. 
Bond raters know that. Economic people across the country 

know that. How hard can that be to grasp? But no, the members 
opposite can’t have anything to say about this budget. 
 
But I’m going to verify it in the local paper, the Leader-Post. 
How do they characterize this budget? Well they say operating 
expenses this year are $7.79 billion, debt servicing of $560 
million from the billion dollars each and every year the 
members opposite overspent when they were Tories — but 
they’re not Tories today — and that there’s $75 million in the 
General Revenue Fund surplus. Not only that, the Leader-Post 
says that this is the 14th consecutive balanced budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well in any constituency across this 
province, you want to keep in touch with what people are 
saying, and you want to hear from your constituents. And there 
are people in each of the constituencies that man constituency 
offices who are the eyes and ears out to the riding. People call 
in to the offices, and they keep in close contact with us. And my 
constituency assistant, Tammy Watt, is no different. She’s a 
warm, welcoming voice on the end of the phone when people 
want to find out more about something, they want to reach me, 
or they want to talk to the riding. And I’m very, very thankful 
for the work that Tammy does. 
 
And then of course, there’s your family. I am blessed with so 
much family. I have my close family — my husband Bob, and 
my daughter Amber, son Noel — who go out into community, 
and they keep my feet on the ground because they come back 
and tell me what they’re hearing or what are some of the issues 
or problems of the day. But I also have in-laws and I have 
step-in-laws. I have on my father’s side — he had remarried — 
I have stepfamily there. I have the beautiful opportunity in my 
life to have a daughter who’s adopted and found her birth 
family and so I have that family. And I also have church family 
who keep you right on the ground there with some of the issues 
of the day. 
 
And what I’m hearing from them, there’s so many parts of this 
budget that they are really talking about from the very, very 
young who rely on daycare and all of the additional daycare 
spaces, to seniors who are looking at this drug plan and saying, 
wow. And they’re saying, you know, we know that every 
measure you’ve taken is a measure that you take when it’s 
sustainable because you don’t want to be in a position where 
you do an initiative and then have to pull it back from 
community. And so they know and they’re assured that when 
we introduce a drug plan for seniors, yes — yes, members of 
this House; yes, members of community — we take those 
measures when there’s money there, and it is sustainable into 
the future, social progress into the future. 
 
Well my community, there’s so much I want to highlight in this 
budget, and I’ll look to my members to give me wrap-up 
signals. But in Wascana Plains I’d say probably the number one 
issue that people ask me to address is keeping young people 
here at home and giving opportunities for young people and 
employment opportunities for all people in this province. 
 
And with that, I’m very proud of the measures that are indicated 
this year that are going to happen in our budget. And the 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

members opposite, if they were interested in attracting young 
people, should be telling them that these are good measures to 
have people want to be employed here, get their jobs here, stay 
here, come here. 
 
The new five-year $10,000 annual graduate tax exemption for 
post-secondary graduates . . . they’ll pay no provincial income 
tax on the first $20,000 of income. Young people tell me that 
that’s a move that would want them to be here in Saskatchewan. 
And as a matter of fact friends of my son and daughter are 
coming home. They’re coming back to Saskatchewan. They’ve 
got jobs in Saskatchewan, and it doesn’t matter where they’re 
educated in this country. They’re coming back to Saskatchewan 
to enjoy the tax exemption that’s brought forward in this 
budget. 
 
For the people in community who have students who are in 
university, we’re freezing university tuition at 2004 levels until 
2008. Post-secondary students and their family in my 
constituency really appreciate that measure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re providing $23.7 million for 2,118 new training 
seats, including 544 additional training opportunities in health 
and the CareerStart program has an additional almost 1,300 
expanding opportunities. The budget funds almost 31,400 — 
31,400 — training opportunities, and that’s a 24 per cent 
increase since 2004. 
 
Now the members opposite, if they’d want to get their budget 
books out when we talk about employment opportunities, 
employment in this province has risen in each year through 
2003 to 2006. In fact in 2006 Saskatchewan achieved the 
highest level of job creation in the province’s history with an 
average of 491,600 people working in this province. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Over 15,500 jobs have been created in the province since 2003. 
Employment growth has been particularly strong in the resource 
and construction sectors, each averaging an annual rate of 8.3 
per cent since 2003 and posting growth rates of 15.5 per cent 
and 12.2 per cent respectively in 2006. 
 
Now this is not a secret to anybody because we know our 
labour force is constructive, but Saskatchewan’s labour 
productivity has consistently ranked as the second-highest in 
the country throughout 2003-2006. Our unemployment rate is 
among the lowest in the country, and in 2006 our 
unemployment rate averaged 4.7 per cent. That’s the lowest rate 
since 1981. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in Regina Wascana Plains with 
young people who are coming home, who are employed at 
home, who have post-secondary education opportunities, 
appreciate this budget. 
 
When you’re looking at encouraging the economy, there are 
many measures within this budget. I can talk about a few. From 
personal income tax reform that sees, since 1999, Saskatchewan 
personal tax reform reducing the provincial personal income 
taxes on an average Saskatchewan family by $1,238 from 
$3,500, and it’s dropped from $3,500 in an average family, to 
$2,300. People paying taxes in Regina Wascana Plains 
appreciate the personal tax reforms. They’ve talked about the 

tax measures we took last year in being able to stimulate the 
economy, and they talk about my colleagues who worked hard 
to change the royalty structures to look at the economic 
backdrop to this province. 
 
There’s so much more that we would want to say about this 
budget that’s so positive, but tonight I would say that attitudes 
of Saskatchewan people are up. They’re positive about this 
budget everywhere, upbeat, except for the members opposite. I 
will coin the words of our Minister of Finance who says, “Our 
communities remain strong, and our infrastructure continues to 
support the growth of new industries and new jobs throughout 
this province.” 
 
This budget deserves our support, and that’s why tonight I stand 
in support of the budget and speak against the amendment 
posed by the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the Assembly this evening and 
to be able to take part in the budget debate. It’s the first time 
that I have a chance to comment on the budget as an elected 
member, and I’m very happy to do so. 
 
But before I comment on the budget, I want to give some thanks 
to some very important people this evening. First to the people 
of the constituency that I represent, for allowing me to be a 
member of this legislature and to have the honour of serving, 
it’s a tremendous honour to represent the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
This has been a very, very exciting year. Actually I guess 
tomorrow is the one-year date of when I was first nominated to 
run for the Saskatchewan Party. So it’s been a very busy year, 
and I’m grateful to the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy for that 
opportunity. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That was a great night. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — I also . . . It was a great night. And I want to 
thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank my wife, Amanda. 
She’s back home at Weyburn, and she’s been a tremendous 
amount of support and encouragement for me in this last year 
and through the almost eight years that we’ve been married. 
And she’s always been supportive of things that I want to do 
and accomplish in my life. 
 
And I see it’s a little after 8 o’clock. And we’re in the middle of 
renovations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so she’s probably 
painting right now. We’re on to the basement, and she’s 
probably got another three or four hours of painting left in her 
for this evening. So hopefully when I get home tonight, she’ll 
be done painting. And I thank her for all her support. 
 
And I want to thank my constituency assistants: Marcie 
Swedburg who is on a much deserved holiday this week, and 
Marilyn Charlton who is filling in this week. I thank them for 
all their help. 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to offer my 
congratulations to my seatmate, the member from Martensville. 
She’s going to be a tremendous member of this legislature for 
many years to come. And you know, if only she’d get off her 
feet a little more, Mr. Speaker, and add to the debate. You 
know, she’s a little bit shy off the beginning, but, you know, I 
think she’ll get into it pretty soon. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do have to comment on 
today. It was a little bit odd. You know, we were asking some 
questions, and then my seatmate was asking some questions on 
the whole Carriere scandal. And the member, the minister, the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana, she said, you know, she didn’t 
want to answer any questions on that and their terrible handling 
of that matter. 
 
She wanted us to ask questions on their terrible handling of 
rural Saskatchewan and the closures that are going to happen in 
rural Saskatchewan. And I hope to see her on her feet in 
question period tomorrow perhaps asking some questions of her 
own government if she’s that passionate about the issue of rural 
Saskatchewan and school closures, and maybe get back into the 
feel of opposition where I’m sure she’ll be very shortly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my short time as a member of this 
legislature, I’ve heard numerous government members, 
including in this budget debate, they want to give members 
opposite lessons on fiscal management and prudence and even 
some of their own personal recollections of when they first 
came into government in 1991 and some of the difficult 
decisions that had to be made by the Romanow administration 
and the MacKinnon budget, the Romanow-MacKinnon budgets 
of those years. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if I recall correctly, in my maiden 
speech I talked a bit about why I feel that the party opposite is 
not right for the future of our province is because they look 
back so much. And I believe the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
in her reply to that Throne Speech, she gave me somewhat of a 
history lesson. She thought it was important that I know a little 
bit of the history of this Chamber. She spoke of her time in 
those early cabinets and in that early government and some of 
the discussions and the tough decisions that had to be made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I listened very closely to that 
minister. And in fact when those members opposite want to rise 
in the Assembly and talk about those difficult decisions, I 
listened very closely cause I think they have a lot to add on the 
subject of prudence and fiscal responsibility from some of their 
experiences in past governments. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after sitting through deficit 2007, I’m 
no longer prepared to sit in this Assembly and take fiscal 
prudence lessons from that government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Not after they delivered a $700 million deficit. 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at best, at best this is a tired old 
NDP government that is recklessly spending money to win 
re-election— at best. At worst, at the worst, Mr. Speaker, they 
have lost all regard for the taxpayers of this province and they 

are . . . at worst they don’t care what happens after the next 
election. If it’s a new government, it’s the new government’s 
problems. And if it’s that same old tired NDP government, that 
for some reason does return, then we’ll see a replay of 2003 
where they’ll raise taxes. They didn’t talk about it before, but 
they’ll raise taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of how hard this tired old NDP 
government tries, this budget is a deficit budget — a $700 
million deficit. And I know the Minister of Labour, he likes to 
follow along, and I’m looking at the budget performance plan 
summary, pages 50 and 51, bottom of the page 50, revenue, 
$7.8693 billion; expenses on the next page, $8.349730 billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not exactly sure of how the 
government goes through the budgeting process. I think the 
cabinet ministers decide how much money they need — they 
take it to the Finance minister — to run their departments. And 
at the end of the day the cabinet, they decide on what the budget 
will be, and at some point they share that with their caucus. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after seeing these numbers, I can’t 
believe that not one member of that government didn’t say, wait 
a minute, what are we doing here? What are we doing here after 
some of the credibility that we built up, that that government 
built up? What are they doing? And I can’t believe that 
members of that government didn’t see the problems in this 
budget, that it is actually a deficit budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, they’re 
spinning this budget pretty hard. And they have to because 
pretty much everybody is against this budget. But I found it 
very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that to give credibility, 
some credibility to their budget, who are they quoting? They’re 
quoting the big banks. Can you imagine that? The NDP are 
quoting the big chartered banks. And I guess, you know, they 
haven’t totally, you know, the big corporations haven’t totally 
taken over the most profitable parts of our economy. They still 
have time to look at this budget. But I can’t believe that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a deficit budget. It doesn’t 
matter how you cut it. And actually, Thursday afternoon I went 
back to Weyburn after the budget. It was Thursday afternoon, 
and I had a meeting in my office. And I stopped in the office 
and told Marcie . . . because you know, we’d gone over lunch 
and I hadn’t eaten yet, so I was going to go out and get a bite to 
eat before my appointment came in. And I went to a coffee shop 
in Weyburn, and a place they serve pizza and coffee and 
doughnuts, and I went to get something to eat. And two 
gentlemen stopped me. They stopped me in the coffee shop. 
And they had heard on the radio and they came over to me. And 
they couldn’t believe that this government was running a deficit 
budget. They couldn’t believe it. They couldn’t believe it, and I 
know they don’t want to believe it. It’s in their own books 
though. Revenues 7.8 billion, expenses 8.3 — that’s a deficit. 
 
And I know the member from Coronation Park, last night he 
informed us you know — he was pretty animated — that he 
thought that members on this side couldn’t read a simple 
financial statement. But you know he might have a bit of 
trouble because I know in his speech, I know in his speech, he 
said when he was in school they used to stop class, Mr. 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

Speaker, to look at semis going by the school, so maybe he 
missed a bit in accounting or math or whatever class it was. But 
this a deficit budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the last couple of years — and 
they’ve been some pretty good years for our province — we’ve 
had record government revenue in terms of additional oil 
revenue, and our natural resources have provided for our 
province, and this government they put some money aside. Well 
first of all, they didn’t really put money aside; it was more like 
a credit card. And then last year they did decide to put some 
money aside, but they did that. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in fact in this Chamber, the Premier said in 2002, and I quote, 
“Money aside in a savings account for the rainy day. And when 
the rainy day came, we’ve used it.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, in deficit 2007, the government has 
spent a majority of that rainy day fund, at a time of what they 
will say is a boom time in our province. And yet they’re 
spending the rainy day fund, over $500 million taken from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just three years ago, the former 
minister of Finance, the member for Regina Douglas Park, he 
said, on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, he said, quote, “We are 
weaning ourselves from relying on the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, our rainy day account.” And I end the quote. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this has been quite an expensive weaning process that 
this government has gone through. Over $500 million taken 
from the rainy day fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it makes it 
hard to believe that deficit 2007 is making the people of this 
province long for that Finance minister. That’s how bad this 
budget is. 
 
In fact according to the government’s own 2000-2001 budget, 
and I’ll quote from that budget: “In years when fiscal 
challenges are great, the government will use fund withdrawals 
to stay focused on [its] long-term plans . . .” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the only fiscal challenge today is that NDP 
government’s reckless, runaway spending. That’s the only fiscal 
challenge in this province. 
 
Now there’s a bit of confusion. We’ve talked about this a little 
earlier; members opposite will talk about it. There’s a bit of 
confusion of how to properly read the government’s budget. 
They’ll dispute that it’s an actual $700 million deficit in the 
summary financial statements. Well here’s what the auditor 
says. This is from a press release, or actually a statement given 
to the media on the 2004 auditor’s report. And he said: 
 

The summary financial plan also improves the 
Government’s accountability by allowing legislators and 
the public to assess whether its financial performance is 
better or worse than what was planned. 
 
I encourage legislators and the public to look for this 
information when the Government provides its quarterly 
updates . . . 

 
[20:15] 
 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

Rather than focusing on the GRF which only reports part 
of the Government’s operations, you should look to see 
how the Government is performing against its financial 
plan for the entire Government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the government’s own document, 
budget document — this, the book that I’m holding — it’s a 
Budget and Performance Plan Summary. And I’ll encourage the 
members to turn to page 61. And this document says, “The 
Summary Financial Budget combines all organizations on a 
modified equity basis for the purposes of calculating the 
Government’s surplus.” But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this case 
we know it’s not a surplus. It is a deficit, but the government 
won’t give the people of Saskatchewan a clear answer on this. 
 
They keep saying it’s not a deficit, but I guess the only person 
that the government will admit that it is a deficit to is apparently 
Don Newman. Don Newman, host of CBC Newsworld’s 
Politics, said to the Minister of Finance, “But you’re going to 
spend more money in the coming fiscal year than you’re going 
to collect.” The Minister of Finance says, “Yes, that’s right.” 
And Don Newman says, “Is that not called a deficit in 
Saskatchewan?” And even the Minister of Finance, he won’t 
admit it to the people of the province, but he’ll go on TV, on 
national television and he’ll say, well it’s a surplus actually on 
the GRF [General Revenue Fund], but it is on the summary 
financial a deficit. The Finance minister admits it. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on. I got pages here of 
what people say — pages. Randy Burton, StarPhoenix, “When 
you look at it all together it’s a very expensive campaign 
platform that no government is going to be able to afford in the 
long run.” Murray Mandryk says, “It’s hard to see anything 
particularly good emerge from the numbers presented by the 
New Democratic finance minister.” 
 
Leader-Post editorial, “The key issue is affordability.” And 
they go on and say, “Budgets are about making hard, but 
responsible, choices and there’s a real question mark over 
whether this big-spending political budget is sustainable.” 
StarPhoenix editorial, “Thursday’s budget by the Lorne Calvert 
government was a giant step in the wrong direction.” 
 
I could go on, and I think I will. You know it’s interesting. 
They like to quote the big banks saying that it is a balanced 
budget. What do the chartered accountants say? The chartered 
accountants association: 
 

Well it is a deficit budget and the size of the deficit 
depends on what you include. If you look at just the 
General Revenue Fund which our taxes mostly go into, it’s 
about $480 million deficit. 

 
Now that’s from the chartered accountants, which I think they 
would know a little bit about accounting. You would think that 
they would know about accounting. And the chamber of 
commerce, they talk about how this is a 9 per cent spending 
increase and yet revenues aren’t increasing that fast. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the middle of a boom the only ones 
experiencing a rainy day in this province is the government 
opposite. They know they’re in tough. We got an election 
coming. In fact the Minister of Finance says, don’t worry; this 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

budget is sustainable. He says it’s sustainable. So let’s check 
the government’s projections to see how sustainable it is. Let’s 
go to the projections. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see projections on the price of 
potash over the next two years. I see projections on the price of 
oil over the next two years. I don’t see the projections from this 
Finance minister though. It’s harder for him to say to the people 
of this province, just trust us; everything’s going to be fine. Just 
trust us. The people of this province have heard that long 
enough from this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I would like to talk . . . I’m not sure how much time I got 
left. Am I all right? Yes, I got a couple minutes left. And I want 
to talk about . . . You know, obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’m in this Chamber today because of the good people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and the message that they sent in the 
by-election. And my seatmate also is here because of a very 
decisive by-election win. And those are really the last two 
major tests for this government of what the people of the 
province feel. 
 
Now taken alone they tell very different stories. Obviously one 
seat is, you know, very good for our party historically over the 
last 10 years, and one other has been a bit of a tougher race. So 
let’s add the two numbers together. If you add both by-elections 
together, the government . . . of the votes cast, the governing 
party got less than 19 per cent. Less than one in five people put 
their confidence in that party. And I think that’s very indicative 
of what’s going to happen in the next provincial election, 
whenever they decide to call it. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my final remaining moments I do 
want to talk . . . I’ll give a bit of credit. I don’t think it was 
probably the best way to do it, but the Finance minister in 
offering the new graduate tax exemption, it’s a bit of a step in 
the right direction. But from their own documents, there’s going 
to be 10,000 graduates but only 4,000 new jobs so, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you do the math. I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 
could figure out how well that’s going to work for the people, 
the young people of this province. But I’ll give them credit; it’s 
the first meaningful step towards young people, towards 
keeping young people in our province that we’ve seen from this 
government in 16 years. So you know they’re a little late to the 
party, but it’s good to see them. 
 
Now they’ve done . . . And if you look at past budget speeches, 
past budget addresses, past throne speeches there’s been very 
little talk about growing the province, about making sure that 
this is a place, you know, for young people to stay. Now this 
last Throne Speech they did get the message, but that was after 
a by-election loss and after some polling that finally, you know, 
they got the picture that this is an important issue for the people 
of this province. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it reminds me of this government on 
the issue of population and youth retention. It reminds me of a 
quote I recently got. Each Friday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I receive 
The Family Place newsletter. It’s a community-based 
organization in Weyburn that does terrific work for the young 
people of our community, and each newsletter ends with a 
thought for the week. And a couple of weeks ago this was the 
thought of the week, and it was, “Failure is less a crime than 

low ambition.” And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has 
had not a lot of ambition for the young people of our province, 
for keeping them in the province. 
 
And you know had they set some real goals over the last 16 
years about keeping young people in this province, even if they 
didn’t make those goals I think the people would have gave 
them credit. At least they tried. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
haven’t even tried. They haven’t even tried. 
 
And I could go through other issues about property tax relief, 
how, you know, they betray the people of this province. 
They’ve said that they were going to provide some long-term 
help for property taxpayers, and they haven’t done that. It’s 
been band-aids — band-aids on agriculture and on health care 
and on post-secondary education. 
 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me today at the rally that was 
held outside, and the Minister of Learning was standing up and 
talking about all the things that their government was trying to 
do. And one of the people that attended the rally — I’m not sure 
which community she was from — but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
heard her say from behind me, she said when the Minister of 
Learning was speaking, this lady said, I knew we should have 
brought our shovels today. And that’s exactly what the people 
of this province are saying. They can’t really trust what this 
government is saying anymore. They’ve lost confidence. 
They’ve lost confidence because this budget shows that they’re 
losing credibility with the people of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close here. I haven’t got to 
everything I want to say, and we’ll have . . . members this side 
want to talk more. But I want to close with something that a 
current member of this House once said in this Assembly. And 
I’ll quote: 
 

. . . when a government has lost the confidence of the 
people, when it has lost its credibility and demonstrates as 
much in a budget address, then it’s time to defeat that 
government. It’s time to put into place in government a 
group of women and men who will . . . restore confidence, 
not only to the budgetary process and the financial 
management of our province but confidence to our people 
in what we can do and be in the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the province spoke those words in 
April of 1990. He spoke it about the former Conservative 
administration. Mr. Speaker, those words hold as true today as 
they did back then. And for that reason, and other reasons that 
members have talked about, I will be supporting the 
amendment, and I will not be supporting the $700 million 
deficit budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today and honoured to stand and enter into 
the budget debate. Mr. Deputy Speaker, representing the 
constituents of Regina Dewdney is an honour that I take very 
seriously and one that I am very proud of. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

few people ever have the opportunity in public life to represent 
the people, to be elected to represent the people of the province. 
And it is a duty and a responsibility that I take extremely 
seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Before I start my remarks I’d like to congratulate the new 
member for Martensville. She has tremendous shoes to fill, and 
she sets a new precedent I believe in this Assembly being the 
daughter of a former member. And her father served this 
Assembly in a very, very exceptional way, and I am sure that 
she will do the same. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we talk about the budget, this is a 
budget that is built upon a foundation that took many years to 
build. Before you can have the opportunity to spend money on 
social programs, you first must build an economy which 
produces the revenue in which to spend, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget, after many years of hard work, allows us for the 
first time to put in place some very significant new social policy 
directions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the last number of years 
this government has cut taxes. It’s built its foundation. It’s built 
the economy to where we are today. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
year alone more than one-half billion dollars will be paid less in 
taxes by the people and businesses of this province. That 
includes $340 million in sales tax. In October of last year, 
October 27, the Finance minister stood and announced the 2 per 
cent cut in the sales tax, saving every Saskatchewan family 
approximately $300. 
 
This year alone, we’re seeing significant tax cuts in corporate 
and business taxes to the tune of about $155 million. On top of 
that we’re seeing property tax cuts of $107 million. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is all possible because of the great foundation that 
has been built over the last number of years that has allowed 
our economy to grow at an unprecedented rate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re also indexing benefits under The 
Income Tax Act so that bracket creep doesn’t take away that 
benefit of those tax breaks from Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is all possible because of a belief that 
you cannot have economic prosperity without first building that 
good economy. But out of economic prosperity should come 
social progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — The people of the province should benefit from 
the well-being of its province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what 
this budget is about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget will see two very significant 
new programs put in place. One is a program that will cap 
prescription drugs for seniors at a maximum of $15 per 
prescription. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a very significant, 
significant advancement for the well-being of our seniors. 
 
These people are responsible for making our province what it is. 
Seniors are responsible for building the foundation in which this 
great province has become what it is. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s only fair and right that they have the opportunity to benefit 
from their hard work and the many years they have put forward 

in this province making it what it is. Seniors built this province, 
and now it’s our opportunity to reward them for what they’ve 
done for us. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of them, we 
have what we have today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are those who think this plan is not 
the appropriate thing to do, that the money could be spent better 
in other ways. But Mr. Speaker, being government is about 
making choices, and it’s about rewarding those who deserve to 
be rewarded. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our seniors most 
definitely deserve to be rewarded. Because of them today, we 
have what we have, and we have the opportunities that we have. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have also taken steps towards keeping 
our young people here, creating opportunities for young people 
and creating a future so that those young people can see their 
future here in this province. We’ve done that in a number of 
ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But fundamentally we’ve done it by 
creating a new graduated tax credit that will allow young people 
to earn up to $20,000 per year before they pay tax over a 
five-year period in the province of Saskatchewan. That is up to 
$100,000 over five years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 
significant. And there are individuals say well that isn’t 
significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it is. You have to do what 
you can do within the financial means you have, and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we are focused on keeping our young people 
here. 
 
I’m a father of three children, all of which I hope will make 
their careers in the province of Saskatchewan, all of which are 
going to university today in the province of Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s for them we need to make decisions, 
not for those of us who sit in this House today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve also frozen tuition at the 2004 
levels, making education more affordable for each and every 
child in this province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that represents 
a savings of approximately $1,500 per year. That in itself is 
quite significant as young people struggle to pay for the costs of 
going to school. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have responsibility as 
a government and a responsibility as parents to try to ensure 
that every young person has every opportunity they can to be as 
successful as possible as they move forward in life. 
 
This budget also includes more than 31,000 training spaces — a 
24 per cent increase in the last three years alone. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s about putting your money where your mouth is. 
It’s about indicating that those young people are important, and 
the training opportunities for those young people in our 
province is our priority. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government put its money where its mouth is. It’s moving 
forward, creating new training spaces for young people, 
creating new opportunities for our children right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re even going further in a number of 
ways. We’re putting $3 million into literacy funding to ensure 
that every young person and every adult has the opportunity to 
make sure that they have the greatest possibility to reach their 
potential in this province. We’re increasing by another 500 new, 
licensed child daycare spaces in the province, bringing the total 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

to 9,300. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is significant but even more 
significant in an environment where the federal government has 
continually cut back in child care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But this 
province decided to fully fund and move forward in these 
programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is significant. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what this 
province’s greatest gift to Canada is — health care. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there isn’t a nation in the world or a province in 
Canada that isn’t struggling to bring quality health care to its 
citizens. It doesn’t matter if you’re living in the United States, 
Canada, Great Britain, or any of the G8 [Group of Eight] 
countries in the world, or any province in Canada. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, every jurisdiction is struggling to bring quality health 
care to its citizens. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province 
we’re continuing to build on the best and most qualified health 
care system in the world. 
 
Medicare was the invention, the creation, the gift of the people 
of Saskatchewan to Canada, and we are continuing to improve 
upon it. We’re going to provide 3,117 more MRIs [magnetic 
resonance imaging] this year. We’re going to provide 5,455 
more bone mineral density scans. We’re going to increase 
cardiac catheterization, lab and renal dialysis clinic services. 
And we’re going to provide $1.6 million more for hip and knee 
replacements for a total of 3,275 procedures this year alone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to increase funding to the 
cancer agency by 17 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
inflation’s 2 per cent, we’re increasing funding to the cancer 
agency by 17 per cent, recognizing the importance of health 
care for our citizens. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year we’re also going to spend an 
unprecedented amount in capital. We are going to spend $534.8 
million on roads, on buildings, on schools, on health care 
facilities so that we can increase the infrastructure to deliver the 
services to our people in this province. On top of that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’re increasing transfers — unconditional 
transfers — to municipalities by $30 million to a record $127.3 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as providing $58.2 million 
for municipal infrastructure. 
 
And we’re doing this at the same time as paying down $158 
million in debt this year. Over the last four years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we will have achieved paying off nearly $1 billion of 
provincial debt. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government’s made a 
commitment to move forward in the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and this budget does just that. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re also continuing to increase Saskatchewan 
assistance plan rates by $10. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
continuing to put our actions where our mouth is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re doing that in an environment where 
we now have 16 consecutive credit upgrades — 16 consecutive 
credit upgrades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re going to have a 
surplus of $75 million in General Revenue Fund this year. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to have economic growth 
predicted at about 2.9 per cent and about 2.6 per cent next year, 
Mr. Speaker — significant economic growth. The province is 
continuing to prosper and move forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is all possible because of the hard 

work of the people of the province of Saskatchewan but also 
about the right choices having been made, about having a plan 
to move forward. Saskatchewan today is a have province. 
Saskatchewan today is sitting among the top two and three 
provinces in this country in its fiscal position. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, outside of Alberta we have the lowest 
sales tax in Canada. Mr. Deputy Speaker, today we pay $1,200 
a year less in income tax for a family of four of $50,000 than 
we did just four years ago. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s about 
this province moving forward and putting its resources to its 
people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, government debt on March 31, 2008, is 
forecast to be $7.3 billion. Just a few years ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that debt was more than $4 billion larger. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, debt-to-GDP ratio is 23.8 per cent today compared to 
69.8 per cent in 1993. Mr. Deputy Speaker, think of the 
significant progress that’s been made in some very difficult 
times. It took significant determination to make the tough 
choices that were necessary to move this economy forward and 
then to put those choices forward in economic reality for its 
people and returning in both tax cuts and new programs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province are seeing 
unprecedented good times in the province. We’re booming like 
we never have before. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 
absolutely no sense having a boom if the people of the province 
do not feel the benefit of that boom. So this budget is returning 
to the people of Saskatchewan significant money in the form of 
the 2 per cent sales tax cut, in the form of corporation and small 
business tax cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in the form of 
property tax cuts to both agricultural lands and residential and 
commercial properties across the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s been $260 million in 
annual tax savings as a result of the personal income tax 
changes made a number of years ago, resulting in significant 
savings to families. 
 
As this government has been able to turn the province’s fiscal 
situation around, it has returned those dollars to its citizens. 
And that’s the responsibility of any government, to return the 
benefit of the wealth to the people who own that wealth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we live today in a province that has the 
most affordable cost of living. We have the opportunity, by 
virtue of owning Crown corporations, to have the most 
affordable, most affordable natural gas, water, telephone, 
power, and utilities throughout the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And those, those are as a result of choices made by 
this government and by the people of the province. We had 
promised the lowest-cost bundle of utilities. We have delivered 
on that and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will continue to deliver as 
we move forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of controversy about 
this budget, but I’d like to just basically deal with this in one 
way. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to let the judgment, whether 
this budget is sustainable, be to those who are the experts. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about what the bond 
rating agencies and the banks are saying about this budget. 
 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the national bank called the Calvert fiscal 
plan “Saskatchewan’s 14th straight budget showing a surplus.” 
That’s the national bank, Mr. Speaker; that’s not the NDP 
government. The national bank called it a balanced budget — 
14th straight balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce] said, “Program spending will grow by a lean 1.4 
per cent.” And the Bank of Montreal gave the province “. . . top 
marks for its commitment to cutting taxes, [and] keeping 
spending in check . . .” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think Michael Gregory of BMO Capital Markets says it 
best: “. . . when it comes to financial management, the 
Saskatchewan government is at the top of its class . . .” Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Michael Gregory spends his days analyzing 
the budgets of governments across Canada, it says. He says, 
Saskatchewan’s “. . . budget continues a fine tradition.” 
 
If someone says, are they doing a good job? Well you know 
“Name me one other jurisdiction anywhere that you can think 
of that can point to 14 balanced budgets in a row.” That isn’t 
the government saying that, Mr. Speaker. That is BMO Capital 
Markets’ Michael Gregory saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know. I’m not going to 
question the experts who say this. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think that, combined with 16 straight credit rating upgrades, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not up to you or I to determine what 
the financial institutions and the bond rating agencies think of 
our budgets. They do it for themselves. They don’t want to hear 
our opinion. They don’t want to hear the opinion of the 
opposition. They’ll make their own decision. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, although the members opposite don’t believe that this 
budget’s a good budget, there are many out there who do, 
including the bond rating agencies, including the banks and the 
financial markets. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those reasons and for many others 
— because this budget represents the values of Saskatchewan 
people, it represents putting forward the values and needs of our 
senior citizens and our young people — for those reasons, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and opposing 
the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, certainly at this time of the night you often wonder 
how many people are really paying attention. I wonder if people 
out are observing as clearly as the members across the floor are 
observing this debate or the members in the Assembly. But I 
can tell you this, from past experience I’ve had people call and 
— while I was still on my feet — correct me when I made a 
mistake, so I’ve got to be careful tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we look at the budget that was 
presented, budget 2007, we can’t help but think that with 

everything going for it the government has certainly created a 
situation where the people of Saskatchewan, I believe, in many 
cases are disappointed. In a time of a boom, the NDP has 
actually blown that boom. It’s gone on a reckless spending 
spree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the taxpayers’ credit card in a 
desperate attempt, I would suggest, to again buy votes. 
 
 And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the past number of years in the 
opportunities I’ve had to sit in this Assembly, I’ve witnessed 
many changes that have taken place from the personnel in the 
Assembly. And let me say first of all a special welcome to the 
member from Martensville and we certainly look forward to her 
contribution not only in the Assembly. I was a good friend of 
her father’s, and I’ve already seen that she certainly is going to 
follow and fill her father’s shoes very well. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of course we know the member from Weyburn has 
already shown us his abilities as well. 
 
But when we talk about the budget and we look at where this 
government is going, I can’t help but think back a few elections. 
And we don’t even have to go that far back, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We just have to go back to the 2003 election and the 
promises that were made just prior to that election. 
 
And as we follow the debate even in the most recent federal 
budget . . . and the Premier has been complaining, this 
government has been complaining about broken promises. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker we have seen the NDP government 
in the past promise one thing, then go through an election and 
say oops, made a mistake; we spent a little too much money, 
sorry. What happened in 2003 . . . the first budget presented 
after the ’03 election was an increase in the provincial sales tax. 
 
So that as we get closer to the 2007 . . . maybe in a few days, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe it’s in the fall. Whatever the 
scenario, the NDP are going to say yes, but we reduced it 2 
percent. However people need to remember they increased it 2 
percent. They don’t even have to remember the 2 percent 
increase and then the decrease. They just need to take a look as 
well at the current budget and the fact that this government is 
running a $700 million deficit. And the facts and the budgetary 
document speaks for itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So what are they doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What’s this 
Minister of Finance speaking from his chair? And I appreciate 
the comments and the suggestions that are coming from the 
minister because it certainly makes it a lot easier to get into the 
debate in the Assembly when there’s added advice. 
 
$700 million additional spending, a deficit, and yet does that 
make things better for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? How much better are the people in general 
going to be? Well the minister says, yes it makes people better. 
Well some seniors are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are no doubt going 
to believe that they’re better off today than they were yesterday. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will find out come 
July 1 that where they had thought they were better off, they 
really won’t be better off. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I look at the Moosomin constituency 
and I look at the challenges facing people across the Moosomin 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

constituency . . . Let me first of all say I really appreciate my 
staff, Tina and Audrey. And over the years, I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we all get to appreciate the staff that work in our 
offices. And we all appreciate our families, our wives and our 
children, and even our grandchildren. And certainly this past 
year we’ve had the pleasure of a grandchild being brought into 
our family, and we’re certainly enjoying that little 
granddaughter. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look forward to 
enjoying her company and grandchildren down the road as they 
bring enjoyment into the home. It’s certainly — and I notice a 
number of other members agreeing — grandchildren are . . . 
Well in fact someone said to me recently, you know, you should 
have had the grandchildren first. Now that might have been 
somewhat complicated, but yes, grandchildren are certainly a 
pleasure to have in the home. 
 
But when I talk about a grandchild I think to myself, well, what 
is this budget going to do for them down the road? We need to 
. . . As we look at the province of Saskatchewan and we all 
believe that we live in a province with certainly so much 
potential and so much opportunity. And we look at the most 
recent budget and yet we look at some of the editorials, some of 
the comments that have been written since the presentation of 
the budget. And I’m just going to read a couple comments. One 
of the columnists in The StarPhoenix says, “. . . when you look 
at it all together, it’s very expensive campaign platform that no 
government is going to be able to afford to run in the long run.” 
 
A second columnist said: 
 

Sadly, the numbers in the brave new world of 
Thomsonomics, where you can increase spending by nine 
per cent when revenues are only increasing by 1.8 per cent 
and still claim a surplus, are a bit scary. 

 
And that’s why my colleagues and I have been pointing out to 
the people of Saskatchewan that this budget that has been 
presented by the Minister of Finance most recently in the 
Assembly is more than what it appears to be on the surface. 
And many of the media outlets and — as I found the other day 
when I was out touring my constituency — many of my 
constituents are beginning to see through it as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to speak a little bit about the 
impact this budget has or doesn’t have on my constituents. And 
first of all, let me talk about schools. And many MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] today had the privilege 
of meeting representatives who came in from different 
communities across the province. And in some cases— I would 
add, Mr. Deputy Speaker — individuals came in through some 
very difficult weather conditions. It’s quite interesting, and I 
think over the past number of years, a period of years, any time 
we’ve had a public demonstration, it’s what I’ve noted. Well 
the day before can be beautiful; the day of the demonstration 
has turned out to be atrocious. And today was no different. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people cared about their 
communities. They were concerned about their communities. 
They were concerned about the educational opportunities. And 
what was on their minds was not only a place for their children 
— and might I add possibly their grandchildren — a place for 
them to get an education, but also the fact of having an 
opportunity with economic growth which they’re looking for of 

a school still being available in their community for children, 
for parents to be able to place their children in and see them 
receive an education. 
 
So I would like to say to each and every one of the individuals 
who came in, thank you so much. And I certainly want to 
compliment you for taking the time to speak out on behalf of 
your community and your school. 
 
As we talk about the Save Our Schools rally, I’d just like to 
read a couple comments that were in one of the most recent 
papers, comment talking about the provincial budget that had 
“. . . plans to increase government departmental spending by 
more than $640 million — and not one thin dime is directly 
dedicated to addressing the issue of school closures.” He says: 
 

Wouldn’t the budget have been the perfect opportunity to 
address this issue? 
 
Evidently not. 

 
While there is a nine-per-cent overall increase in spending 
in the 2007-08 provincial budget, spending in the 
Department of Learning is only rising by 41.7 million, or 
5.4 per cent. 

 
And the Minister of Finance chirps from his seat about 
spending too much. I guess my comment to the Minister of 
Finance is priorities. And that’s exactly what this columnist is 
talking about — priorities of government spending, priorities 
that didn’t meet the needs and the issues that were brought to 
the forefront of the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The columnist also said it raises a pretty fundamental question 
about where education rates on this NDP government’s priority 
list. And then we also were aware of the information that was 
presented to us by David Gleim of Chaplin. The columnist goes 
on to say it should be right up there, education should be right 
up there with health, and it baffles me. This is a socialist 
government, and the history of the CCF-NDP [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party] has always 
been that education was a priority. But I want to leave us with 
one comment that he ends up the column with where he says: 
 

Despite a huge nine-per-cent increase in spending, there 
still doesn’t appear to be a plan or money to keep smaller 
community schools open. And with most NDP MLAs 
representing urban seats where rural school closures are a 
non-issue, there’s less reason to believe either will be 
forthcoming. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that speaks for itself. And even 
for the people who took the time to come to the Assembly today 
. . . they made the trip. I believe they laid out a sound reason as 
to why we need to look at education, how we educate our 
children, why we need small rural schools. 
 
And I would like to add personally that I’m very pleased with 
the number of the communities in my constituency who were 
facing reviews. And I would like to say that many of these 
communities very deliberately took the time to bring forward, at 
the public meetings, all the positive reasons why their schools 
should remain open from the fact of how well students have 



March 27, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

been educated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had students leave our small 
schools and have achieved tremendously at the university or the 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] levels, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’ve gone on and 
they’ve done well in the professional fields, which certainly 
speaks well for how our teachers have devoted themselves to 
educating our young people. 
 
And when I look at Kennedy Langbank and Glenavon and 
Wapella, and the parents who came in, the school board 
members, and how hard they worked, I need to compliment 
them for their hard work and their dedication to their 
community. And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague 
has talked about our plan of schools of necessity. 
 
And one of the individuals I ran into was chatting with, or a 
couple of them at the rally, were talking about the fact of young 
people being on lengthy bus rides, and that’s what schools of 
necessity plays to, or schools of opportunity. I look at the one 
community, Kennedy Langbank, and there’s a couple . . . a 
manufacturing plant that is looking at expanding and doubling 
the number of people employed there. So you wonder why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, people are concerned about whether schools 
are open or not. It’s because of the fact that we are seeing 
opportunities open up, greater opportunities for young people to 
come back to Saskatchewan despite what the government is 
doing. There are businesses who are creating opportunities for 
young people to look at coming back and investing in our small 
communities, but they need to have the services available. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look at the budget presented to us 
today, and I can’t help but think of the health needs of our 
constituency. And there’s no doubt that many of the members in 
this Assembly face the same challenges. 
 
One of the biggest challenges is recruitment of doctors to fill 
our hospitals and to meet the service needs. And yet what did 
we see in this budget? I think there were four more seats for 
training for doctors which is falling short, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
of ensuring that we have the quality professionals in our 
hospitals, in our local communities to meet the needs. And in 
many cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the communities I 
represent, our communities are actually seeing an increase in 
population. So that speaks well for those communities but it 
also speaks for the need not only for doctors; we have a need 
for nurses. What did we get? Eighteen new nursing seats. LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse], 15 new LPN positions within this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we have to ask ourselves, what are the government’s 
priorities? And why, with the surplus the government had to 
work with, why did they choose to spend it in the way they did 
and forgot about putting in place the funding that would allow 
for more professionals to enter the field, especially in health 
care, to meet the needs of people across Saskatchewan? Not just 
urban Saskatchewan but rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must also acknowledge the fact that 
people in the Moosomin and surrounding area are certainly 
pleased to see the way the construction is moving forward on 
the new hospital in Moosomin. And everyone is waiting with 

bated breath to see that construction completed even though it 
costs them an arm and a leg for that facility to move forward 
because of the fact that they have to find 35 per cent of the 
capital costs plus furnish the facility. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in our community are 
following this budget very carefully as well. 
 
And I think one of the issues that has come up very currently in 
the last couple of days . . . and yesterday I had the privilege of 
stopping in at one of the reserves and talking to the band 
council for a few moments. And one of the issues they brought 
forward was the need for dialysis in the Broadview area. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here again let me talk about the fact of 
how communities and how surrounding areas work together. 
Over the years we’ve had communities fighting with each other 
for a service. But in this case the Broadview community and all 
the bands in the area plus the RMs [rural municipality] and the 
surrounding towns said, you know, it’s only right that people 
who need dialysis and that service should . . . there should be 
something closer for them. 
 
Now the Minister of Health, when we were debating it last fall, 
said, well those people are receiving the service; they’re getting 
care, aren’t they? And yes, they are currently, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But unfortunately the Minister of Health forgot about 
the fact — or whether he forgot or conveniently forgot — 
forgot that for people in rural communities it’s a substantial cost 
and burden to them for the cost of obtaining that dialysis 
service. 
 
Many of these people are elderly people. They have to hire 
someone to drive them in or drive them to the destination — 
whether it’s Yorkton, whether it’s Regina. And there’s meals 
and there’s other needs. And I’ve seen some of the figures, and 
the figures are well into the 10, $15,000 a year coming out of a 
person’s pocket just so they can get a service that I believe, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we would all say they have a right to receive. 
So would it not be practical to put a dialysis unit in the 
Broadview area that would be more focal and would certainly 
help meet the needs and take away from the stress of having to 
be on the roads? And we saw today what types of conditions 
people drive in to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think those are some 
things that people are just saying, that’s the right thing to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of the members on the 
government’s side were talking as well about the drug plan they 
introduced. And yes, for a lot of people that drug plan is going 
to certainly improve their lives. However in many cases, Mr. 
Speaker, many people already qualify for the low end and don’t 
pay much towards the drugs. So was $15 going to make much 
of a difference for some of these people? Probably not. 
 
But it’s $15 per prescription. So how many prescriptions are 
you going to . . . like what’s the cost? If you’ve got three 
prescriptions to fill, that’s $45 — not 15. And I think that’s 
some of the issues that people are going to find when this drug 
plan, if it does come into play, is not going to be the carrot that 
they thought it was going to be. And when the facts begin, start 
to become public and the reality of what it is becomes public, 
many people are going to be disappointed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well this government talks about a 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2007 

universality of health care, medicare. Saskatchewan is the home 
of medicare. Saskatchewan is the home of universal health care. 
Well this drug plan is not universal if you look at it in the 
overall scheme of things. It picks on a certain group of 
individuals. And yes I believe it was the member from Regina 
Dewdney who talked about our seniors building our provinces. 
Yes even some of the seniors I’ve talked to are quite concerned 
about how the government spends the taxpayers’ money and 
where they’re putting the money, how it meets the needs of 
individuals. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s also important for people to realize 
that the $15 drug plan only works or deals with drugs that are 
already under the formulary. So what does it do for additional 
drug costs or drugs that come on the scene? In fact we’ve seen 
certain drugs — cancer drugs — right now that still aren’t on 
the formulary, that people are paying the total cost upfront. So 
what does it do for individuals like that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And now the Minister of Health was saying, well should we pay 
for all of these drugs? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government opposite just told us that this is such a good plan. 
It’s going to help everybody. Well maybe it’s time we got all of 
the information out so people had a better understanding of 
what this drug plan is going to cost you for the people of 
Saskatchewan because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe when 
people begin to read between the lines and understand what it 
is, they’re not going to be so excited about the $15 drug fee that 
this government is bringing forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on in so many areas. We can 
talk about highways. We can talk about highways, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I look at my constituency, and the Minister of 
Highways recently announced more funding for highways. 
Then the minister also talked about a council or a body that they 
would be talking to, to develop a more contingent plan about 
meeting the needs of or addressing the needs of highways. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister — over the years 
we’ve had debates in the Assembly — and the minister has 
commented about the regional economic development 
authorities and southeast transportation authority for example, 
southwest. And one has to ask, why would you have to establish 
a new transportation authority? You already have one there. 
Unfortunately you haven’t been listening very well to the 
recommendations that have been coming from many of these 
transportation authorities. 
 
In my constituency for example, had they been following the 
guidelines, had they been listening very carefully, No. 48 
Highway from the Manitoba border right through to Kipling 
would be basically completed. 
 
And we talk about tourism. We talk about economic 
development. We talk about growing the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a prime example 
of, had the southeast transportation authority’s 
recommendations been followed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
would generate economic growth. We would grow our area, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

We could go on to other areas, whether it’s Highway 47 or 
different communities, whether it’s the grid system in the 
province and RMs and the difficulties they’re having. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think, as we look at this budget, as the 
people of Saskatchewan take a careful look at this budget, 
they’re going to see it for what it is. They’re going to see that 
it’s just an unscrupulous party looking to revitalize itself in the 
views of the electorate, hoping to salvage another election 
victory. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
are seeing through this budget, and they’re going to turn thumbs 
down, not only to this budget, but to this government when they 
screw up the courage to call the next provincial election. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister Responsible for Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m conscious of the hour, that it’s 9 
o’clock. Most members start their day by 8:30 in the morning, 
and most members will have a break during the supper hour to 
touch base with their families, to return phone calls, deal with 
emails. But today, because of the dinner put on by the 
Saskatchewan legislative interns, members did not have that 
opportunity. And I think in fairness, rather than starting my 
remarks, I move at this point that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The Minister of 
Government Relations has moved adjournment of debate. Is 
that motion agreed to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The Government 
House Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:02.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1043 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1049 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1052 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


