


















































Hansard: April 17, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1301 
 April 17, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
today to present to this Assembly petitions regarding a dialysis 
unit in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by folks from 
the communities of Grenfell, Cowessess, Neudorf, and 
Grayson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people in the 
communities of Maryfield and Fairlight. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition from people who want the government to 
maintain full service of the SaskPower office in Rosetown. Mr. 
Speaker, they are concerned that the banks cannot accept 
payment if the customer doesn’t have documentation, a service 
which the office supplies. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 

communities of Herschel, Rosetown, and Zealandia. And I am 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Central Butte. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are petitioning the government for increased signage 
at the junction of Highway 6 and 39. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to increase highway signage at the 
junctions of 6 and 39. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville and 
Minton. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar who are 
concerned about their possible loss of health care services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
once again rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
frustrated parents across Saskatchewan who for the past eight 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

years have been lobbying this government for a dedicated 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from the provincial constituencies 
of Saskatoon Sutherland and Saskatoon Silver Springs. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition from Saskatchewan people who are deeply 
concerned about the presence of sexual predators that present a 
threat to our communities and: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon possible. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good people of 
Prud’homme and Cudworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition calling on the 
Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 20 to 
primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by good citizens from the 
towns Drake, Lockwood, Jansen, and Dafoe and Young. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition on behalf of citizens from the 
Stonebridge neighbourhood of the Saskatoon Southeast 
constituency. The petition calls for a school in that area. The 
prayer states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Stonebridge. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Stepney 
Crescent and Martin Crescent in the Stonebridge area of 
Saskatoon Southeast. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to rise a petition, or to present a petition, calling 
on the government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Radville, 
Gladmar and Minton. And I’m very pleased to present it. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House 
on behalf of my good friend, Mr. Trew, 22 students from 
Coronation Park Community School with their teachers Lisa 
Frei and the chaperone Noreen Faulconer. The member from 
Coronation Park will have the opportunity to meet with them a 
little bit later. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and to all members of the House a young lady from Regina, 
Nataliya Pasichnyk. She is seated in the west gallery along with 
Angie Merasty who works in my office. I had the pleasure of 
meeting Nataliya along with other members of our caucus 
during one of the Premier’s breakfast delegations. 
 
Nataliya currently works for the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership which is also referred to as STEP. Nataliya 



April 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

is originally from the Ukraine. She has been in Regina for five 
years now and is a constituent of the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
And prior to the Premier’s breakfast delegation, Nataliya had 
never visited or toured the legislative buildings, so I invited her. 
So she’s here today and very happy to see her here, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask all members of this House to join me in 
welcoming Nataliya to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you to all members of the House, 
I’d like to introduce a noted First Nations artist and a 
constituent of mine from Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Willard Ahenakew is the great great-grandson of 
Chief Ahtahkakoop. He has just completed a commemorative 
portrait of his great great-grandfather at the signing of Treaty 6 
in 1876. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you and all members 
of the legislature to give Willard a warm, warm welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming Mr. Ahenakew to the House. A copy of 
the painting is hanging in room 2 of this building. And I 
understand there’s copies available. And without wanting to 
appear that I’m being a shill for someone, I would like to 
encourage members to go down there and have a look at. I went 
down. It’s Mr. Sklar’s office. And have a look at the print that’s 
there. It’s an interesting piece of Saskatchewan history. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Equality Day 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, today a voter’s declaration that 
includes the words, and I quote, “That I am of the male sex and 
of the full age of twenty-one years, [and] that I am a British 
subject and that I am not an Indian or a person of the Chinese 
race . . .” such a statement would be considered offensive, 
discriminatory, and outrageous. 
 
The passage that I just read comes from the 1909 Saskatchewan 
statutes. We have come a long way since that time, and one of 
the significant reasons behind this is the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms which was signed 25 years ago today, April 17. 
Among the rights signed into law 25 years ago are the freedom 

to vote; the right to life, liberty, and security; the ability to 
travel freely; freedom of the press; and to be secure against 
unreasonable search and seizure, just to name a few. 
 
It should also be noted that the equality section of the Charter, 
section 15, was proclaimed two years later on April 17, 1985. 
Hence today is known, April 17 is known as Equality Day. That 
section of the Charter outlines every Canadian’s right to equal 
protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination 
based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, 
age, mental or physical disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms is a document 
that is uniquely Canadian and one that has changed our nation 
for the better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

International Day of Farmers’ Struggle 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, for the past decade, members 
of the National Farmers’ Union and other farm groups have 
commemorated April 17 as the International Day of Farmers’ 
Struggle. 
 
On this date in 1996, 19 members of a farmers’ organization in 
Brazil were massacred when police opened fire on thousands of 
demonstrators demanding land reform. The victims were 
members of the Landless Movement of Brazil where 1 per cent 
of land holders own 50 per cent of the land. And the landless 
rural people are subject to torture and violence. 
 
This day commemorates the tragedy and restates the importance 
of food sovereignty, of social and economic justice for farmers 
and farm workers worldwide. Policies based on a foundation of 
food sovereignty recognized the right of farmers to fair trade, 
the right to own land, to earn a reasonable income, and to 
practice stewardship in the interest of all people. And the words 
of NFU [National Farmers’ Union] women’s president, Colleen 
Ross, quote: 
 

Food sovereignty gives priority to local and national 
economies and markets and empowers family farms while 
promoting environmental, social, and economic 
sustainability. 

 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when our farmers are threatened by trade 
injury and so-called free trade agreements, by corporate control 
of the food system and by a federal government that dismantles 
their right to market collectively, I ask members to 
acknowledge the farm struggles and sacrifices of the past and 
the right of all farmers to a just future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mother 
Teresa once said and I quote: 
 

We ourselves feel that what we are doing is just a drop in 
the ocean. But the ocean would be less because of that 
missing drop. 

 
This week, National Volunteer Week, is one in which we 
recognize those who live by this statement. Were it not for 
volunteers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, our communities 
large and small would simply cease to function. Our volunteers 
do us proud every year and ensure that our communities are 
vibrant and prosper in ways we never dreamed possible. 
 
They are active in both rural and urban Saskatchewan and 
repeatedly step up to the plate to fill the hundreds of roles 
needed to put on large events like Telemiracle, the Junos, 
national curling tournaments like the Brier and the Scott 
Tournament of Hearts and others. 
 
They are also always there helping with fundraisers for sports 
teams, charities, food drives, and other worthy causes. 
Volunteers play important roles in our schools, hospitals, 
community centres, and neighbourhoods. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to come from a province where volunteerism is a 
commonplace and in fact where people volunteer at the highest 
rate in the entire nation. Mr. Speaker, I would invite all 
members of this Assembly to join me in thanking all of 
Saskatchewan’s volunteers for their selfless contributions to our 
province and our people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

World Hemophilia Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World 
Hemophilia Day, a day to raise awareness and dispel 
misconceptions about hemophilia, an inherited bleeding 
disorder that affects about 3,000 Canadians and an estimated 
400,000 people worldwide. 
 
This year’s slogan is Improve Your Life! and builds on the 
World Federation of Hemophilia’s strategic vision of treatment 
for all — a vision that aspires towards proper diagnosis, 
management, and care by a multi-disciplinary health care team 
for all those with inherited bleeding disorders around the world. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, residents with hemophilia 
do have access to a multi-disciplinary health care team through 
the Saskatchewan bleeding disorders program at the Royal 
University Hospital in Saskatoon. The program provides a team 
approach and offers the skills of experienced hematologists, 
clinical nurse coordinators, a physical therapist, and a social 
worker. Associated services include genetic counselling and 
dentistry. 
 
The Saskatchewan bleeding disorders program partners with 
Hemophilia Saskatchewan to improve the quality of life for all 

people with bleeding disorders. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
acknowledge the excellent work of the staff of the bleeding 
disorders program and also Hemophilia Saskatchewan and their 
employees and volunteers who work to support, educate, and 
provide hope for people with hemophilia. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
Assembly to please join me in recognizing World Hemophilia 
Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Consul Midget A Rockets Capture 
Provincial Championship 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The village of Consul 
has another achievement to add to a recent hockey history that 
includes a Bantam provincial D championship in 2002-2003 
and the hosting of the Freedom Cup versus Kazakhstan in 2002. 
Last month, the Consul Midget Rockets emerged the victors in 
the provincial A category — a category for towns with much 
larger populations than that of Consul — without losing a single 
game. 
 
The results of this season are a testament to the talent and 
dedication of the players and the coaches. Consul, like many 
small towns, struggles to keep hockey active in the community. 
Their team this year included players from as far away as 
Shaunavon. Next year, they may not have a team in Consul, but 
this year they decided to go for it all. 
 
The final game in the Consul arena was packed to the rafters 
with cheering supporters from Frontier, Shaunavon, and Maple 
Creek, as well as the usual locals. With the strong coaching of 
Palmer Wenzel and Bevin Funk and the inspired play of these 
15- to 17-year-old boys, 10 of whom are in their senior year, 
they did capture it all — the league championship and the 
provincial championship. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate each of the players and the coaches on this very 
significant achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Defining Gutter Politics 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
one year ago that the Leader of the Opposition had to answer 
some questions around the definition of gutter politics, and he 
gave an interesting definition. He basically said that it’s not 
gutter politics to simply ask a question even if that question is 
loaded up with all kinds of malicious accusations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this definition, that allows the opposition to get 
away with so many of their recent drive-by smears when it 
comes to Murdoch Carriere. They keep making the accusation 
that Mr. Carriere is an NDP [New Democratic Party] insider 
when they have no proof to back it up. Perhaps the Leader of 



April 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

the Opposition needs a reminder of why this is gutter politics, 
and I’m only too happy to help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Was the Leader of the Opposition an insider when his former 
boss John Gerich went to jail for fraud, Mr. Speaker? I’m just 
asking. Was the member from Martensville an insider when her 
former boss decided to break his equalization promise to the 
people of this province? I’m just asking. Was the Leader of the 
Opposition an insider when he sent a memo for liquor to the 
civil service? I’m just asking. 
 
The problem with dressing up drive-by smears as questions, Mr. 
Speaker, is that when it comes to being judged by your friends, 
the members of the opposition are at a significant disadvantage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Public Response 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that 
the Premier doesn’t agree with the cards the Sask Party is 
sending out on the Murdoch Carriere scandal. Based on the 
nearly 4,000 responses we’ve received so far, it appears that the 
Premier is in the minority. 
 
I’d like to share some of these with the House today. Quote: 
 

As a government employee who has been harassed 
sexually and emotionally by several directors, this is an 
outrage to all women, especially those that are brave 
enough to stand up for themselves. 

 
Quote: 
 

I work for the Department of Environment and did at the 
time of the “scandal.” I saw first-hand how this rolled out 
and affected staff, then to hear what he received, JOKE!!! 
What does this say to the victims? 

 
From Regina, quote: 
 

This is a black mark against women employed by the NDP 
government. It shows that anything goes, as long as the 
employee is an NDP supporter. 

 
From Saskatoon, quote: 
 

As a retired woman in the workplace, this really concerns 
me. Regardless of what your lawyers tell you, Open 
Season has now been declared on working women. 

 
From Regina, quote: 
 

Rewarding a convicted person with this settlement is 
reprehensible. It clearly reflects the biased treatment of 
long time friends and colleagues, while the victims in this 
case were slighted. I look forward to the next election so I 
can express my feelings on the ballot. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on for an entire day sharing these 

similars, but I’m out of time for today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Rebates 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
bring forward a problem that is affecting people in this province 
and it’s about SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
rebate cheques. Mr. Speaker, it appears that Community 
Resources regards the rebate cheques as income. This means 
that those that can least afford it are having money clawed back 
from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier explain why this is happening and 
what he plans to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously one of the things we want to point out to the people 
of Saskatchewan is that the Department of Social Services 
obviously looks at all incomes of all people. And what’s really 
important is we want to make sure that the people that are 
receiving support in the province are able to adequately meet 
their needs but, quite frankly, that we have to make sure that to 
protect the taxpayers’ interest is to make sure that there’s no 
income coming from other sources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is important is that we’re going to make sure 
that this doesn’t create any undue hardship on the people, and 
we’ll certainly take advice from the officials on what you’ll do 
in the future when you get the SGI cheques as such. And I’ll 
take notice of the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
how you take notice of an answer you’ve already given, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is 
completely unfair to the people receiving government benefits 
or assistance. For one, according to the NDP government, 
people receive this money because they were overcharged, 
using after-tax dollars. Now the government is calling it 
income. Yet these same people have no choice regarding the 
SGI’s overcharging or the rebate. For instance we received a 
call from an individual on federal disability who is having the 
money clawed back because of the SGI rebate cheque. 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

Mr. Speaker, what does the minister plan to do about this 
problem and when will this government stop overcharging and 
taking money from people who can least afford it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I pointed out, I’ll take notice of the question and I’ll certainly 
get more specific answers as to what we’ll do in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the 
Minister for DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment] can’t answer the questions and is taking notice, 
perhaps the Minister Responsible for SGI would like to try 
answering this question because it’s obvious this government 
rushed this political decision through and never gave any 
thought to how the SGI rebate cheques were going to affect 
people on assistance. They were more concerned about how to 
try and buy votes for the upcoming election with people’s own 
money. Now those on assistance are suffering from this hasty 
and politically motivated scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit today that anyone on 
assistance will not have their money clawed back because of the 
government’s initial overcharge and resulting SGI rebate 
cheques? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
hon. member opposite makes it very, very clear what the 
perspective of the Saskatchewan Party is on Crown 
corporations. Mr. Speaker, SGI is a well-run Crown corporation 
that realized greater revenues than it needed in order to provide 
stability for rates — the lowest rates in Canada. The lowest 
rates haven’t changed since the year 2000 except for to provide 
safe driver discounts and now the rebates and on top of that a 
rate reduction. That’s a well-run Crown corporation. 
 
But what does the opposition say about SGI — the Finance 
critic for the opposition on budget day and then he repeats it 
after. Surely I found it hard to believe that there was anybody in 
this entire legislature that didn’t understand that the money that 
comes in to SGI for the Auto Fund come from only one source 
— from payment of fees — and can only go to one source. He 
says that they would not do it. If it was the Saskatchewan Party, 
if they had their way, there would be no rebates for the people 
of Saskatchewan, and this company is going to continue to 
operate in the best . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saltcoats. 

Crop Insurance Premiums and Coverage 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re getting calls from farmers all across the province that are 
very unhappy with the amount of premiums that they have to 
pay this year for crop insurance compared to the amount of 
coverage they have. Mr. Speaker, hard red spring wheat and 
canola are by far the largest two crops produced in 
Saskatchewan, yet Saskatchewan farmers are paying a lot more 
for less coverage than their Manitoba counterparts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our farmers have had to deal with world subsidies. 
They’ve had BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy]. 
They’ve had low commodity prices and now they’re having to 
deal with an NDP government in Saskatchewan that really 
doesn’t care about Saskatchewan farmers. Can the minister 
explain to the farmers of Saskatchewan why they have to pay 
more in Saskatchewan for less coverage than their counterparts 
in Manitoba? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s very important that, I think, in talking about this issue that 
the member opposite should become informed about the 
process around crop insurance rather than just bowing to the 
lowest understanding and then try to perpetrate his story based 
on that lowest understanding. 
 
He should know that with crop insurance, it has to recover its 
costs. Saskatchewan Crop Insurance has paid out significantly 
over the years and as a result of that we’re in cost-recovery 
mode, Mr. Speaker. And in cost recovery we have seen this 
year that we have been able to also provide new programs, new 
opportunities in crop insurance, variable price program, Mr. 
Speaker, that is going to provide a benefit to farmers. And we 
think that crop insurance provides great service and will 
continue to, Mr. Speaker. And it will over the years — as we 
get good years — recover and rates will show correspondingly. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Agriculture minister doesn’t have to tell farmers 
there’s a variable price. There’s a variable price and there’s a 
variable coverage for the two provinces. Saskatchewan has high 
premiums and low coverage. Manitoba has a far superior 
program and by the way, that’s also an NDP government. Isn’t 
it funny how that works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s do a comparison, Mr. Speaker. In Manitoba, premiums for 
canola are about $11 an acre for the farmer that called in and in 
Saskatchewan that same farmer is paying 12.50 an acre. In the 
event of a . . . 



April 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, order. I 
would ask members to allow the member who’s got the floor to 
put the question without interference. The member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
Manitoba a premium for canola is about 11 bucks an acre; in 
Saskatchewan it’s 12.50. The coverage in Saskatchewan is 
about $148 per acre but in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, it’s $224 an 
acre. What does that tell you? It tells you the farmers on the 
Saskatchewan side are getting rooked by this NDP government. 
 
What farmers are asking is: when will they make a parity 
between the two neighbouring provinces and put crop insurance 
on a level playing field? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think there are a number of factors here, and 
certainly one of them is the amount of money that Crop 
Insurance has paid out to farmers over the last few years — 
significant dollars, Mr. Speaker. And in order to operate, this 
program has to recover its cost over a 15-year cycle, Mr. 
Speaker. And in order to do that the rates show what those cost 
recoveries are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say clearly that this program that we 
have in the province, despite all of the money that has gone out 
over the years, has shown a creativity in trying to respond to the 
needs of the farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said, we’ve got the variable price option. We have been 
expanding coverage to new crops. We’ve been responding to 
needs in southwestern Saskatchewan for establishment benefits, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a good, solid, responsive program, and it is 
federal-provincial, Mr. Speaker. These programs are 
comparable across the provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Agriculture minister is not listening. There is no 
comparison in coverage, and there’s no comparison in 
premiums. I’ll give you another example, Mr. Speaker. The 
premium for hard red spring wheat in this province is 8.24 an 
acre for this particular farmer. For the same farmer on the 
Manitoba side, his cost is about $4.85 an acre. That’s almost 
half the premium that the same farmer is paying on one side 
from the other. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan farmer is paying about 40 
per cent more for less coverage, Mr. Speaker. And when the 
case of drought or floods . . . It happens on both sides of the 
border. It just isn’t in Saskatchewan, and the Agriculture 
minister must be aware of that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, how can our farmers compete with world 
subsidies and all the other things that have gone on when they 
have a government that doesn’t care about them, when they 
have a government that wants to fill the General Revenue Fund 
on the backs of Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think there are again a number of factors that impact, 
but we have to start with the base that this program has to 
recover its costs. And in this province we have paid out 
significant dollars over the last few years for frost, for all kinds 
of damage to crops, Mr. Speaker, and it has provided the 
service that farmers have needed. 
 
Now it has to recover, Mr. Speaker, and the premiums reflect 
the fact that it has to recover. These are the federal-provincial 
rules that we have to live by, Mr. Speaker, as Manitoba has to 
live by, as Alberta has to live by. That’s the way the program is 
structured. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if we were going to talk about fairness across 
the country and we were going to talk about the situation in 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan, let’s talk about equalization: $2 
billion, $2 billion into Manitoba; next year here, nothing; this 
year, $226 million. There’s got to be a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m glad the 
minister brought that up because that reminded me of 
something else. When we have less coverage in the province of 
Saskatchewan, we’re sending federal dollars back to Ottawa 
compared to what Manitoba gets put in from the federal 
government. If you want equalization, prop up crop insurance 
and the feds will put more dollars into Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re dealing with here 
is one farmer, Mr. Speaker, one farmer on both sides of the 
meridian — Manitoba and Saskatchewan. The coverage on this 
side is far less than on the farmer’s same land on the other side. 
Land quality doesn’t change. The drought doesn’t stop at the 
border. Frost in 2004 didn’t stop at the border; it froze on both 
sides. And yet in Saskatchewan we cut coverage because we’ve 
had so many things go wrong. What on earth are they doing in 
Manitoba that we can’t do in Saskatchewan, except neglect our 
Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again 
obviously the member opposite is just trying to twist the 
situation here because, Mr. Speaker, this obviously is a situation 
where Crop Insurance must recover its costs. And in order to 
recover those costs, it’s reflected in the premiums. That has 
been the way of crop insurance since it was developed. But I 
can tell you clearly that we have paid out significant dollars 
over these last number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since ’03 the province, $99.3 million in ’03; 96.2 
in ’04-05; 78.3 in ’05-06; 63.2 in ’06-07. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when we look at, when we look at that, Mr. Speaker, we can see 
that there has been huge, huge dollars put out into the farming 
community which we do care about and which we are trying to 
support by developing solid programs that they can count on. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Environmental Issues 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday we 
saw the Premier and members of the cabinet at a glitzy launch 
for the province’s green strategy. The announcement was a 
great photo op, but it lacked substance. 
 
In Friday’s StarPhoenix the headline read, and I quote: 
“Environmentalists slam province’s green plan.” Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Environmental Society thinks this green 
strategy is flawed because it lacks any targets. 
 
My question is for the Premier: why does his green plan lack 
targets, goals, deadlines, outcomes, or any measurability? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that 
the member opposite wasn’t listening to the whole afternoon 
when she was there because what we’ve announced is that the 
green strategy sets the overall principles and we’ll be setting out 
our targets around climate change and our sustainable energy 
policy very shortly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a process that’s involved many people 
across the province as we’ve developed this particular policy, 
and I encourage that member and her colleagues to be part of 
the solution, not part of the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this morning there was another 
article in The StarPhoenix again slamming the NDP’s green 
strategy. The headline states, and I quote: “Gov’t needs real 
green strategy.” Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, and I 
quote: 
 

If the goal of last week’s announcement was to give the 
people of Saskatchewan the impression that the 
government is doing something meaningful to build a 
green economy, perhaps it is a strategy. But if the goal is 
actually to build a green economy, the strategy is a 
non-starter. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta has a plan with real 
targets. Industry is required to start meeting these targets in July 
of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier disagree with these 
environmental groups who condemn his green strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this article that the member 
refers to also recognizes that my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon, has been working on many of these policies. He’s 
set out some very good information in his first report and we’ll 
be looking forward to his second report. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the real question for Saskatchewan people is: 
what does that member say about Kyoto? What’s the position of 
that party? What’s the position of the Leader of the Opposition? 
We have never heard anything from them about this, and we 
look forward to hearing as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to know what the 
minister’s opinion is on Kyoto considering that, under the NDP 
watch, emissions rose by 62 per cent in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that clean coal would be one of 
the most important ways the province would reduce its carbon 
emissions. But it seems that the Premier and SaskPower are not 
on the same page. SaskPower is the third worst polluter in all of 
Canada, but it doesn’t even know if clean coal will go ahead. 
 
Here’s what the Leader-Post reported: 
 

Despite the roughly $20 million in work that’s been spent 
on the project, Youzwa stressed that . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Far too many side 
conversations going on makes it very difficult to hear. I ask the 
members to allow the member for Martensville to continue. The 
member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — And I quote the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Despite the roughly $20 million in work that’s been spent 
on the project, Youzwa stressed that SaskPower is not 
committed to going ahead with clean coal. 

 
That’s coming straight from the president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of SaskPower. 
 



April 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. His green strategy has no targets, 
no goals, no measurability. His Crown has no idea how to 
reduce carbon emissions. So I ask him, why is SaskPower now 
backing away from clean coal? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it appears that since 
the member from Weyburn left the research department over 
there, they haven’t been able to replace anybody to actually do 
some research other than the Leader-Post or The StarPhoenix. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can read that information too, and we 
are. But, Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing is working 
with the people of Saskatchewan, the experts, and also all of us 
across the province who have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working with 
the people of this province. And I ask that member and her 
predecessor as Environment critic, where is your position on all 
of these things? What is your plan? We look forward to 
receiving it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Well if the minister wants some help on this, 
I’d be happy to help him. But as the Government of 
Saskatchewan, it’s his obligation to provide the people of this 
province with a plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s how out of touch this NDP government is. 
They say they have a strategy, but the province’s foremost 
environmental groups slam it for not having targets. The 
province’s largest emitter of carbon has no idea how it’s going 
to reduce emissions. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan need answers. Right now the NDP 
government’s federal cousins are retooling clear air legislation 
that will affect this province, its industries, and its taxpayers. 
Mr. Speaker, without a real plan this province will be caught 
flatfooted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier explain his inaction on this file to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, stay tuned for the plan of 
this government as we will lay out. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have answered my own question that I 
asked a little earlier. There is no plan on that side. They don’t 
want to reveal that there is nothing there, and so therefore I 
understand that they’ve changed the colour of the fruit in their 

backroom. It’s now green, lime. It’s just as sour but it’s not 
yellow like the old lemons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair would like to recognize the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, after nearly six weeks of 
stubbornly defending Murdoch Carriere, the Minister of Public 
Service Commission has decided it’s time to try to change the 
focus to bullying and intimidation in the workplace. 
 
The Murdoch Carriere scandal is not the first case of 
harassment and bullying that’s happened in the public sector 
under this NDP government. In December 2004 two employees 
from the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region came forward with 
their stories of bullying in the workplace and how it was 
ignored even though it was brought to the attention of their 
supervisors as well as to the government MLAs and to cabinet 
ministers. 
 
A supervisor in the health region continued in a supervisory 
role despite an external report that concluded he had harassed 
and bullied several employees. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party called on this government to act then on harassment in the 
workplace and nothing was done. Mr. Speaker, why has it taken 
this government so long to say they’re finally going to work on 
this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know, if you look at the definition of 
harassment in the workplace, it is along the grounds that are 
contained in the Human Rights Code. And if you go across the 
country, all provinces with the exception of Quebec have 
definitions that are similar. 
 
What the province is presently looking at is a strengthened 
definition of harassment so that issues around abuse of 
authority, intimidation, and so on could be contained within the 
legislative provisions of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act, Mr. Speaker. At present, as I understand what employers 
look at when there’s a case of an allegation of harassment, they 
look at the provisions of the present occupational health and 
safety harassment definition, and there are no provisions at the 
moment to protect the people that the member speakers of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the members 
opposite about the case I’m talking about. Kevin Albert and 
Deseri Cooper worked as security guards for the health region. 
They and several other employees filed complaints with 
supervisors about on-the-job harassment and bullying in 2002. 
 
An external investigation found out that harassment did take 
place. Yet the supervisor who was identified as a harasser 
continued in his role and continued to supervise those he had 
harassed. In this case, like the Murdoch Carriere scandal, the 
health region did have zero tolerance anti-harassment policies in 
place, and they were simply not followed. 
 
If this government was truly committed to making changes, it 
would stamp out bullying and harassment in the workplace. 
Why didn’t they do anything as a result of this serious case in 
2004, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to 
the member, if you look at the legislation it is clear that the 
definition is along the lines of the human rights provisions 
which deals with age, race, sex, religion, background, weight, 
and height. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think we have an opportunity as legislators 
in the province to seriously improve the definition of 
harassment in the province. And obviously, through 
occupational health and safety legislation and in terms of 
enforcement in the workplace, we have the Department of 
Labour with occupational health and safety people who are 
there to enforce occupational health and safety. But I would say 
this: that I do recall the member from Kelvington saying that we 
have too much red tape and regulation in the workplace when it 
comes to enforcing labour protection in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the bullying Kevin Albert 
suffered in the workplace drove him to a mental breakdown. He 
disappeared for two days and then left his then fiancée a suicide 
note. Deseri Cooper was on stress leave for at least four years as 
a result of the bullying and the region’s failure to deal with it. 
We called for an external investigation into how harassment 
complaints were handled, but the Premier simply asked the 
health region to investigate it itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t believe it’s a good idea to send the same 
people back to investigate the work they’ve already done, and 
that is why — like in 2004 — we are calling for an 
investigation into the Murdoch Carriere case to find out exactly 
what went wrong so the problems can be fixed. The question is: 
why is this government refusing to hold an all-party 

investigation into the current scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday on the floor of 
this Assembly, members of the legislature heard that member 
refer to labour legislation as job killers. I think that we have 
heard the Leader of the Opposition refer to labour legislation — 
which protects all workers in the province whether they work in 
the private or public sector — they referred to that as job killers. 
And in fact the Leader of the Opposition went into Calgary to 
his business dinner and talked about the need to change labour 
legislation in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we look at labour legislation in this 
province, it is there to provide protection for workers that work 
both in the private and public sector, Mr. Speaker. What is their 
position? Should labour legislation only apply to the public 
sector or should it apply to the private sector as well? Put your 
position on the line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,105 through 
1,116 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,105 to 1,116 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 47 — The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to participate in the debate and the discussion 
regarding The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the years, our courts have been called 
upon to . . . 
 



April 17, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

The Speaker: — Are we ready? I ask members to come to 
order, please. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise in the 
House today to enter the debate regarding The Fatal Accidents 
Amendment Act. Through the years, we have well established 
jurisprudence dealing with tort law and entitling individuals to 
compensation where wrongful death has been caused through 
the actions or omissions of another party, usually referred to as 
the tortfeasor. 
 
Compensation by the courts is restricted usually to whatever 
financial compensation is appropriate. The courts are unable to 
bring a person who is deceased back, and there’s little else that 
the courts can do but offer financial compensation to the 
individual and the family members that are affected by this. 
 
Unfortunately over the past number of years in our common 
law system, the jurisprudence has developed around what the 
economic loss is sustained by a family member regarding the 
death of another family member. And usually it’s directly tied 
to the amount of money that that person had earned and what 
kind of financial support they were giving to other members in 
the family. 
 
I’ll give a few examples, Mr. Speaker. A dependent child in the 
early years may have a very large claim where a parent has been 
killed because that child will be looking to that parent for 
support for the rest of their growing years until they reach 
adulthood. So they will have lost all of the companionship, 
guidance, plus the financial support that that deceased parent 
has given them. And that is how the system is supposed to 
work. 
 
The unusual situations are when the death occurs where a 
family member is not the breadwinner or a significant 
breadwinner. In the situation where a dependent child dies, the 
actual financial circumstances, when you look at it in the most 
callous way, is that the family unit is better off with the loss of a 
child because they do not have the cost of that upbringing. The 
courts do not wish to have a situation where there would be a 
reverse onus or something where the loss of a child would be 
regarded as something that would be regarded as desirable from 
a financial point of view. 
 
Same situation happens where you have an adult that is 
dependent on, for whatever reasons, dependent on a parent or a 
child and may look to that person for ongoing financial 
assistance. So this Act sets out to deal with that by recognizing 
a specific set of damages where the courts will be entitled to 
award damages for — and I use the words — grief, loss of 
guidance, care, and companionship without having to prove 
specific economic loss or loss of income into the family unit. 
 
This Act prescribes a specific sum of $30,000 that would be 
payable to minor children in the unamended portion. This 
amendment really does only one thing. It removes the word 
minor so that damages would be payable to adult children as 
well in the event that they lose a parent through a set of 
accidental circumstances where there is somebody that is liable 
for having caused that accident, Mr. Speaker. So this is a 
relatively small amendment but does enlarge the group of 

people that will be entitled to receive damages as a result of the 
wrongful death of a family member. 
 
Most MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] and most of 
the people in this room are now at an age where they have lost 
one or more of their parents by natural causes, and most of us 
are at a situation where we have gone through that type of 
difficulty within the family. And as tragic and as difficult as 
that has been for many of us, it is even more tragic and more 
difficult to go through where the death is caused through the 
actions of another person through a motor vehicle accident or 
some other type of situation where there is a tortfeasor 
involved. 
 
This Act will allow for some recovery, and it states that in the 
absence of being able to prove a specific financial loss, there 
would be a $30,000 death benefit payable by the tortfeasor, the 
person that’s responsible for this. This is a progressive piece of 
legislation, and similar legislation has been passed in other 
jurisdictions. It allows for a statutory benefit to be payable by 
the tortfeasor without proof of psychiatric harm or other loss by 
a psychiatrist or other health care professional. It recognizes 
what has really taken place and what trauma goes through a 
family when there’s a death of a family member. 
 
It may, Mr. Speaker, do lawyers out of some work. And in the 
view of many of my colleagues, they may regard that as a good 
thing. And I hear them saying, right on. 
 
Some of the issues that arise around this legislation will be that 
it is retroactive to deaths that have occurred on or after August 
1, 2004. There will be discussion about this when this Bill 
proceeds to committee, Mr. Speaker. And this is the type of 
legislation that we see coming in from other jurisdictions. It’s 
something that our province has to look at as it brings itself into 
line with other jurisdictions and we try and have a court system 
and jurisprudence that is fair and representative of the current 
realities in our society. 
 
So this is something that the opposition will be generally 
supportive, but we will have questions as we go into committee 
and in particular — and I want to make sure that we give the 
government reasonable and adequate notice — would be the 
timeline for when the retroactivity comes in to place. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re prepared to allow this Bill to go to committee at 
this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 47, The 
Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2007 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 47, The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 47 is referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the 
good work of the standing committees in the Economy as well 
as Crown and Central Agencies, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1302 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1303 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1303 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Equality Day 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1303 
 International Day of Farmers’ Struggle 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................1303 
 National Volunteer Week 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
 World Hemophilia Day 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
 Consul Midget A Rockets Capture Provincial Championship 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
 Defining Gutter Politics 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
 Public Response 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1305 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Rebates 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1305 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1305 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
 Crop Insurance Premiums and Coverage 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
 Environmental Issues 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1308 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1308 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1309 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1309 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1310 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1310 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1312 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


