






















































Hansard: April 12, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 12, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1253 
 April 12, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure again 
to present more petitions in regards to a dialysis unit in the 
Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions and implement a strategy that will 
see a dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress 
Hills in protest of the recent closure of the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s presentation includes six fully completed 
pages of petitions from individuals in the communities of 
Eastend, Shaunavon, Frontier, and other small communities 
surrounding that locale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well good morning, Mr. Speaker. I have 
yet another petition asking that the government maintain full 
service of the SaskPower office at Rosetown. They note that the 
Rosetown SaskPower office currently supplies personal service 
for SaskEnergy and SaskTel customers, making it a one-stop 
office for payments of all three Crown utilities. The prayer of 
the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Rosetown. I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
while on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from citizens from Wilkie who are 
concerned about the level of health care services in their 
community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present yet another petition in this House, a petition on 
behalf of frustrated parents across Saskatchewan who for the 
last eight years have been lobbying this government for a 
dedicated children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from the provincial constituencies 
of Saskatoon Meewasin, Saskatoon Nutana, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens in the South that are very 
concerned that the withdrawal of lab services in the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre would cause undue hardships to 
residents, especially seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
McCord, and Gravelbourg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of southwest Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of rural school closures. And I’ll read 
the prayer. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Assiniboia 
and Limerick. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition today from citizens deeply concerned about the 
presence of sexual predators that are present as a threat in our 
communities: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that the communities are alerted to the presence 
of known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 

Highway 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Govan and Duval. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned about maintaining a Department of Highways section 
shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan. I will read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain 
open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such possible closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many tickets has the department purchased to the 
upcoming Al Gore presentation? How many does it intend 
to purchase, and to whom will the tickets be distributed? 
 

And I have questions for similar departments, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

members of the Assembly some special guests who are bearing 
cookies and telling us that May 12 they and their partner, Tim 
Hortons, will be cleaning up Saskatchewan. 
 
We have this morning in the west gallery Alice Gravoronski, 
Regina public relations Co-Chair and Saskatchewan provincial 
cookie advisor; Lisa Wilde and Jennifer Wilde from the 
Uplands Guide Unit No. 11; Annette Lang, Regina public 
relations Co-Chair with Sparks No. 27; Cydney Weir, Guides 
Unit 27; and Madyson Hautz, Sparks No. 27. They are also 
joined this morning, or have been joined by someone who’s no 
stranger to the Assembly, Morgan Morin, a former Spark — 
there she is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to them that I would make sure to get 
them copies of the member’s statement yesterday — the 
member from Estevan — and my statement today, for their 
archives. I’d ask all members to join with me and warmly 
welcome the Guides and Sparks this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce — my family’s in the gallery today — my wife 
and daughter who have been here several times before, but for 
his first time into the House is my son Jonathan. So I’d ask the 
House to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery, I should like to 
introduce to you and, through you, to all the members a group 
of students from the Graduate School of Public Policy at the 
University of Regina. 
 
This is a group of 14 students. They are doing either a master’s 
degree in either public management or public policy. The name 
of the class is How Government Works. I appreciate that might 
raise questions in here. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by 
someone who is no stranger to public service in Saskatchewan, 
Ms. Lynn Minja. 
 
They’re here to observe the proceedings. It will be my pleasure 
after their tour of the building to meet with them, try to answer 
any questions they might have. And I would ask all members to 
join with me, and also recognizing that about half of these 
students are students from other countries — China, North 
Korea, Kazakhstan, Tunisia, Colombia — and to wish them all 
a very warm welcome. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 

Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to join the minister in welcoming the students from the graduate 
school to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
I understand that they’re participating in the public management 
and public policy program. I want them to be aware, if they’re 
not already, that Saskatchewan has a wonderful tradition of 
creative public policy. And they’re learning in a school that can 
build on that particular reputation. 
 
And the public management element of their education can be 
put to very good use in the countries from which they have 
come, but here in Saskatchewan as well. We understand that the 
public service is going to be losing a number of people over the 
next few years. There’ll be opportunities with the Government 
of Saskatchewan. We’d like to make them aware of that. This is 
a recruiting announcement. And we’d also like to welcome 
them once again to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a few 
folks in your gallery. 
 
First of all, nine-year-old Adele Sawatsky is here — if she’d 
just stand. She wasn’t so sure she wanted to be introduced. But 
I said it’s not going to be painful; you just have to stand and 
give a little wave. She’s here today to study this beautiful 
building, the Legislative Assembly, and also learn more about 
the building and what goes on in the building. It’s her first visit 
to the Legislative Assembly. Joining her are her mother, Pam, 
and her younger sister, five-year-old, Catherine. I’d like all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I also wanted to introduce a couple 
that are here with them: Mr. and Mrs. Sean Quinlan who are in 
the gallery as well. I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “The first to perish were 
the children . . . From these a new dawn might have risen.” 
These are the words of the Yiddish poet Yitzhak Katzenelson in 
a poem about the Holocaust. 
 
Although it has been commemorated across this nation for 
years, Holocaust Memorial Day was formally recognized 
through an Act of the House of Commons in 2003. The date is 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

determined each year by the Jewish lunar calendar and 
coordinated to mark the date of April 19, 1943 — the Warsaw 
ghetto uprising. 
 
This year we will commemorate the day on Sunday, April 15. 
This is a day to reflect on and educate about the lessons of the 
Holocaust and to reaffirm a commitment to uphold human 
rights in Saskatchewan, across our country, and around the 
world. During the Second World War, six million Jews were 
put to death in concentration camps in a genocide described by 
many historians as a program of deliberate extermination 
planned and executed by the Nazis. One million of these 
victims were children. Many were subject to torture, medical 
experiments, all manner of inhuman conditions, and worse 
before their tragic deaths. 
 
There are some who today would deny the Holocaust, Mr. 
Speaker. In some corners of the world, there are those who 
would argue that we shouldn’t perhaps be educating about the 
historical fact of the Holocaust. Mr. Speaker, although the 
atrocities that were committed by the Nazi regime against 
millions of Jews are unspeakable, we must not stop speaking of 
them, and we must never forget about the new dawn that never 
rose. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Girl Guides 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last couple 
of days, the Girl Guides have been here at the legislature 
bringing us their tasty cookies. Mr. Speaker, the Girl Guides 
and Girl Guide cookies are associated with a couple of 
Saskatchewan firsts. 
 
Did you know for instance that first Girl Guide unit in Canada 
was formed in Moose Jaw in 1910? And did you know that 
those cookies we all buy and should be buying again this week 
were first baked here by Christina Riepsamen and sold in 
Moose Jaw and Regina area to send girls to camp 80 years ago? 
Did you know that annually the guides in Regina collect about 
50 tonnes of food for the food bank and that they are partners in 
the Second Glance magazine reuse program and that assists 
over 35 community agencies and a variety of literary purposes? 
And did you know that this year, national AGM [annual general 
meeting] of the Canadian Girl Guides will be held in Regina, 
June 1, 2, and 3 with representatives from all the province and 
territories? 
 
Mr. Speaker, for nearly a century the Guides have been an 
integral part of our province as well as our national community. 
As the Chair of the Premier’s voluntary sector initiative, I’d like 
to take this opportunity to thank all the wonderful people 
involved with the Girl Guide movement, in particular the girls’ 
parents and the many workers who volunteer their time and 
energy to help make organizations so successful. And of course 
I want to thank the girls themselves for all the work that they do 
in our communities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Best Wishes to Legislative Interns 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I arise in the 
Assembly today to offer thanks and best wishes to the three 
legislative interns that have been serving with the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus since January of this year. They are Justine Gilbert 
who is my intern, Lucy Pereira who worked with the member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy, and Jonathan Selnes who worked 
with my colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
During their three-month stint with us, they have been busy 
with a variety of projects as assigned by their members: trips 
out to the constituency, fundraising efforts for their upcoming 
comparative study trip, and research for their intern research 
project. Mr. Speaker, in fact I’ve been spoiled. Now I’m going 
to have to start writing my own member statements again. 
That’s how much work they’ve done. 
 
It’s been an absolute pleasure to have these three young, keen, 
and bright individuals working in our office for the last three 
months. We were pleased to be able to thank them for all their 
work in our caucus this morning. I know that they will come 
away from the program with a better understanding of the 
legislative and political process here in Saskatchewan, and 
hopefully one day we’ll see them working in their respective 
fields right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our caucus is also looking forward to welcoming two new 
interns after the study trip: Kiley Frantik who will be working 
with the member for Moosomin and Jarita Greyeyes who will 
work with the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. I wish them 
well on their study trip to Ottawa, England, and Scotland. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Property Sales Booming in Southern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, members across the way have 
been predicting doom and gloom for this province for longer 
than anyone cares to remember. Despite the fact that the NDP 
[New Democratic Party], the NDP has taken this province from 
bankruptcy to boom times, the members opposite just keep 
predicting the worst. 
 
Let’s compare their dire predictions with what’s really 
happening in this province. Here’s an excerpt from the March 
29 edition of the Deep South Star, and I quote: 
 

In many centres across Southern Saskatchewan there has 
been a large influx of home and acreage buyers from out 
of province. In Radville, there is also [been] a boom of 
property buyers as there are virtually no homes left. 
 
Town officials even had houses on the chopping block that 
are now sold and being renovated. 
 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

One homeowner east of Radville had a small package . . . 
sale that received 28 hits of interest. It sold to the top 
bidder. 
 

The article goes on to say: 
 

Who would have thought this? What this also means is 
there are folks moving here, more shoppers, more tax 
dollars, more folks using our recreation facilities, churches 
and schools . . . and hopefully more workers to fill the vast 
list of job opportunities. It’s great to see this for all of the 
communities [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
That’s the Saskatchewan reality under the NDP, Mr. Speaker — 
so much for the Saskatchewan Party and their ridiculous 
predictions. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Kahkewistahaw Hurricane Wrestling Team 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 49 
students from Chief Kahkewistahaw Community School in my 
constituency recently travelled to Saskatoon to participate in the 
Saskatchewan Amateur Olympic Style Wrestling Provincial 
Age Class Championships. 
 
In total, 256 wrestlers competed in this event from all over 
Saskatchewan. The Kahkewistahaw Hurricane wrestling team 
has only been in existence for two years but has already made 
their mark on wrestling in this province. This year the team 
successfully defended the team championship it won last year in 
freshman, novice, and peewee girls. Mr. Speaker, the 
Hurricanes brought home 10 gold medals from the provincial 
championships. 
 
The wrestlers who won gold are Kennedy McKay, freshie girls; 
Leilani McKay, Jalysa Kaysaywaysemat, and Shante Sparvier, 
novice girls; Elisha Bobb, Alexi Richter, and Adrian Taypotat, 
peewee girls; Kyle Campeau and Dwayne Taypotat, novice 
boys; and Tristan Alexson, novice boys. Mr. Speaker, it should 
be noted that the team also brought home 13 silver medals and 
15 bronze medals for a grand total of 38 medals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all 49 wrestlers and 
thank their coaches, Tonny Peel, Brian James, and Don 
Thompson, parents, volunteers, chaperones, and fans for all 
their contributions in supporting these young students in their 
wrestling careers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Federal Conservatives in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party and the 
federal Conservative Party have a politically incestuous 
relationship. To quote the Regina Leader-Post from May of last 

year, “It has been increasingly hard not to notice that the 
Saskatchewan Party and [the] federal Conservatives in 
Saskatchewan have had virtually interchangeable parts . . .” 
And is there any wonder why the media might leap to that 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Conservative Member of Parliament Tom Lukiwski was a 
former general manager of the Saskatchewan Party. He also 
served as an executive director of the former Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. The Conservative 
candidate in the last two federal elections in Regina Wascana 
has been Brad Farquhar. He was the executive assistant to the 
former leader of the Saskatchewan Party, the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. And Farquhar has worked as the interim 
director for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Federal Conservative Revenue Minister Carol Skelton was a 
member of the Saskatchewan Party executive and ran for 
president of the Saskatchewan Party at one of their conventions. 
Conservative Member of Parliament Lynne Yelich worked for 
the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Carrot 
River Valley when he was the Conservative Member of 
Parliament. 
 
This explains the opposition’s stance on equalization. Mr. 
Speaker, to quote from one of their Conservative brethren, 
former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney: “Ya dance with the 
ones that brung ya.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

A Memorable Hockey Season for the Cupar Canucks 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Cupar 
Canucks, the senior hockey team, certainly had a memorable 
hockey season that ended this past Saturday. Back in January 
they celebrated their 100th anniversary Mr. Speaker, and they 
went on to finish first in the Highway Hockey League. But their 
claim to fame this hockey season, Mr. Speaker, was in the 
Senior A provincial playoffs where they defeated such teams 
from Indian Head, Langenburg, and two games straight in the 
southern playoffs, and won the southern championships in a 
hard-fought series with the Southey Marlins where the Canucks 
won the final game in front of a capacity, home crowd. 
 
After winning the southern championships, Mr. Speaker, they 
want on to play the Kindersley Klippers in the provincial 
championships. It was a very close series, Mr. Speaker, with 
each team winning their home game, and the final game being 
played this past Saturday in Kindersley. The game was a close 
game back and forth with one team leading in one period and 
the Canucks leading in the third period, but Kindersley came on 
late in the third period to tie the game, Mr. Speaker. And 
unfortunately the Canucks lost the game in the third period, 
third overtime period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But congratulations to the Canucks and all those people 
associated with them, particularly manager Kelly Findling, the 
coaches, Jamie and Wade Herauf, and Rob Wolsley, Kevin 
Bonish, and Neil Schulhauser. Mr. Speaker, way to go, 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

Canucks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Medical Coverage in Prince Albert Parkland Health Region 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the doctor shortage in Shellbrook is going from bad to 
worse. Two physicians from South Africa had been lined up to 
relocate in the community. Now they are no longer coming. 
This is an additional problem to the doctor who will cease to 
practise in Shellbrook effective the end of May. So instead of 
five doctors in Shellbrook, there will be only three. Mr. 
Speaker, what is the government doing to fix this problem? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite knows, recruitment initiatives supported 
by this government and undertaken by regional health 
authorities, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and 
communities, Mr. Speaker — and I do applaud the work that’s 
being done at the community level in Shellbrook with regards 
to recruiting efforts, Mr. Speaker — these efforts have all been 
undertaken, recognizing the competitive nature of physician 
recruitment and retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the efforts that we’ve undertaken are extensive. 
The member knows how extensive they are, and we will 
continue to work with the region and the community, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that there are sufficient numbers of health 
professionals working within the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, my hometown of Spiritwood, the hospital’s been shut 
down to emergency services for six months. How is the 
recruitment services working in Saskatchewan, especially rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The problem is not limited to Shellbrook alone, Mr. Speaker. 
The lone physician in Big River is leaving for seven weeks 
effective May 1 and it doesn’t look like any replacement has 
been found. Efforts on the part of the health region have come 
up short and now it looks like the people of Big River will be 
without on-call service for all of May and half of June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will this government do to fix this 
unacceptable and potentially dangerous situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
of course this government recognizes the challenges that are 
faced not only by the communities represented by the member 
opposite, by other communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
But the area that the member represents does have some 
specific challenges. And I’m assuming that the member 
opposite has met with the community groups that are actively 
engaged in the recruitment process, Mr. Speaker, because I 
think that’s a role that members of the legislature should be 
engaged in at the community level. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, specific to the Prince Albert Parkland 
Regional Health Authority, in recognition of the challenges that 
are faced there, Saskatchewan Health has now funded an 
additional four nurse practitioners specifically to help address 
the shortages that exist in physicians in those communities 
while the recruitment efforts are undertaken — additional 
funding for Prince Albert Parkland Regional Health Authority, 
Mr. Speaker, for those communities to assist them in this time 
of challenge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me give you an outline of this region. It’s a huge 
region with no doctors. The situation is unacceptable. Big River 
has no doctor. Spiritwood has been without emergency services 
for over six months and now emergency services likely will no 
longer be offered in Shellbrook. It’s an hour and a half drive 
from Spiritwood to Prince Albert. It’s also the same distance 
from Big River to Prince Albert. Those in surrounding 
communities will have an extra longer drive to access 
emergency services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this situation been allowed to deteriorate 
so badly, and when is the government going to fix the problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite knows, as do members of the communities of 
Big River, Shellbrook, and Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government and the regional health authority has been very 
active in the recruitment efforts in that area for quite some time, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a hard-to-recruit-to area of the province. 
There are significant challenges that present themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have recently funded four additional positions 
for nurse practitioners — one for Shellbrook, one for 
Spiritwood, one for Big River, and one for the Big River First 
Nation, Mr. Speaker — to alleviate some of the stresses that 
exist there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition the other day said, 
we don’t just criticize; we provide alternatives. The member 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

opposite has not provided a single alternative to help with this 
situation in all of the time that we’ve been working, that we’ve 
been working with the region and the communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Forest Fire Fighting Policies and Plans 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, last summer Saskatchewan was 
plagued with an intense forest fire season. In November the 
Minister of Environment told the House that he would be 
conducting an internal review, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
minister is, did he do that review and, if so, what changes is he 
planning to his forest fire policies, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial wildfire 
policy is a comprehensive plan that we have as a government 
that’s been implemented for quite a number of years, which 
includes an annual review of the previous year’s forest fire 
fighting season to see what you’ve learned and then make 
changes as you move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these items have all been reviewed over the last 
three or four months, and the plan for the firefighting season 
will be laid out very shortly. And I’ll be pleased to provide 
information to that member and to the public as we normally 
do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister says that 
he’s completed his review and will be laying out the policy 
soon. The residents of northern Saskatchewan would like to 
know whether he will still be adhering to that rigid 20-kilometre 
zone around northern communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current policy calls for the department to let 
the forest fires burn unless they come within the 20-kilometre 
zone. Last summer the community of Stony Rapids was nearly 
burned to the ground because of this policy and this minister’s 
inaction. Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is, is he still 
adhering to that rigid policy of allowing forest fires to burn 
outside the 20-kilometre zone? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve explained it a 
number of occasions in the House and to the public, is the 
overall policy has a system whereby values of protection are 
provided throughout the whole forest fire risk area, and 
primarily it relates to protection of people, protection of homes, 
businesses, and activities. And we’ll continue to proceed with 

that policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year’s fire season had 501 fire starts compared 
to a 10-year average of 643 fire starts. Unfortunately many of 
them were right all at the same time and that ended up putting 
great pressure not only on our firefighting response but the 
firefighting response of all of Western Canada and the United 
States. Mr. Speaker, we have a very good system and we’re 
going to continue to make sure that it’s well supported. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that he has a very 
good plan in place and that the people of particularly northern 
Saskatchewan should be assured that they will be adequately 
protected. Yet the minister has also said that last season they 
were challenged when all the forest fires broke out in the La 
Ronge area. 
 
For a number of years, Mr. Speaker, the Aerial Applicators 
Association of Saskatchewan have been talking to that minister 
and his government about using single air tanker planes to 
supplement the firefighting resources. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
believe that that minister has any intention of accessing those 
resources. And I would like to know why he hasn’t made 
arrangements to access all possible resources in case we get into 
a jam like we did last season, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working very 
carefully with the experts in this area and they have laid out a 
plan whereby we’re doing a combination of things involving 
everything from the fire towers across the North to the new 
aircraft that we have been bringing on board. And we know that 
the new chemical firefighting aircraft will be coming in the 
coming weeks, and I know that the public will be happy to see 
all of that when it comes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real question here is, what does that member 
opposite say that we should do as far as how much money we 
should spend in this whole area? We have had very good 
support from our Finance people in providing the resources that 
we need and we’ll continue to do that. But the member 
opposite, he needs to tell us how much more money he thinks 
we should be spending in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Compensation for Former Deputy Minister 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, when a person receives a 
severance it’s for the purpose of severing ties with their former 
employer. That’s not the case for former deputy minister of the 
Environment, Terry Scott, one of the people who ignored 
harassment complaints about Murdoch Carriere. Scott was not 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

only given a $200,000 severance, he also received a guarantee 
from this government that he would be making the same deputy 
minister’s salary regardless of what job he found. So Terry 
Scott was told to take the fall for the Murdoch Carriere scandal 
and this NDP government would take care of him for months, 
maybe even years. 
 
Will the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission table Terry Scott’s settlement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I took notice 
of the member’s question yesterday and I do have the answer. 
Mr. Scott was provided with a structured severance comprised 
of a 10-month lump sum payment totalling $115,430 plus an 
additional seven mitigative payments totalling $63,195.43. Mr. 
Scott received in total $178,225.43. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for her 
answer. We understand that the NDP ordered civil servants to 
work over the Easter weekend to quickly put together some sort 
of additions to the harassment policy. In estimates yesterday the 
Labour minister said there would be no outside consultation on 
legislative changes. But before any harassment legislation can 
be changed, all the details about what went wrong in the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal have to be found out. Has the NDP 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Members come to order. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, my question is, has the NDP 
government undertaken an internal investigation of when . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. I’d 
ask the member to come to order and stay in order. The member 
for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Has the NDP government undertaken an 
internal investigation of when the first allegations against 
Murdoch Carriere came forward? Who knew about harassment 
complaints and didn’t act upon them? And how could this go on 
for years and not be addressed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in addition Mr. Scott 
received $4,664.92 in the form of the government career 
assistance. So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to fully answer the 

question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what the Government of Saskatchewan is 
trying to do is to look at our harassment legislation within the 
occupational health and safety legislation. We’re also reviewing 
our anti-harassment policy that applies to all people that work 
within the public service. And we’re also looking at the 
structure of how we deliver human resource information and 
advice to managers that cross all departmental lines. 
 
So what we are attempting to do, Mr. Speaker, is to take a 
broader approach to this issue of harassment in order to ensure 
that people who work in the province of Saskatchewan, both in 
the public service and the private sector, have protection. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government has not 
undertaken to find out answers to the questions of what went 
wrong in the Murdoch Carriere scandal, it is not only 
irresponsible but it’s reprehensible. If this government has 
undertaken an investigation, they owe it to the victims and the 
people of this province to report those findings. 
 
Today I will be moving a motion to have the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal investigated by an all-party committee of this 
legislature. And if this government truly wants to ensure that 
nothing like this happens again, this government will support 
that motion. Mr. Speaker, will the NDP government be 
supporting the motion today to find out the details of the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, after it became evident to 
the Government of Saskatchewan that we needed to review and 
substantially strengthen our anti-harassment policy, we did so. 
What I can say now is that if a person has an allegation of 
harassment, and if indeed that harassment is found to be 
substantiated, there is a group of deputy ministers that review 
what the discipline should be, including firing, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe that our policy has been greatly strengthened. 
 
However I think that we can do more. And we are in the 
process of reviewing our policy as well as legislation to ensure 
that workers in this province are not subjected and do have 
rights to bring forward allegations of harassment that go beyond 
what we presently have in policy and the legislation. So what 
we are attempting to do, Mr. Speaker, is to strengthen the 
legislation and the policy to protect workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the government could be doing 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

more. They could support this motion so that we can get to the 
bottom of what went wrong in the Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
The victims tell us that this NDP government had no intention 
of getting rid of Carriere. In fact years after the first complaints 
were made, and months after several managers met with the 
associate deputy minister about the harassment, Murdoch 
Carriere was being moved to a larger office space because he 
didn’t think his current office was big enough. That was in 
August 2002. It certainly doesn’t sound like a man the NDP 
were holding accountable for years of harassing women. 
 
What is necessary is for the details of this issue to be brought to 
light. How many times were harassment complaints brought 
forward and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The member may 
proceed. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Why Murdoch Carriere wasn’t disciplined 
and then fired with cause in the first place. And internal legal 
opinions that rewarded a harasser instead of firing him. 
 
Will the NDP support a motion to have this issue examined 
before a legislative committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks an 
interesting question, and I can only reflect on the nature of the 
debate and comments made by some of the opposition members 
during a similar kind of debate just a week ago. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly be interested in 
seeing what the Sask Party members have to say in debate 
today. And I would ask the hon. member whether she would 
arrange to ensure that the Saskatchewan Party members would 
allow, would take their place and allow government members to 
enter into debate on the motion that she proposes today. Would 
she be willing to allow government members to enter into 
debate on the motion that she proposes today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty 
clear that the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan is unable 
to keep his story straight with respect to the Carriere scandal. 
 
Yesterday he absolutely insisted that he was being misquoted 
by the Saskatchewan Party. But when a reporter asked him if he 
had to do it all over again, would he still pay Murdoch Carriere 
$275,000, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he would do that — 
that he would do it again. That’s what he told the media outside 
the legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, four years ago the NDP said they were going to 
fight Murdoch Carriere in the courts. Instead they decided to 
reward harassment as has been clearly pointed out in this 
session. And the Premier has still never explained why. There 
are still unanswered questions. He’s hiding behind the secret 
legal opinion. He refuses to refer the matter to the appropriate 
committee of the legislature. 
 
To the Premier, Mr. Speaker, why? What is he trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I see that the member opposite is 
continuing to misinform the public and to mislead the public, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what’s curious, Mr. Speaker, is that their members 
stood in this House in April 2003 and demanded, demanded — 
not once, not twice, not three times, but four times — that 
Murdoch Carriere be fired. Mr. Speaker, he was fired. He was 
fired. He had been disciplined, but the government of the day 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the minister complete her statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — He was fired. And Arlene Julé knew, 
Mr. Speaker, as did the previous leader of the opposition, that 
this was a cause of action on the part of Mr. Carriere. Well Mr. 
Carriere launched his cause of action, and at the end of the day, 
the Government of Saskatchewan chose . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Now I may have to 
repeat this several times, but it can be avoided if members just 
contain themselves so that the member who are speaking or 
asking the question can do so without being impeded. Would 
the member please conclude her remarks. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — At the end of the day, the government 
received legal advice to settle. And we settled as did The 
StarPhoenix. We all settled, Mr. Speaker. I can say this: that it 
was in the interest of the public to settle because to go to court 
would have cost us a lot more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this case the NDP 
said that they would fight harassment. Instead, they rewarded 
harassment. They said they would fight Murdoch Carriere in the 
courts. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — They said they would fight Murdoch Carriere in 
the courts. That’s what the current Minister of Industry said 
when he was the Justice minister. Instead they wrote him a 
cheque for $275,000. 
 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

They said they consulted with the women before they paid 
Carriere. They never consulted with the women, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier said he never heard about the case before he read it 
in the newspaper. He had to call a press conference to confirm 
that that wasn’t true either, that he had heard about it prior to it 
breaking in the news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t it be easier, wouldn’t it be better for 
everyone concerned if the Premier, if the NDP could simply tell 
the truth? Why won’t they do that? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. Members will 
come to order. I wish to quote — order please — to the member 
from Swift Current from Montpetit and Marleau, page 522: 
 

Remarks directed specifically at another Member which 
question that Member’s integrity, honesty or character are 
not in order. 

 
I find that the remark he just made does exactly the opposite. I 
would ask him to withdraw that remark before he continues. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I do want to say to the members opposite is this: that Mr. 
Carriere . . . a formal complaint was launched by women in the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] fire centre in, I believe, September 2002. 
Mr. Carriere was removed from the workplace, suspended with 
pay. Mr. Carriere on February 12 was advised that he was 
suspended without pay for three months, demoted, and sent to 
Regina. And he had no staff under his employ. 
 
On April 1, Mr. Speaker, we read about the Gillies report on the 
front page of The StarPhoenix, and on April 2 Mr. Carriere was 
terminated, Mr. Speaker. I believe those are the facts of the 
case, regardless of what the opposition has to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the facts of the case. The fact 
of the case is that a former senior manager under the employ of 
this current government — related to an NDP cabinet minister, 
with ties to other NDP cabinet ministers — was fired for 
harassment, was convicted of assault, of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I invite the Leader of the . . . 
Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, who was convicted of assault and 
then fired for harassment of nine women, Mr. Speaker. The 
other facts of this case include the fact that the government 

won’t table a legal opinion that would justify them paying 
$275,000 to the one that did the harassment while the women 
got $15,000 each. Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter is that 
question after question on this scandal have gone unanswered 
by this government for some reason. We’d like to know why 
that is. 
 
Why does the Premier change his story on this? Why does he 
say that he would repeat this issue again with respect to the 
settlement or with the firing? Why is, Mr. Speaker, why is the 
minister refusing to answer questions in this Assembly about 
the scandal? That’s the question to the government. If they truly 
have nothing to hide, why won’t they answer a question on the 
Carriere scandal, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think there 
isn’t a member in this legislature, let alone a member of the 
previous legislature, including Mr. Goulet, that supports any 
kind of abuse of power in the workplace where people are 
harassed. There isn’t one of us, not one of us. And if the 
members of the opposition can offer up any proof that any of 
my colleagues — one of them — supports abuse in the 
workplace, I would ask them to do so. Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, we had a deputy minister that was responsible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. We cannot have 
three or four debates taking place at the same time. The 
Minister for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the 
government believe that the deputy minister did not handle this 
properly by suspending Mr. Carriere for three months only. 
That was not acceptable to the government members and, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier ordered that he be fired. 
 
Now if we were ever in this situation again, it is the Premier’s 
due that if some deputy minister made a mistake, didn’t handle 
it properly, a person that had that kind of action in the 
workplace should be dismissed, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that 
anybody who harasses people to that extent needs to be 
dismissed from the public . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day . . . Order please. 
Order. Order please. Order. Order. Order. Before orders of the 
day, I wish to table a report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the 2006 financial statements of the CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] Crown 
corporations and related entities, dated April 2007, from the 
Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And I wish to table a report in respect to The Health 
Information Protection Regulations amendments from Mr. Gary 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

Dickson, the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. 
 
Why is the member for Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Leave to raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
please state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Morgan: — During the question period exchange, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Nutana made an accusation directed 
at the members opposite, accusing the members opposite of 
“misleading the public” which is exactly the same type of 
situation that the Speaker made a ruling on regarding the 
comments made by the member from Swift Current. We think it 
would be appropriate if the member from Nutana would 
apologize and withdraw the statement, the words “misleading 
the public,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, without intending to 
comment on a Speaker’s ruling, I note that in your ruling that 
was made, and the reference you referred to, it specifically 
brought to the attention of the House that it is not appropriate to 
cast aspersions on the character of another member. And that is 
a long-standing principle, and it is the principle that I believe 
the Opposition Deputy House Leader is attempting to refer to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a . . . it is clearly, it has been ruled many, 
many times in this House and others that it is improper and 
casts aspersions on the character of another member to suggest 
that another member is intentionally misleading which is 
equivalent to use of the phrase lying or intentionally and so on. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what the minister did in referring to the 
actions of the opposition was refer to the consequences of their 
actions which is to present information that is not factually 
accurate and is therefore misleading. 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member is getting into debate at 
this stage and would he just stick to the point of order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the minister expressed an 
opinion about the representation of the facts, an opinion about 
the representation of the facts, as expressed by the opposition. 
And I can tell by their reaction, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
feeling a tad guilty. If you toss a rock into the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. First of all 
I want to thank the member for Saskatoon Southeast for raising 
the point of order. I did notice during the debate that there were 
two times that members’ remarks had caused considerable 
uproar in the Assembly. Ordinarily the comment of 
misinforming, using the comment misinforming, I have allowed 
that many times. 
 
Right now I think it’s a matter of a context. The debate is very 

heated and sparks fly very easily. The comment before that was 
one about a member referring to another member keeping his 
story straight. Again that’s the kind of remark that, taken in 
different context, probably would not make any kind of an 
impact. 
 
So I think that the best advice I can give at this stage is just for 
members to calm down and try not to be inflammatory. If the 
member or any one of these members wishes to withdraw a 
remark, I would accept that at this time although I will not rule 
on it. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview, the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,042 through 
1,099 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,042 to 1,099 have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Seniors’ Drug Plan 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks I’ll be moving a motion that strongly endorses the 
seniors’ drug plan unveiled in the provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview has the 
highest concentration of seniors in the country. This is 
according to Stats Canada information shared with me by the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. And as a province, we 
have more seniors per capita than any other province. 
Approximately 15 per cent of our population are age 65 or 
older. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have visited with many seniors over the last nine 
years in my capacity as an MLA, minister responsible for 
seniors, and associate minister of Health, responsible for the 
drug plan, long-term care, home care, and primary health care. 
 
The one constant complaint I can say with confidence that I 
heard is the cost of their drugs. Most seniors are on fixed 
incomes, and the rapidly rising cost of drugs is alarming for 
them. Prescription drug costs are increasing by an average of 13 
per cent per year. Eighty-seven per cent of seniors’ families in 
Saskatchewan have at least one prescription per year that costs 
$15 or more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2004 there were 147,780 seniors in 
Saskatchewan who filed income tax. Based on that information, 
their average income was $26,767. Of those 147,000-some 
seniors, there were 65,860 males and 82,120 females. 
According to Stats Canada, the average income for elderly 
married couples in 2003 in Saskatchewan was $35,000; for 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

unattached elderly men, $21,000 per year; and unattached 
elderly females, $16,900. 
 
As we can see by these figures, there are not a lot of rich seniors 
in Saskatchewan, although all of us know some. My point is 
that when developing a policy that affects the majority, 
consideration must be given to the fact that it is more onerous 
and therefore more costly to identify and eliminate the minority. 
 
There’s a recent United Kingdom study that was recently 
released about means testing and that it has forced 
administration costs up from 5 per cent to 20 per cent, taking 
money directly from health services. That is why, Mr. Speaker, 
the new Saskatchewan seniors’ drug plan is for all seniors over 
65. 
 
The new plan will benefit 115,000 senior citizens by reducing 
their cost to no more than $15 per prescription. This plan will 
save seniors approximately 35 million in 2007-08 and 53 
million in 2008-09. The seniors’ drug plan will result in an 
average of $400 per year saving for each senior. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on average seniors receive more prescription 
drugs than non-seniors, therefore incurring a higher average 
annual prescription drug cost. For this reason, some seniors 
experience difficulty paying for their prescriptions. Stories are 
told anecdotally about seniors who choose to fill only some of 
their prescriptions so that they may eat and/or pay for their 
accommodation. The new drug plan for seniors is designed to 
reduce out-of-pocket expenses so that cost is not a barrier to 
accessing their prescription drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors’ drug plan will be implemented July 1, 
2007. No application is necessary. Individual seniors will 
receive coverage in the month they become 65 years of age. The 
plan will provide a cap on seniors’ prescriptions so that no 
senior will pay more than $15 per prescription for drugs in the 
Saskatchewan formulary. The program includes prescription 
drugs that are benefits under the Saskatchewan drug plan as 
well as drugs approved under exception drug status. The benefit 
will be calculated automatically as pharmacists submit 
prescriptions electronically to the Saskatchewan drug plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are ongoing concerns on how many 
prescriptions seniors receive, but that is a separate issue and is 
being addressed by pharmacists and in long-term care facilities 
with medication reviews. There is still much work to be done 
on this front, but the seniors’ drug plan will not be the culprit 
for inappropriate or over-prescriptions. 
 
Nearly half of our government’s annual expenditures on health, 
49 per cent of 3.46 billion, directly benefit older persons. Home 
care expenditures are up in this budget by 2.4 million. In 
2005-06 older persons — that is 65-plus — accounted for 72 
per cent of all home care clients in the province. Mr. Speaker, 
long-term care’s budget is up 6.4 per cent. As of March 2006, 
persons aged 65 and older accounted for 91 per cent of 
institutional long-term care residents in Saskatchewan. While 
the majority of residents in long-term care are seniors, this only 
represents 5.5 per cent of the total senior population. Most 
seniors are living in their own homes, seniors’ complexes, 
assisted living accommodations, or personal care homes, to 
mention some of the options. 

Mr. Speaker, although there are resident fees in long-term care, 
the government subsidizes about 77 per cent of the total cost of 
providing that care and accommodation in a special care home. 
Sask Housing also plays a big role in providing low-cost 
housing for seniors and grants for assisted living complexes, 
such as the new addition to Columbian Manor in my Eastview 
riding. 
 
Primary health care is a key part of providing better coordinated 
disease management, improved case management for clients 
with complex needs, care provided by the professionals who 
can best meet the needs of the client, and health services that 
are continuous with and complimentary to other community 
services — not to mention all of these delivered as close to 
home as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to tell the Assembly about the primary 
health care centre in my riding of Saskatoon Eastview. This 
centre is located in Scott-Forget Towers, a seniors’ high-rise 
that offers subsidized housing through Sask Housing. This 
primary health centre is the first of its kind in Saskatchewan and 
was one of my first proud achievements as an MLA. 
 
It directly targets services to the 280-some seniors in the towers 
as well as the surrounding seniors’ complexes like St. 
Volodymyr. The primary health nurse travels out, sometimes on 
foot. I see her walking around the constituency to offer services 
to the seniors community. The centre is also open to anyone 
who wants to walk in and receive the services. It’s not just for 
seniors, but it certainly benefits seniors, especially in 
Scott-Forget where they can go and get their services in their 
housecoat and slippers. 
 
Seniors also benefit from access to Saskatchewan’s HealthLine 
that offers immediate, confidential, professional health advice 
and information by registered nurses 24 hours a day. 
 
Last year we introduced the seniors gold plan which grants 
seniors free provincial park entry, free angling licenses, 30 per 
cent discount on bus fares from Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, free non-driver photo ID [identification] from SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
And as we continually announce, we are continuing to shorten 
wait times with more MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scans 
— a new one coming in Saskatoon — more hip and knee 
replacements, and more surgeries. In 2006 we completed 22 per 
cent more MRIs, 18 per cent more CAT [computerized axial 
tomography] scans, and 37 per cent more bone mineral density 
tests. In spite of rising demand, the wait lists for these tests are 
dropping. Waits for an MRI have dropped most dramatically — 
42 per cent over the past two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars of investments to expand 
surgical capacity are making a difference. In the past two years 
the surgical wait list has dropped by about 3,000 cases. It is 
now the lowest it has been since September 2004. 
 
In the six months ending in September 2006, 86 per cent of 
surgeries were completed within six months and 93 per cent 
within one year. The biggest rate increase for priority areas in 
Saskatchewan were for knee and hip replacements which — 
even though I had both my knees done in the last year — the 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

surgery is usually done on older persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2005 and ’06 the Saskatchewan senior citizens 
ambulance assistance program paid approximately 6.2 million 
and handled approximately 22,960 claims. This plan limits the 
cost of road ambulance services to $250 per trip per person 65 
years and older. 
 
Older persons have access to a range of rehabilitation services 
such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, and 
speech-language therapy. Services are provided through the 
regional health authorities and facilities in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would like to 
bring it to the member’s attention — the member who’s, I 
believe, the mover of the motion — that the motion is actually 
quite specific, related to the seniors’ drug plan and prescription 
drugs. I would ask her to relate her remarks to the motion 
before us. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will talk about why 
seniors are most benefited by this and why it is such a necessary 
thing for seniors. We do have, as I said, in the province the 
most seniors per capita than any other province. Fifteen per cent 
of our population are aged 65 and older. And when I talk to 
seniors they talk about the high costs of drugs, and they talk 
about how sometimes the choices are whether they get the 
prescription filled or whether they eat. So I can say that this 
program is going to benefit many seniors. 
 
Seniors have come up to me already and have said, some of 
them — when we say we’re saving on the average of $400 a 
year for some seniors, for the average senior — some of them 
are saying they’re going to be saving $400 a month. And this is 
a huge difference in fixed-incomes families. 
 
And when I talked about how the Stats Canada stuff has shown 
us how seniors in this province don’t have very much money — 
20,000 for an elderly male living alone and 16,000-some for an 
elderly female . . . And of course females are going to be, 
there’s more females and they’re going to be targeted even 
harder with trying to make ends meet buying drugs. So what I 
was talking about all the things that benefit the seniors is 
because we have targeted the seniors in this province, who have 
built the province and who have a great stake in how good it is 
today. That some of the things that, some of the money that we 
have should be turned back into programs that will benefit 
seniors. 
 
And more seniors of course use prescription drugs than 
non-seniors, and of course then have higher drug costs for the 
year. And when I talked about the seniors’ drug plan, I want to 
just repeat that it will be implemented July 1, and there will be 
no application process. Seniors can get their drugs at the 
pharmacy as the pharmacist will be submitting those drugs 
immediately upon the prescription. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Now the means test: I think that is my point when I talked about 
what seniors make. It’s very difficult to find a line. Who’s 
going to pick the line of cut-off? When the average income for 
seniors paying income tax is 26,000, we hardly have a lot of 

rich seniors in the province, even though many of us do talk 
about what seniors we know and how that will affect some of 
them and some of them should have income testing. 
 
What really disturbs me . . . And my mother is a senior living in 
a high-rise with many other seniors, and they’re talking about 
this. And what I get the feeling of is they’re starting to feel 
guilty, that we have made them feel that because we have 
money that they shouldn’t get it, that some other program 
should get it, is more deserving of it. 
 
And when we talk about sustainability and those sorts of things, 
these seniors are telling me that they feel guilty because they 
don’t think that this will be sustainable, and they really 
shouldn’t have it. They don’t think that they deserve it. Students 
is fine. They think students should get money, that keeping 
young people is fine. But somehow when we talk about this 
isn’t sustainable, we have made seniors feel guilty for getting a 
program that is specific to their needs. 
 
And when they’re seniors making $16,000 a year and having to 
buy high-cost drugs, even with some of the assistance programs 
that there are in the province, they cannot survive that way. And 
if they don’t take their drugs, we end up having people come 
into the hospital. They have more complications, and then our 
costs rise. So I don’t think we should be talking about seniors 
making this an unsustainable program. I think they feel guilty. 
 
And I think it’s really unfortunate that we have put in programs 
all across the board, including business tax cuts, and have not 
made anybody feel guilty about that — and those are 
sustainable — and why the pioneers of our province who have 
made this province such a great place to live, work, and raise a 
family and retire and enjoy the fruits of that labour, feel guilty 
that we’re giving them a program. 
 
When my mother says people in her building talk about how 
can it be sustainable, well sustainability is about choice. And 
when we make choices every year in our budget process, we 
decide what we’re going to keep and what we’re going to not 
keep. This is sustainable because we choose to do it. 
 
We choose to recognize our seniors and to give them this 
program because we value their contribution, and we value that 
they keep healthy as long as they possibly can and live in 
Saskatchewan in a healthy atmosphere and a healthy lifestyle as 
the rest of us hope to do. So none of those things should be said 
that make seniors feel that they’re guilty and that they don’t 
deserve this. 
 
And when we talk about income testing, when studies like in 
the United Kingdom have just come forward and talked about 
means testing has raised the administrative cost of the program, 
why would we bother doing that? When there’s so few seniors 
that have a lot of money, why would we raise our 
administration costs and take money out of our health system 
into programs that could be beneficial to many other people? So 
I don’t think that income testing would stand the test of a good 
review by any financial institution. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that — and I think that my comments 
about seniors deserve something in this province because they 
have built it; it’s a great place to live, work, and raise a family, 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

and also to retire and enjoy the benefits of your lifelong work 
— I move then, seconded by the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly strongly endorses the seniors’ drug 
plan unveiled in the provincial budget; the plan’s universal 
application will ensure cost-effective access to all 
prescription drugs under the formulary plan for every 
Saskatchewan person over the age of 65. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly strongly endorses the seniors’ drug 
plan unveiled in the provincial budget; the plan’s universal 
application will ensure cost-effective access to all 
prescription drugs under the formulary plan for every 
Saskatchewan person over the age of 65. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to stand to second the motion put forward by the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. Mr. Speaker, in recognition of our seniors 
and elders, this government is introducing a seniors’ 
prescription drug plan, the first of its kind in Canada. Like 
medicare, it will be a universal plan. Every person over the age 
of 65 qualifies for the program, and no senior will have to pay 
more than $15 for a prescription. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the high cost of prescription drugs nowadays, 
this is a groundbreaking initiative. At more than $15 billion a 
year, prescription drugs are the second highest health care cost 
in Canada. And this cost has been rising rapidly at a rate of 13 
per cent a year — far greater than the rate of inflation. No one is 
more affected than seniors. 
 
For many seniors who have carefully planned their retirement 
years — some with registered pension plans, some relying on 
Canada Pension and old age security— for many seniors these 
years also bring with them the unexpected, some things that 
can’t be planned for, health issues. And when these health 
issues come with a price tag, it can add a stress to their lives 
that is unfair. Mr. Speaker, with 87 per cent of the seniors in 
Saskatchewan having at least one prescription a year that costs 
more than $15, this plan will make a real difference for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all remember the introduction of medicare in 
the province and how the rest of Canada followed. The result is 
a public health care system that is the envy of many people in 
the world including our neighbours to the south. The seniors’ 
prescription drug plan follows in that tradition. It is a signature 
piece for Saskatchewan New Democrats and for Saskatchewan 
and, most important, it honours those who have given us all that 
we have, our seniors and elders. 
 
So why would the Saskatchewan Party oppose such a plan? 
Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I hear members opposite say that 

it should be needs-based; there should be an income test. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I asked a few of my constituents what they 
thought. One of my constituents in the Spruce Home area said, 
and I quote: 
 

I don’t believe in means tests. Cause you spend a lot of 
money and time trying to establish it and it becomes one 
of those silly things. It really should be universal. 

 
A senior in White Fox who has about $70 a month in 
prescription drugs says, and I quote: 
 

I’m not in favor of tests because they never seem to be 
fair. People with the most money seem to make things 
work to their advantage. Maybe I’m biased because I don’t 
have much money. 

 
A senior in the Wild Rose area talked about how the 
prescription drug plan would help him. He said some of his 
prescriptions are as high as $80. His prescriptions last year 
added up to $2,624. 
 
A senior in the Big River area said that it’s a good plan. She 
said her prescriptions amount to about $60 a month but she 
knows other seniors who pay $200 and more a month. 
 
A farm couple residing in Canwood . . . Well first of all, Mr. 
Speaker, they had to talk about the federal Conservative 
position on the Canadian Wheat Board, but when we talked 
about the drug plan they talked about how appreciative they are. 
And both of those seniors have more than $1,000 in prescription 
drug costs every year and believe that, like medicare, it should 
be universal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our seniors’ drug plan will assist more than 
115,000 seniors such as those in my constituency at an average 
of $400 per person per year, and it will be universal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found the Saskatchewan Party’s focus on 
sustainability amusing. First of all, for a politically modified 
version of Devine’s Conservatives to be lecturing anyone on 
sustainability is hugely ironic. These are the guys that saddled 
this province with a $14 billion debt that we’re still paying off 
today. Transport those members opposite back in time 45 years 
ago when medicare was introduced, and I’m sure we would 
have heard them saying then, ah, medicare will never work. It’s 
not sustainable. We can’t afford it. It should be needs-based. It 
should be income tested. And yet here we are 45 years later 
with one of the best public health care systems in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I was reading a letter in the 
Leader-Post, April 11, 2007, from a Wes Norheim, and the 
letter is titled “Share the wealth.” And I’ll just read a small part 
of it. I quote: 
 

The assistance to those over 65 with drug costs will be a 
big boost to the health of the province and will mean their 
scarce dollars are spent on other essentials in our 
economy. 
 
Of course this budget is sustainable; its only shortcoming 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

is that Ottawa has yet to be convinced of its share of the 
responsibility, as in medicare. 
 
But until then, I recall the birth of a hospitalization plan, 
and then medicare, both much greater leaps when we had 
much less. And by the way, to the naysayers who worry 
about the budget’s sustainability, I can report that . . . age 
65 we do not stop paying income tax. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Borgerson: — But, you know, Mr. Speaker, when the 
opposition raises questions about the sustainability of a new 
seniors’ drug plan, I think the public can read between the lines. 
This isn’t really about sustainability. It’s about public health 
care. The Saskatchewan Party doesn’t like the public health care 
system because it’s a public health care system. 
 
As the Premier pointed out in his budget speech to this 
Assembly, it is interesting that the Saskatchewan Party applauds 
business tax and corporate tax reduction and finds them 
perfectly sustainable, but when it comes to a drug plan for our 
seniors or a graduate tax credit or daycare spaces or training 
spaces, well then these are unsustainable. If we budget for 
business, it’s sustainable. When it comes to making life better 
for Saskatchewan families, well then, Mr. Speaker, they say it’s 
unsustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all part of a privatization agenda that the 
members opposite have carefully veneered over. They have a 
new paint job — a nice, glossy, friendly face paint job — but 
it’s wearing a little thin. When something like a seniors’ 
prescription drug plan comes along, we see their true colours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day in this province healthy children are 
born, people receive emergency care, people undergo successful 
heart surgeries and joint replacements, and some seniors receive 
long-term care, and some seniors receive caring, competent, 
palliative care — and all of this with no health premiums. Is it 
sustainable? Of course it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — As long as we as a people choose to 
provide it, it will be sustainable. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
as long as we as New Democrats sit in government, you bet it’s 
sustainable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And that is true for our new seniors’ 
prescription drug plan as well. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to close by saying a few 
words about the dental sealant program for students in 
community schools. Now you may wonder why I choose to end 
a speech about the seniors’ drug plan by talking about a 
children’s dental plan. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are lessons we can learn 
from history, even recent history. You will know that we once 
had a full-fledged children’s dental plan in this province. It was 
introduced to schools by Premier Blakeney’s NDP government, 

and it was well received and highly successful. It was a 
program for children ages 5 to 17, and by 1986 there were 578 
clinics in schools across this province. 
 
It was cut that year by the Devine government which is no 
surprise really. The children’s dental plan was exactly the kind 
of program that would be initiated by a social democratic 
government but would never reach the radar screens of 
conservatives like the ones opposite. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, while they were selling off 
provincial highway equipment and other assets at fire sale 
prices, and selling out health care education and social services 
for those in need, the Conservatives of the day dismantled the 
children’s dental program. Five hundred and seventy-eight 
school dental clinics were closed, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
more than half of them in rural Saskatchewan. Four hundred 
and eleven employees were laid off and dental services shifted 
to private dental offices. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m waiting as the member is closing 
his remarks that he is going to link that to this very specific 
topic in front of us, and if he would do that to make the linkage 
to the motion that he would be speaking to, please. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The 
point is that if the Saskatchewan Party were ever to be elected, 
you can expect that the seniors’ drug plan would meet the same 
fate as the children’s dental plan. It would be renamed, 
redefined and un-privatized into non-existence. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the seniors’ drug plan, along with this 
new dental sealant program, speak to the incredible distance 
between our parties in a way that is both real and symbolic. You 
know, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party may 
try its best to sound like born-again social democrats in support 
of public health care and support of public utilities, but these 
two programs — one for seniors and the other for children — 
mark a great divide between a New Democratic Party 
government that focuses on the people of this province and a 
tired, old conservative party that focuses on itself and its friends 
and its for-profit privatization agenda. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as seniors and elders fought for 
medicare and pioneered this province, they created a better life 
for their families, children, and grandchildren, and we stand on 
their shoulders. This seniors’ drug plan honours our seniors and 
elders who have given us all that we have. 
 
I second the motion from the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a privilege to enter into the debate and speak to the 
motion that was put forward by the member from Eastview and 
seconded by the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
You know I’ve been here in this Assembly for about seven or 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

eight years, and I can honestly say that that was the first time 
that I have seen a motion put forward by a member and the 
Speaker had to draw that member back to the motion. She 
didn’t have, the member didn’t have enough information or 
enough to say about the motion to fill 15 minutes and was asked 
over and over again . . . well a couple times — once — and 
certainly could have been called on about four or five times to 
bring the debate . . . 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member is 
commenting on a Speaker’s ruling, so I’d ask him to get back to 
the motion in front of us. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I just 
find it very interesting when members of the government side 
cannot speak for 25 minutes without having been drawn back to 
their very own motion. Each speaker had to be brought back to 
the motion, and I find that really quite amazing that they don’t 
have enough information that they could speak for 25 minutes 
on their own motion. 
 
And when you listen to what they had to say, they really didn’t 
support or defend. Many times — and both speakers spoke this 
way — many times they would stand in their place and they 
would say it is sustainable, it is sustainable, it is sustainable. 
Why? I would ask the question, and they would say because 
we’re saying it is sustainable. 
 
But it was very interesting that not once in the budget 
documents did the Minister of Finance ever give any 
projections of what this would cost into the future. Many, many 
people, when they saw the government introduce this 
prescription drug plan for seniors — which I totally agree that 
there should be a prescription drug plan for seniors — not once 
did they stand in their place and give a rundown on what the 
costs will be into the future. 
 
So when we ask the question — is it sustainable? — they’ll say 
yes it is. We say where are the documentations to show it’s 
sustainable? They don’t have it because they say just trust us; 
this is what it’s going to be; we can sustain it. They don’t have 
any documentation. 
 
And it’s also very interesting that, you know, we’ve got a tired, 
old NDP government here that’s worn out, and what they’re 
doing over and over and over again is simply trying to buy 
votes. And it was interesting that the member from Eastview 
would start her comments by using her constituency as an 
example. It has the highest number of seniors per population of 
any constituency in the province. Well now if a person was 
skeptical and said you’re trying to buy votes, it would really 
tend to prove the point. We know the polling in Eastview, and I 
think the government would know what the polling is like in 
Eastview. The polling for the NDP, the governing party, is 
going south. So what they have to do in a budget, just months 
before a general election, is try and buy some votes. 
 
Again we don’t disagree that there needs to be a drug plan for 
seniors. But this is so obvious. And especially when the 
member from Eastview is talking about it with the numbers 
sliding like they are for that member, it would make perfect 

sense that she would stand in her spot and talk about how 
important this is — yes, for seniors, but more importantly how 
important it is for her electoral success. And that’s what this is 
based around, at least for that member, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I was also very interested to listen to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, and I don’t know how many times he 
talked about sustainability. He never once used the number of 
what it’s going to cost this year, what it’s going to cost next 
year, and what it’s going to cost five and ten years into the 
future. 
 
In the year 2007, which we’re in right now, is the leading edge 
of the baby boomers. In the year 2017 is when the bulk of the 
baby boomers are going to be going through the system. So that 
would be the highest cost of the system. 
 
Does the government have any projections on what this 
program will cost 10 years down the road? Absolutely they 
don’t. They don’t have any projections of what it’s going to 
cost two years down the road. Well they’re . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member from Moose Jaw is going, aw, 
give me a break. Well if you have projections, why wouldn’t 
they lay them on the Table? It would have been a perfect 
opportunity. They had 25 minutes to talk about how much it’s 
going to cost five and ten years into the future about their 
motion and their plan, and they couldn’t fill the time. They had 
to be brought back to the subject. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, it’s really interesting 
that they won’t lay out the projections into the future. The 
member from Sask Rivers talked many times about . . . he’s 
talked to people in his constituency, and they don’t think it 
should be income tested or anything like that. And you know, 
that might be very well true. But I’m amazed that he wouldn’t 
stand and correct them and say we already have an income 
testing for the drug plans that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Did he not correct that person to say that we already do have 
programs for low-income seniors? And how is that tested? It’s 
tested on income. So he’s standing in his place saying, I can’t 
believe you would want to have an income test because they 
never seem to work and it wouldn’t be fair. And his government 
has those programs already in place. 
 
Now I really would hope that he would have been honest with 
the constituents and told them we have an income-based 
program already. Low-income seniors, seniors that are getting 
social assistance, there are many, many programs . . . I 
shouldn’t say many. There are some programs that will 
certainly help low-income seniors. 
 
Well you know, you had 25 minutes to talk about them. 
Members had 25 minutes to talk about the programs that were 
in place and failed to do it, you know. And it’s just, it just is 
absolutely amazing. 
 
But I really think it’s important that we talk about what this 
government has done. Now I mean, they’re within months of an 
election. It’s interesting they announce it in budget, not to come 
into effect until July which, you know, could be as much as a 
month away from the next general election. You know, I mean 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

it would be a major plank in their election platform. 
 
But I think it’s really important when, when the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well they’re questioning whether it could be 
August. I would probably think they won’t go in August. The 
last time they called an election in August they almost lost 
government. I think it was under the former premier, Roy 
Romanow, they called an election in August, so it’s not 
unknown to the NDP to do it. 
 
But I think it’s very important that we look at what the NDP 
have done for seniors over the last 16 years of their 
government. When they came into government, there was a $75 
deductible for seniors who then had to have a copayment of 20 
per cent. That was a program in place when this NDP 
government came into power. 
 
Shortly after they were elected, instead of a 20 per cent 
copayment, the NDP, the government raised it up to 35 per cent 
and increased the deductible. So all they did when they became 
government . . . Now they’re saying we’re the big defenders. 
We’re the . . . you know, we’re going to defend and stand up for 
seniors. That is not what they did when they came into power in 
the early ’90s. 
 
So then in 1993 they weren’t getting enough out of seniors at 
that point. They weren’t getting enough. So what did they do 
. . . is they raised it up to a $1,700 deductible from . . . They 
took power and it was $75. They raised it up to $1,700 with a 
cost share of 35 per cent. Now it’s obvious that the polled 
numbers are showing that they’re not doing very well. They 
have to do something to shore it up because I really believe the 
true feelings of this government is back in 1993 when they were 
charging seniors a $1,700 deductible and a 35 per cent cost 
share. 
 
That wasn’t quite enough. They weren’t quite finished then. So 
in 2002 they changed the formula. They changed the formula so 
that 3.5 per cent of income is what they have to pay towards 
drug costs. Now the member from Sask Rivers again says we 
can’t go on income. That’s exactly what their program is based 
on now. It’s based on a 3.5 per cent of your income. 
 
Now we don’t want to go income tested, and that’s fine. That’s 
the program that they put in place. I would say that if a person, 
a senior, is bringing in $500,000 of income that perhaps he 
could afford some of his prescription drugs. Now the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview says we don’t have very many rich 
seniors in Saskatchewan, and I can agree with her. 
Unfortunately so many of them have been under this 
government and have moved out of the province. They 
followed their children and are living out of the province. 
 
But the point of an income test is that high-income people may 
not need this program. But the real issue is the issue around 
sustainability, and this government continues not to release its 
information in that area. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. As 
the Minister Responsible for Seniors in Saskatchewan, I’m 

proud to stand today to speak about the most significant 
expansion of health care services to seniors in a generation. 
 
This program is designed to reduce out-of-pocket expenses for 
Saskatchewan’s seniors to $15 per prescription for every fill, 
ensuring that cost is not a barrier to their accessing prescription 
drugs. This will ensure that seniors never have to choose 
between groceries and prescription drugs. This is just part of 
this NDP government’s commitment to making life better for 
all of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The seniors’ drug plan will benefit an estimated 115,000 seniors 
an average of $400 annually. This is a significant savings for 
many of our seniors who make up one in seven Saskatchewan 
residents. This NDP government outlined our plan in the 
Throne Speech when we committed to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s leadership in public health care and when we 
committed to ensure Saskatchewan families benefit from our 
strong, prosperous economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the $400 saved annually by seniors under this 
plan, the $300 saved annually by the average family with the 
PST [provincial sales tax] cut, and the continued commitment 
of this NDP government to providing the lowest-cost utility 
bundle in the country, Saskatchewan people will continue to 
prosper from the current boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no surprise that the members opposite are 
opposed to the seniors’ drug plan. When asked what they would 
do differently on budget day, the opposition Finance critic 
didn’t seem to know. All he could come up with was that they 
would cut health care and get rid of civil servants. Now what 
kind of vision is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the statement by the opposition Finance 
critic saying that this is not sustainable and it should be income 
tested basically would have removed this program and cut 
almost all of the seniors off in his riding from this program. I 
wonder if the seniors in his riding know that their MLA is 
endorsing cutting them out of the seniors’ drug plan. And why 
would he do that, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
Whereas I am proud, Mr. Speaker, that here in Saskatchewan — 
the birthplace of medicare — this NDP government continues 
to be a leader and a pioneer in the area of health care. We’re 
committed to doing what’s right and what’s good for 
Saskatchewan people. The members of the opposition 
unfortunately seem to be focused only on what’s good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
This is why, Mr. Speaker, they’ve refused to stand up to 
Stephen Harper, Prime Minister Stephen Harper and the 
Conservative government in Ottawa. Rather than support a 
seniors’ drug plan, they’d rather be silent than anger their 
bosses in Ottawa. They’re more committed to their party and to 
their mother ship in Ottawa than they are to the seniors in this 
province, and won’t support this seniors’ drug plan. They 
cannot admit, Mr. Speaker, that things are going well here in 
Saskatchewan because it may affect their own political fortunes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people aren’t buying this Sask Party 
negativity. The people can see that this is a time of 
unprecedented prosperity and growth here in Saskatchewan. In 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

fact, the members opposite said this may not be sustainable, is 
not sustainable, should be cut back, and we can’t prove that it’s 
sustainable. 
 
Well it’s going to cost approximately $35 million this year, $53 
million next year. And what does the Bank of Montreal say 
about this budget which includes the seniors’ drug plan? They 
have given this government top marks for our commitment to 
cutting taxes, for intelligent spending and maintaining fiscal 
stability. Nothing in what they’ve said in the banks would cast 
any light negatively on whether this government and this 
province can afford to support the seniors through the seniors’ 
drug plan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, people are now beginning to see that 
Saskatchewan is the best place to live, work, and raise a family 
and retire, Mr. Speaker. This government, to seniors, is another 
part of that strategy. Along with the seniors’ drug plan, this 
government has also developed low-cost seniors housing so that 
our seniors may enjoy their lives without worrying about utility 
bills or living conditions. Mr. Speaker, this government has also 
created the seniors gold plan which grants seniors free access to 
our provincial parks, free fishing licences, a 30 per cent 
discount on STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] 
service, and free non-driver photo ID from SGI. 
 
[11:45] 
 
This has come after much sacrifice by our seniors. Support for a 
seniors’ drug plan is important because you’ll remember, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 1991 when our government was first elected, 
Saskatchewan was at a crossroads. The province was near 
bankruptcy from 10 years of rule from those members opposite 
and a government that they supported. At that time we couldn’t 
afford a seniors’ drug plan like we can today. But the people of 
the province sacrificed, and they improved the economic 
condition in this province so that now that this NDP 
government and the people of this province have turned the 
province around. 
 
And the opposition just can’t handle it. They can’t handle it, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’re the very same people that put this 
province into debt. They supported a government that ran up 
debt after debt. 
 
They don’t support seniors, yet they blindly support Prime 
Minister Harper in Ottawa even when he breaks an $800 
million promise to Saskatchewan. Imagine, Mr. Speaker, how 
much better the seniors’ drug plan could be if we had a Prime 
Minister that kept his promise and provided $800 million. So 
they will quibble over a 35, probably $50 million program and 
take this government to task that that’s not sustainable, but they 
won’t say anything to the Prime Minister about breaking his 
promise for $800 million ongoing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this drug plan is sustainable. This government has 
had 14 balanced budgets, 16 credit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I ask all members to 
allow the member to speak. Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I have lots to say, so with 
the agreement of the opposition I could extend my time to a full 

25 minutes if they’d like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — And I see leave has not been granted. 
But, Mr. Speaker, this drug plan is sustainable. This 
government has had 16 credit rating upgrades, 14 balanced 
budgets. This is in stark contrast to the days when the 
opposition members were in government and supported the 
government of the 1980s. After all the years of sacrifice and 
hard work the seniors of Saskatchewan are now seeing the 
benefit of good, responsible government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are some of the things that the opposition has 
said on budget day about the seniors’ drug plan? The member 
for Cannington said this is an unsustainable program. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve shown with the credit upgrades, with the 
balanced budgets, with the banks saying that this is a good 
budget, that this is sustainable. Well let’s hear from the 
members with their evidence as to why this is not sustainable. 
This drug plan is sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance critic from the opposition says that he 
feels the seniors’ drug plan, the post-secondary tax credit will 
increase drastically in the coming years, becoming totally 
unsustainable. Well I wonder if he’s put that in his householder 
and sent it to all the seniors in his riding, saying if he had his 
way he would cut their drug plan. Because most of the seniors 
in his riding would be probably a little more affluent than the 
general public, seniors in the rest of the province. And so does 
he support cutting . . . He does support cutting the drug plan for 
seniors. And do the seniors of his riding know about that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Sask Party released some information to the constituents saying 
that they would provide support, social programs, to those who 
truly need the support. Now they’re saying today that seniors do 
not truly need this support and that this program is not 
sustainable and that if, when they’re in power they’re going to 
cut this program because it’s not sustainable. 
 
The other thing that they said is they would hold the line on 
increases to government spending and continually reduce 
government spending after an audit in the health care. So are 
they saying that the seniors . . . Well they are saying that the 
seniors are the area that they would want to cut back on funding 
for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Eastview, the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers have laid out a program of why this 
program is sustainable, why we need a drug plan for seniors. In 
the consultations that I’ve had with seniors this was one of the 
number one issues that they’ve raised for sustainability and they 
wanted some help. And this government and this Premier have 
stepped forward to the plate and have provided this support. It’s 
up to the opposition to show what they’re going to do. 
 
And in conclusion the seniors’ drug plan will benefit all seniors 
and I’m proud to be part of this pioneering government and its 
great . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and join in the debate on the topic of health care for seniors 
in this province. Mr. Speaker, I certainly would like to iterate a 
bit of a personal story. My mother lived to the ripe old age of 82 
years of age, and so it was an interesting observation for me to 
be close to her and to listen to what her concerns were in her 
future. She also did not have particularly problematic health 
conditions, although she did require medication, and she was 
able to live very independently on modest means for those 82 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have a lot of issues that they face as the 
so-called golden years approach and one of them is their 
concern about health care. And certainly the topic of the debate 
today touches on a part of that whole health care debate concern 
that seniors do have in this province. 
 
Last night when I was at home, I noticed an ad that was 
sponsored by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and in it, it 
said that there were 579 unfilled nursing positions in 
Saskatchewan. And I thought, you know, if there’s anything 
that should bring some fear into the hearts of our seniors in this 
province is the fact that this government has so badly 
mismanaged the health care and human resources file that there 
is a real possibility that seniors are going to have a hard time 
getting the health care they need in a timely fashion as their 
years advance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of that reality, we’ve heard day after day in 
this Assembly of hospitals in this province that are closed or 
closing and closed part-time, that are not able to give 
emergency services as doctors are not able to fill the available 
positions. We are told that there are, I believe, eight locum 
doctors in the province and that’s supposed to fill the gap that 
there is right in this province. Mr. Speaker, it points to the fact 
that in addition to badly mismanaging the health care human 
resources for the nursing profession, they have also 
mismanaged the health care requirements for doctors in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this vaunted budget that we have — and the 
Health minister shakes his head as if this is no — we have a 
three and a half billion dollar health care budget. We told the 
government almost a decade ago that their human resources 
plan was going to create this kind of a problem, that it was 
going to be the lack of human resources — doctors and nurses 
— that the shortage of them are going to close hospitals, not 
governments. And it’s coming to be true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, at the same time the 
Saskatchewan Party was raising the alarm about the 
unsustainability, about effective human resources program in 
the health system, other provinces were taking action. In 
Manitoba, for example, there are 101 medical training seats for 
doctors in that province with a population virtually identical to 
ours — 101, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What have we got? We have 60 and an announcement of a 
whole four more seats in this budget to move to 64. That means 

that Manitoba, with a similar population to Saskatchewan, a 
similar percentage of seniors in their province, has got 36 more 
doctors each and every year in that province than what we have 
in this province — training seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these issues point to the concerns that 
seniors have about the health care that they are going to 
demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her leadoff speech the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview said sustainability is all about choices. And I think 
that’s absolutely true. It is about choices. The choices this 
government has been making in regard to health care have 
created an environment of concern and fear for seniors in our 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a great concern to our 
seniors. It’s a concern that they have. 
 
Certainly seniors are concerned about a great number of things 
as they face their future. They’re concerned about housing. 
They’re concerned about personal safety. They’re concerned 
about mobility. All of these issues impact on seniors. 
 
And the member from Saskatoon Eastview is absolutely right. 
It’s about choices. Sustainability is about choices. And this 
government has to make choices that are appropriate to seniors 
right across this province. 
 
When you think of, from a seniors’ perspective, of what it 
means that there is no hospital in Shellbrook available to them 
at this point or that there’s a shortage of doctors in those 
communities, where are they supposed to go? Many seniors are 
not as mobile as other people. Many seniors require bus trips to 
get to a doctor. Many seniors are isolated in their homes where 
family may or may not be living in the adjacent community. 
 
And many times these seniors live at home and they’re 
concerned about their health care. It’s absolutely true. And yes, 
they are concerned about the cost of their medical prescriptions. 
That’s also true. And I do believe that it’s an absolute essential 
fact for our province to make sure that the most vulnerable and 
needy seniors in our province have got the kind of health care 
that they need — and not only prescriptions, but accessibility to 
competent doctors and nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — That is absolutely a necessity in this 
province and it’s absolutely important that governments make 
the balanced choices that need to be made in order to take those 
concerns away from our seniors. It’s absolutely essential that 
that balance is created in our province so that seniors from one 
end to the other, in urban and rural centres, are making sure that 
they have the health care they need. 
 
It’s much more than just prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly is about sustainability, and it’s certainly about choices. 
 
The member from Indian Head talked about what the 
demographic realities are going to be in 17 years or 20 years. I 
mean, most of the members in this Chamber in 17 or 18 or 20 
years are going to be seniors and are going to require the help 
and the support of the medical system in their time of 
vulnerability. And so we’re not talking some theoretical 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

perspective for people that don’t involve us. They’re either our 
parents or our grandparents, or indeed they’re going to be 
ourselves in not too many years forward. And we simply have 
to have an environment where the balance is created and 
sustained. There has to be the health care professionals to 
deliver the programs. 
 
I recall a number of years ago we met with the college of 
pharmacy, and they were concerned about the number of 
pharmacists that were being trained and how many were being 
retained in our province. And in many communities in this 
province, there was a real difficulty in getting pharmacists to 
dispense prescriptions in these communities. Well where are 
seniors supposed to go for their prescriptions if they don’t have 
enough pharmacies in our communities and pharmacists to give 
this kind of advice? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I think that is so important to make in 
this whole debate is — while it’s important to talk about the 
needs of seniors to have prescription drugs, it’s important to 
talk about the needs that the most vulnerable and the most 
exposed seniors have to making sure they can afford these 
drugs — it’s also a question of balance because this is not the 
only thing that is needed that creates that uncertainty and the 
instability for our seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland said that 
the government is committed to make the right choice for 
Saskatchewan people or something to that effect. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s easy to say that that is a commitment, but it’s 
much more difficult to deliver that balance that is needed for 
our seniors so they can be assured that they’re going to be able 
to access the type of health care that they require when the time 
comes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my mother never drove a vehicle. She never 
drove, so she relied on the buses. And when in Watson the 
doctor moved away from being a resident physician in Watson 
and an itinerant doctor came from Humboldt, she was 
concerned because it was now going to have accessibility once 
a week instead of once every day virtually — Monday to Friday 
when the resident doctor had his hours in that community. And 
when she required any more services, when her cataracts 
needed replacement, we had to drive her to Saskatoon, and she 
had to wait for a fair bit of time in order to have that service 
provided. And all through that time, there was always that 
period of concern and worry about, is it going to happen soon 
enough? Are my eyes going to deteriorate to the point that they 
will not work as well even though the surgery may happen? 
 
[12:00] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the point I’m trying to make in the time 
that I have is I agree that we have to make the right choices for 
our people. I agree that we need a proper, sustainable health 
care and drug plan and make sure that people that are 
vulnerable get the services and the drugs they need. 
 
But we also have to make the responsible choices to make sure 
that we have the doctors and the nurses and the pharmacists and 
the other health care professionals that this province needs so 
that our seniors feel safe and secure, that the health care system, 
the whole health care system is going to be there for them when 

they need it, and that they can live their retirement years in 
peace knowing that the people of Saskatchewan have made the 
balanced and proper choices. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to enter into the debate today on the drug plan 
and the expansion of medicare in Saskatchewan because this 
debate, as members have indicated, is in fact about more than 
just the provision of quality drug therapy at an affordable price 
to senior citizens. This is a debate about the basic principles of 
medicare in this province. 
 
And I was interested and was listening to the comments by my 
colleague, the member for Saskatchewan Rivers, as he was 
talking and saying that he suspected if we looked back in the 
record of this House, back to the time as medicare was being 
first proposed by the Douglas administration, ultimately 
implemented by the Lloyd administration, by two NDP 
governments — CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party] governments — but he 
suspected the debate would probably not have changed much. 
 
I fear that what he says is absolutely accurate because what we 
have continued to hear from right wing parties, whether they 
were Conservative or Liberal or Sask Party, is that medicare 
itself is not sustainable. We have heard this in debate after 
debate. And I was shocked, shocked when we introduced the 
seniors’ drug benefit in this budget, that would cap the benefit, 
cap the costs to seniors at $15 a prescription, that the first thing 
the Sask Party said is, it’s not sustainable. 
 
I ask this question: how is it, in a $3.45 billion health care 
budget, that we cannot find $35 million to support the low-cost 
provision of drugs to our seniors? How is it that the members 
opposite can stand and oppose the provision of this expansion 
on a universal basis to senior citizens? How is it the members 
opposite can claim that they’re protecting medicare while at the 
very time they’re undermining one of the most, single most 
important values of medicare which is its universality. How is it 
the Sask Party thinks they have any credibility as they continue 
to fearmonger in this Assembly about the provision of health 
care services? 
 
There is a huge disconnect between what it is that these 
members opposite say in question period as they attack the 
health care system and introduce a level of fear about the 
provision of services compared to what they stand . . . And I 
listened to the Opposition House Leader stand in his seat today 
and say that, no, in fact they care about seniors. They care about 
the drug plan. They believe in medicare. They just aren’t 
prepared to fund it. 
 
And it was, I thought, a very telling difference in the values of 
these two parties — the CCF-NDP that have bought forward 
medicare on a universal basis and the Sask Party in their 
tradition to the Liberals and the Conservatives of this province 
that have always opposed it. 
 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

What is it that they propose? What is it that they proposed as an 
alternative? If they had more money to spend in health care, the 
first place they’d spend it is to do what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Auditors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Audit. They would undertake an audit 
of the health care system. They’d bring in accountants and 
auditors to take a look at how the doctors and the nurses and the 
patients are using the system. 
 
They say there’s no money for a drug plan. They can’t support a 
drug plan because it’s not sustainable. They say $35 million out 
of a $3.45 billion budget, the Sask Party claims is not 
sustainable. But they seem to think that there’s enough money 
in there that they can go and hire auditors. 
 
And what is it they believe that they will find? As they said at 
their convention, they believe that by hiring these auditors 
they’ll be able to find up to a quarter billion dollars a year 
where the savings of the health care system so that they could 
then spend that on the demands of the union of nurses. 
 
Isn’t that interesting? They cannot seem to find enough money 
to support seniors who are increasingly dependent upon drug 
therapies to maintain the quality of life, to be able to stay in 
their homes and stay out of the acute care system, but they are 
quite conveniently able to find the money to hire accountants 
and auditors and management specialists to go in and audit the 
doctors and the nurses and the patients who are using the 
system. 
 
It is amazing that the first thing they want to do is to hire 
auditors rather than support front-line services. Unbelievable. 
But it tells a very . . . It is the same tale that we have heard in 
this province for a generation, two generations, frankly, three 
generations, ever since the CCF-NDP proposed a universal 
medicare system. The cry from the right wing parties always, 
always is affordability. 
 
And they pick the most ludicrous examples to criticize. I 
listened to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley say, why 
should somebody who makes a half million dollars a year be 
able to get free medicare? Why is it that they oppose this with 
the drug plan, but they seem to be silent in terms of whether we 
should be checking to see whether these people can afford to go 
to the doctor? Is this really what their agenda is? 
 
Isn’t this really what the right wing is suggesting, is that those 
people with the money should be able to get the better services? 
Isn’t that really what they’re suggesting, that as they go into a 
doctor’s office, we should be looking in their wallet to see 
whether they should be paying? Is it going back to the plan that 
the Liberals, one of their forefounding parties supported, which 
was to provide a deterrent fee? Is that what they’re providing 
and proposing? It is one of the oldest debates that we have had 
in this historic Assembly. 
 
This NDP government, this government is going to expand our 
health care system to provide better health care to all 
Saskatchewan people, and in particular to our seniors through 
the expansion of programs like a universal drug care program 
that caps the fee at no more than $15 a prescription. 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, as I have travelled the province 
since the budget, and as we introduced this, many, many seniors 
have come up and have said, you know what? We really 
appreciate this. 
 
Now the member opposite, the Finance critic, who has not been 
able to find his feet for six — well six weeks, three weeks at 
least — three weeks to stand up and ask a question in the 
Assembly says what about the sustainability? What about the 
sustainability? 
 
And what is it that we have said? The drug plan will cost $35 
million this year, $53 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just allow . . . There will 
be a time for questions. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said when we 
introduced the plan that this plan would cost us $35 million this 
year. It will expand to about $53 million next year. And we 
expect the costs to rise somewhere in the range of 8 to 9 per 
cent, which is what health care costs are rising. That is what we 
are believing. 
 
But the members opposite say that in a $3.45 billion budget 
there is no money that they could . . . to support seniors get 
universal drug care. But they think that they would be able to 
find savings by hiring their auditors and their accountants. What 
an underhanded way to undermine a basic principle of 
medicare. 
 
We should be working together in this province to build a 
stronger medicare system, to make sure that we’ve got better 
access to new therapies, to those items that will help keep 
seniors out of the acute care system where we know the costs 
are higher, provide a better quality of life so they can stay in 
their homes, and to be able to support the basic principle that 
this province has always supported, which is medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The 65-minute portion of the debate has 
ended, and we will now have a 10-minute period where any 
member can ask question of any of those members who have 
spoken. The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to put my 
question to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. Mr. 
Speaker, the government floated a trial balloon before the 
budget saying that their political drug plan announcement was 
going to cost $60 million. Then they came out with a $35 
million budget item. Then it was also put out that it would 
probably be around $100 million next year, and then in the 
budget document it came out it would be around $53 million. 
So we really don’t know what the cost of their political drug 
announcement will be. 
 
What I would like to ask the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers, what is their political drug announcement about their 
drug plan going to cost in year one, year two, year three, year 
four, and year five? 
 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Finance 
minister already answered that question, Mr. Speaker. He 
indicates that because this is a partial year, 2007-2008, cost is 
$35.7 million. Next year we’re looking at a cost of $53 million, 
and then as the Finance minister indicated, we’re looking at a 8 
to 9 per cent increase for the year after that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to add as well this is, as the Finance 
minister has indicated, a possibility to expand medicare. And it 
does raise the question, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how far we 
could move that expansion of medicare if the federal 
Conservatives, who are good friends of the members opposite, 
would keep the promise they made in terms of the $800 million. 
Just think about what we might do in terms of expanding 
medicare in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there is many quotes that the opposition has indicated that this 
program is not sustainable. Yet last year the Finance critic kept 
saying on many, many occasions — more than just once 
anyway — that this government seems to be sitting on a 
mountain of money. The NDP shouldn’t be building up a 
mountain of money. We know that you have a mountain of 
money that you’re sitting on. 
 
And recently they released a document that indicated that they 
would support a safety net which protects those who truly need 
support. Given that according to the opposition that we have a 
mountain of money and that they believe that this isn’t 
sustainable, why do they not think seniors do not truly support 
this drug plan? Why are they attacking seniors, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay and thank you very . . . Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Drug plans are very important for all members of society 
including seniors, Mr. Speaker. But I find the NDP’s 
doublespeak very interesting that the NDP have supported 
means testing in the past, especially the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle, Mr. Speaker, who in a debate over the cost of 
supporting seniors in long-term care said that having a means 
test in place was the right thing to do, that seniors should pay up 
to 90 per cent of their income towards the cost of their 
long-term care beds. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Eastview: does she support that 
view, or is it her belief that seniors should choose between their 
drugs and long-term care beds, or does she continue to support 
her previous policy of let them die sooner? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to clarify 
that what I said last year, that I think people should be given the 
means to live healthier longer which everybody wants to do. 
And when they do die, they die quicker. And all seniors’ groups 
understood what I meant. Unfortunately the opposition didn’t 
understand that. 
 
But in long-term care, people don’t get to . . . have to choose 
between their accommodation and their drug costs. Their drugs 
are paid for. And in long-term care, we still subsidize 77 per 
cent of the fees that people pay for their accommodation and 
their drugs. 
 
And I think that it’s very telling that the misunderstandings that 
are going on have an effect on seniors who are vulnerable and 
who feel that they need to support everything we do to make 
sure the province maintains its strength and that somehow they 
don’t deserve something good for them. And I think that’s 
extremely unfair of the Sask Party to make them feel that way 
and to continue to make them feel that they’re the problem for 
anything that would be unsustainable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My question is to the member for Indian Head-Milestone, the 
opposition Health critic. I would like for him to stand today in 
the House and explain how much it is that party plans to spend 
on an audit of the efficiency of what our doctors and nurses do 
today, and why he would rather spend money on accountants 
and auditors than on a seniors’ drug plan that’ll support our 
senior citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
know that if we were and when we become government and we 
put out a plan for a senior drug plan, we’re not going to have 
projections for one year, maybe know what the number is for 
the second year, and not talk about year 3, 4, and 5 because 
what they’re doing is nothing more than trying to buy votes. 
They’ve set out a program that is only one year down the road 
or two years down the road, and they haven’t looked any further 
than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What they tend to do is just fear monger, fear monger, fear 
monger and that’s continually what they do. And that is their 
defence, Mr. Speaker. That’s their defence for a health care 
system that’s failing miserably, because the health care 
professionals — as we have said — should have been put in 
place 10 years ago. Now we’re paying the consequences. And 
they’re trying to put a stopgap with this drug plan and not 
dealing with the real issues that we’re facing in health care, and 
that’s a human resources shortage. 
 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

[12:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask my 
question to the member from Saskatchewan Rivers again since 
he didn’t answer it last time. First, the Saskatchewan Party 
believes in a sustainable seniors’ prescription drug plan within a 
balanced budget. Obviously those are fundamentals that we 
believe in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government came out with a budget that by all 
accounts shows a $700 million deficit. Their own former 
Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, said that the seniors’ drug 
plan that they announced is unsustainable. I’d like to ask the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers: how much debt is he 
prepared and the NDP government is prepared to run up to be 
paid for by future generations of Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to answer 
that question by reading something. And I’m going to start the 
quote with this: 
 

The removal of clawbacks would give Saskatchewan 
approximately $800 million per year in additional revenue. 
What could Saskatchewan do with this money? Here are 
some examples. Saskatchewan could purchase 260 MRI 
machines. Saskatchewan can educate and train 
approximately 40,000 licensed practical nurses. 
Saskatchewan could hire approximately 5,000 medical 
doctors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is from Brian Fitzpatrick, MP [Member of 
Parliament], from one of his mailouts to his constituents. And 
so, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. There come times when it’s 
easier to hear members that are not having the mike than 
members who have the mike. That shouldn’t be the case. I 
invite the member to continue his remarks, the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — And so, Mr. Speaker, $800 million — I 
would think that that would contribute significantly to the 
sustainability of this province. I would like to know what the 
members opposite are doing to see that the Conservatives in 
Ottawa keep their promise. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone dodged the question last time. I’m going to ask 
him again: why is it the Sask Party’s priority to hire accountants 

and auditors and not to support a $35 million expansion of the 
drug plan to support low-cost drugs for our senior citizens? 
Why are their values so out of step with Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well the Minister of Finance likes to stand 
in his place and — even when he isn’t standing in his place — 
lecture from his seat about answering questions. He has had 
many opportunities to come clean on how much this drug plan 
will cost, and never has he done it. He will not touch it because 
he realizes five and eight years or ten years down the road it 
may not be sustainable. He only has a short-term view to get 
him passed the next general election. 
 
We heard it from the member from Saskatoon Eastview. We 
know the polls are showing that she is going down miserably. 
So the only way to try and prop her up is to implement a 
program months away from a general election . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Implement a program months away from a 
general election that may save her hide, Mr. Speaker, because 
quite frankly, the polls don’t look very good at all. And so the 
Minister of Finance refuses to answer the long-term question 
because it is a short-term program for this government, and 
that’s all it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Last question. Member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the member from Saskatoon rivers who says 
that the Saskatchewan Party only talks about grow, grow, grow 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Saskatchewan Rivers, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member read a quote that the person 
did not support means testing. Yet the NDP government, 
including the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, 
continues to support means testing for seniors in long-term care. 
They continue to support means testing for children’s drugs. 
Does that member support means testing, or are they going to 
eliminate means tests in the entire health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, of course there are 
needs-based programs throughout government. But I would say 
this, I would say this. And now, Mr. Speaker, we have reached 
the point where we have the financial situation in this province 
where we can bring in a universal seniors’ drug plan. But I’d 
like to remind the House of the reason why we have not been 
able to act on these kinds of things earlier . . . is a $14 billion 
debt that this government inherited from the Conservative 
government under Grant Devine. Think about what we might 
have accomplished if we had not incurred that debt. Think 
about where we might go now with pharmacare, as a national 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

pharmacare in this program in this country. Think about where 
we might go now under this government and under the financial 
strength that we have at this time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Motion No. 5 — Undertaking an Inquiry into Management 

of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion that I’m 
introducing today calls on the Murdoch Carriere scandal to go 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
We feel that this is important for several reasons. We’ve been 
asking questions in the House since the session resumed in the 
beginning of March, and we feel that there’s many questions 
that are left unanswered about how the government handled the 
Murdoch Carriere case, how the complainants were treated, 
why this went on for so long without any kind of resolution, 
why complaints that were brought forward as early as 1994 
were ignored, and for other reasons as well. And we would 
hope that the government would support this motion to bring 
this issue to committee to make sure that we find answers to 
many of these questions. 
 
As I said, these women were being harassed by Murdoch 
Carriere for years. It took almost a decade for anything to 
happen. One of the earliest complaints was in 1994. We have a 
good idea of what happened after 2002, but there’s many 
questions left unanswered as to what happened prior to 2002, 
and I’m just going to run through the timeline of what we know 
from 2002 and on. 
 
December 20, 2002, Saskatoon mediator, Robert Gillies 
submitted a report on his investigation into harassment 
complaints made by six female employees against Murdoch 
Carriere who was at the time the director of fire management 
and forest protection with the Department of the Environment. 
And the reports concludes and I quote, “. . . that harassment did 
occur both in terms of abuse of authority and in terms of 
inappropriate sexual behaviour.” The report is commonly 
known as the Gillies report. 
 
On February 12, 2003, a memo was sent to the fire management 
and protection staff from then deputy minister of the 
Environment, Terry Scott, that says that Carriere will be and I 
quote: 
 

. . . assuming new responsibilities as a senior advisor to the 

. . . [administrative] Deputy Minister of Operations. We 
expect that Murdoch will commence these responsibilities 
in early May and he will be spending a part of each week 
in our Regina headquarters offices. 
 

Carriere was to be back in the Prince Albert office when not in 
Regina. And the Prince Albert office is where many of his 
victims continued to work so they were planning on putting 
Carriere back in the office where he had originally harassed his 

employees. The letter goes on to say, from Terry Scott and I 
quote: 
 

I want to thank Murdoch for his valuable contributions to 
the Fire Program. Under his leadership, there have been 
some major accomplishments which have earned 
considerable recognition with the public [that] we serve. 

 
The very same day that that memo was sent out, Terry Scott 
sent a letter to the women who had filed complaints. And I 
quote: 
 

It is in this context that I have decided that Murdoch 
Carriere will be removed from his role as Director of Fire 
Management and Forest Protection and will be assigned 
alternate responsibilities within the department. 

 
And after moving Murdoch Carriere, the women were 
instructed to not speak about the matter. And I continue to 
quote from the memo sent from Terry Scott: 
 

I want to specifically caution you to treat this decision and 
any information related to this matter with strict and 
absolute confidentiality. As a complainant you will have 
been provided with a copy of the investigator’s report and 
the information it contains must remain confidential. You 
have a very significant personal responsibility to ensure 
that this requirement is satisfied. Any circulation of this 
material or discussion of the investigation carries a very 
real potential for further damage to the working 
relationships which have been impacted by this 
unfortunate occurrence. 

 
In April of 2001 the Saskatoon StarPhoenix published an article 
based on a leaked copy of the Gillies report. It detailed how 
that, despite the findings of the report that harassment did 
occur, that Carriere had simply been transferred to another 
department. The article states, and I quote: 
 

. . . sources say the women are outraged by the 
government’s handling of the case. They are concerned 
that by reassigning Carriere, the Environment Department 
is putting the safety of other employees in jeopardy. They 
want him fired or [at least] given early retirement. 

 
The complainants involved launched a complaint with the 
province’s Human Rights Commission, and one complainant 
asked the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] to 
investigate. And at the same time it was the Saskatchewan Party 
that called on the government to terminate Carriere, especially 
given the government’s zero-tolerance policy on harassment. 
That day the then minister of the Public Service Commission 
tells reporters that she did not become aware of the allegations 
until she read the article in the paper. The StarPhoenix 
publishes an editorial that states: 
 

Rather than place a premium on fostering a safe workplace 
where female employees are valued, the government is 
signalling that a boys’ club atmosphere prevails in the 
department. Rather than enforce the rules, it conveys the 
impression that Carriere’s touted political connections are 
covering up for him, to the detriment of the women who 
dared to complain. 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

In addition to providing assurance that Carriere will 
remain off the job pending a police investigation, the 
government needs to explain the department’s handling of 
this mess and the silence from the minister on a situation 
that’s been simmering for a long time. 

 
On April 2, 2003, the then PSC [Public Service Commission] 
minister announces that she has stepped in to have Carriere 
terminated, citing that she did not believe Carriere’s punishment 
was strong enough given the findings of the Gillies report. She 
also notes that by firing Carriere in a public fashion that she has 
opened herself up, and the government, to possible legal action. 
 
Also on April 3 the Premier insists that he has never heard of 
these issues or harassment complaints prior to reading it in The 
StarPhoenix. But we know that that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the victims sent a letter to the Premier dated March 10 
and told him of her concerns, but I’ll get to that letter in a 
minute. When asked about the possibility of legal action by 
Murdoch Carriere against the government, the then minister of 
Justice actually had the right approach. And I’ll quote his 
statement from Hansard on April 3, 2003, and he said, quote: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of . . . Carriere was 
justified. [And] we will defend that position vigorously in 
the courts. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — But, Mr. Speaker, we know that that did not 
happen. On April 23 Terry Scott, the then deputy minister of the 
Environment, who made the decision to transfer Carriere 
instead of fire him, takes a separation from the province. 
According to The StarPhoenix the package was broken into a 
10-month period at full pay and another seven months 
depending on what job he got. 
 
On May 13 Carriere officially files a lawsuit against the then 
PSC minister, the Government of Saskatchewan, and various 
media outlets. On November 28, 2003 the RCMP charged 
Murdoch Carriere with six counts of sexual assault following 
their investigation into allegations that he sexually harassed six 
female employees under his supervision. 
 
On May 11, 2004 the provincial government pays $135,000 to 
nine women who complained of sexual harassment at the hands 
of Murdoch Carriere. That’s a payout of $15,000 each. It’s a 
mere pittance compared to what the government paid Murdoch 
Carriere. 
 
On September 9, 2004 a preliminary hearing is held into the 
charges laid against Murdoch Carriere. On September 11, 2004 
the judge decides that there isn’t enough evidence for Carriere 
to go to court. Instead he reduces two of the charges to common 
assault and leaves two charges of sexual assault standing. 
 
January 10 to 19, 2006: the trial of Murdoch Carriere is held in 
Prince Albert. Two women testify that Carriere groped and 
kissed them on numerous occasions in the workplace. One of 
the women complainants testifies that she had sent a letter to the 
Premier in March 2003 to bring the issue to his attentions. 

According to the Prince Albert Daily Herald the women who 
testified, and I quote: 
 

The woman who testified Wednesday said some of the 
women were unhappy with the decision and felt the move 
was a promotion for Carriere. 
 
“We wanted Murdoch removed from the workplace 
because of his negative actions,” said the woman . . . 
 
“But by just removing him to another location, we knew 
the activity would continue on other women.” 
 
In the end, she said [that] the women felt Carriere should 
be fired completely. When the government’s decision to 
move Carriere was announced, the woman said [that] she 
was disappointed. 
 

[12:30] 
 
And I quote: 
 

“The initial memo made us feel like there wasn’t any 
discipline involved,” she said, adding they didn’t feel the 
punishment was enough and that the issue was being 
“swept under a rug.” 
 
Deciding to see if [there was] other action could be taken, 
a letter was written to the premier. When asked if the 
purpose of the letter was to get Carriere fired from his 
position, the woman responded: “Yes.” 

 
They went to the Premier of this province trying to get Murdoch 
Carriere out of the workplace so that other women would be 
saved. They fought for other women when this government 
didn’t. And I go on to quote this woman: 
 

“I thought it was a horrendous decision,” said that woman, 
explaining that one of the complainants was from Regina 
and it wasn’t fair that she would have to work near 
Carriere. 
 
The woman said that she felt that whoever in the 
department had read the report [Gillies report] didn’t feel 
Carriere and his actions were an issue. That’s when she 
decided to write . . . [to the Premier] to see if he would 
intervene. 

 
And her quote is, “I was trying to keep women safe.” 
 
In February 16, 2006, Carriere is convicted of two counts of 
common assault and acquitted on two charges of sexual assault. 
And then on February 27, 2007, the NDP government 
announces it has settled with Murdoch Carriere for the sum of 
$275,000. Mr. Speaker, these are the things that we do know, 
but as I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, there are 
many questions that are left unanswered and questions that we 
need answers to. And that is why the motion is before the 
Assembly today. 
 
And I’ll go back to the quote, the statement by the former NDP 
Justice minister, which I believe was the right approach at the 
very beginning and it’s what the NDP should have done from 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

the beginning. And I’m going to quote him again: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was 
justified. We will defend that position vigorously in the 
courts. And in due course . . . the courts will make the 
determination. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what happened. The government 
did not stand up for these women. They did not take this to 
court. They backed down. And I find it interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP sells themselves as the defenders of 
women in light of this case. 
 
I am fortunate to be a woman in politics, to be in this Assembly. 
I don’t take my position lightly and I’m honoured to be here. 
And I have to say that there are many women who came before 
us that paved the way and opened doors to enable people like 
me to be here. Canada has a history of very strong women who 
dreamt of a better life, not only for their generation but for 
generations to come. 
 
And one of those women was Agnes Macphail. She was the 
first woman to be elected to the House of Commons. She was 
also one of the two first women to be elected to the Ontario 
legislature. Interestingly she was elected as a member of the 
CCF, the forerunner to the NDP. 
 
And in her lifetime, she did great things and fought on behalf of 
all people. She fought for human rights. She fought for reforms 
and improvements to Canada’s prison system. She worked to 
advance women’s issues. She founded the Elizabeth Fry Society 
that helped out women and girls in the justice system. She 
fought for women. She opened doors, like I said, so that people 
like me could be here today. 
 
One of her quotes is: “Do not rely completely on any other 
human being . . . We meet all of life’s greatest tests alone.” 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that for these nine women, 
that statement couldn’t be more true. When they needed their 
government to defend them, they were left to stand and face this 
test alone. And I’m pretty sure that Agnes Macphail, if she were 
here today, would not be pleased with the actions of this NDP 
government. 
 
I’d also like to talk briefly about another Agnes, and this Agnes 
was Agnes Heppner. She is my grandmother. My grandma was 
born in 1901 in Rosthern, North-West Territories. She was born 
before Saskatchewan was even a province. And she was born at 
a time when there were very little options for women beyond 
getting married and raising a family. And although that was one 
of her dreams, she had other dreams to pursue as well. 
 
In 1919 her father paid for a train ticket and she went down to 
the United States. She went to Bible school and to nurses’ 
training and worked in the United States as a registered nurse 
for many years before returning home. She was full of 
adventure. She was a very stubborn woman. She was sick for 
most of her life. She overcame cancer and other ailments, and 
she returned back to Saskatchewan at the age of 38. She married 
my grandfather at age 40 and had my dad at age 42. 
 

And grandma was the very definition of feisty. And most of you 
know my father, and even my father couldn’t stand up to my 
grandma most of the time. One of the greatest compliments my 
dad ever gave me was to tell me that I reminded him of her. 
And I think there’s a lot of her in me, and I see a lot of her in 
my nieces as well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s strong women like her 
that I thank for helping me to become the person that I am 
today. 
 
There’s a few other women that I would like to acknowledge. 
They are known as the famous five: Nellie McClung, Emily 
Murphy, Irene Parlby, Louise McKinney, and Henrietta 
Edwards. They fought what is commonly known as the Persons 
Case. 
 
Women weren’t recognized as persons under the law, and 
therefore couldn’t sit in the Senate. And they fought from 1927 
to 1929 on the Persons Case. They took it all the way to London 
to petition England’s Privy Council to challenge section 24 of 
the British North America Act to ensure that women would 
indeed be considered persons. 
 
I had the privilege to visit the monument that’s set up in Ottawa 
in their memory and it’s inspiring to know that these five 
women fought for my future rights to be considered a person. 
They fought an uphill battle in our country when women’s 
rights were not a priority for the majority of the population. 
 
And I wonder what would have happened if they would have 
sought legal opinions or legal advice as to what the outcome of 
their fight would have been. And had they taken a legal opinion, 
I’m wondering if they would have been told to just stand down 
and let it be. And where would any of us be then? Luckily for 
us they had the fortitude to follow through. And because of 
their opening doors for people like us, as I said I am here today. 
 
I was privileged to participate a few weeks ago at a forum at the 
University of Regina called “Chicks and Politics.” And while 
not everybody may not enjoy the name of that, it does catch 
your attention and the point of it was to get women involved in 
the political system and to understand that politics was a place 
that women could participate. 
 
We discussed a variety of things — difficulties that women face 
in politics, whether or not they feel that the doors are open to 
them — and I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very fortunate. 
I have never in my life faced any discrimination based on 
gender and I would like to believe that I am the norm. If I’m the 
exception, I find that sad. But in my caucus, in the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, I feel that I am accepted, that my 
views are listened to and that my full participation is important 
to the rest of the members in caucus. 
 
I find it very disturbing however, Mr. Speaker, that at that 
forum at the University of Regina there were sitting NDP 
MLAs, women MLAs, who quite openly and candidly 
expressed to the people that were visiting the forum and 
listening to our views, they were talking about their own 
struggles in their own NDP caucus. 
 
They stated quite clearly that unless a man says it in the NDP 
caucus it’s like it hasn’t been said; that women are not taken 
seriously in the NDP caucus and it’s like talking to a wall. The 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

member from Regina Walsh Acres and the member from 
Wascana Plains were in agreement on that point. And although 
I appreciate their candour at that forum, I find it very sad that 
this would be indicative of how the NDP views women. I was 
shocked to hear it, Mr. Speaker. But I am pleased as I said that 
that is not the situation that I face in the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus. 
 
I find it also interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I did a search through 
the NDP’s platform that is posted on their website and I 
searched for two things: either the word woman or women. And 
guess how many times it appeared in that document —once. 
And I find it interesting in that it would only appear once in a 
document that is supposed to be benefiting both men and 
women in this province. 
 
And one of the issues where I believe the NDP have failed, and 
I think this goes to their attitude towards women in this 
province and whether or not that affected their handling of the 
Murdoch Carriere affair. We know that women use food banks 
exceptionally in this province. And we have seen the use of 
food banks go up over the years under the NDP government. 
 
In 1991 the now Premier vowed that food banks would be a 
thing of the past. And he said, and I quote from Hansard, 
December 11, 1991: “We in this government dream of a 
province where at the turn of the 21st century, like the soup 
kitchens of the 1930s, the food banks of the 1980s and ’90s will 
be a thing of the past.” 

 
Well I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that under this NDP 
government food bank usage in this province is the second 
highest increase in the entire nation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a quote too from Bob Pringle, the 
executive director of the Saskatoon Food Bank — and 
interestingly a former NDP cabinet minister — and he said, and 
I quote: 
 

We’re located in the Premier’s riding. I haven’t been able 
to get the Premier here for two-and-a-half years . . . I’ll 
just say it . . . [like] it is. We’ve had more interest by the 
Opposition in these issues than by the government. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Bob Pringle. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Yes, and that was from Bob Pringle. The 
reality of the NDP’s record is that food bank usage is on the 
rise. 
 
This is the legacy of the NDP when it comes to social justice 
and women’s issues. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
people in glass houses shouldn’t be throwing stones. On the 
issue of women’s issues, it is interesting to note that the 
Women’s Secretariat received over $1 million in the 2001-2002 
budget, yet in the following year, 2002-2003, the NDP not only 
cut the budget for women’s programs to $257,000; they 
completely dismantled the Women’s Secretariat altogether. 
Women’s issues, whether the Women’s Secretariat or the office 
of the Status of Women, wasn’t even mentioned as a separate 
line item in the budget in 2002-2003. 
 
So I went through the NDP speeches. I went through budget 

debate. I went through ministers appearing at committee. I was 
looking for the appropriate outrage from the members opposite, 
considering that this would be an issue that they apparently 
would be concerned about — that they gutted the Women’s 
Secretariat and completely dismantled their offices. 
 
But I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that my search was in vain. 
Actually the only defence that I found of the Women’s 
Secretariat after the NDP gutted it came from a member on this 
side of the House. The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
repeatedly questioned the minister in charge as to budget cuts 
and dismantling of this office but received very few answers. 
And I would like to commend the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena for her faithfulness in defending women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Carriere scandal and this 
government’s mishandling of this issue affects a lot of us. And I 
have to say from a personal perspective, I have nieces — 
Jasmine is 13; Sharmaine is 10; and Mileva just turned 3. And I 
want to make sure that they can grow up and work in a place 
where they are free from harassment and where they feel safe. 
 
I spend a lot of time with my nieces. They’re all very unique 
people, and they bring a lot of joy to my life. We have 
sleepovers, and we go shopping. We go shopping a lot. And . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. We have movie nights. And as 
soon as the weather gets a little bit better, we’ll be going 
camping. 
 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve set a good example. I’ve 
taken a lot of chances that others wouldn’t have and jumped at 
opportunities that many would have said no to. And I want to 
make sure that my nieces grow up knowing that they can do 
whatever they want, regardless of gender, and that being a 
woman does not tie them back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP say that more 
legislation is needed. We heard the Labour minister in 
committee yesterday saying that they’re looking at new 
legislation. 
 
The proposed legislation however, according to the Labour 
minister, he said that there is no outside consultations being 
involved in this. And I would think that considering that we 
have nine women who were harassed by Murdoch Carriere and 
were completely neglected for eight years, they would know 
better than anybody else the deficiencies in the system, the gaps 
that need to be filled, and possible legislative changes that could 
be made to make sure that people like . . . so that what 
happened to them doesn’t happen to other people. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP aren’t consulting with people like that. 
They’re doing internal consultations. So they are talking to 
themselves about what they should be doing. 
 
And I also find, Mr. Speaker, that without looking back to find 
out what went wrong in the first place, it’s impossible to go 
forward and figure out what we need to fix. They’ve asked us to 
support amendments to any legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that we need to have a full investigation into this matter. 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

We haven’t seen the proposed amendments by the NDP. And 
we’d be willing to support anything that would actually fix, to 
improve the situation. But, Mr. Speaker, I think more 
importantly than that, the NDP need to look at what happened 
over the last 10 years and look at what went wrong to see why 
legislation and rules and regulations that were in place at the 
time, why those things were not followed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Carriere’s victims reported his behaviour to 
numerous people over almost a decade, and nothing was done 
for them. They went to deputy ministers, to associate deputy 
ministers, to their supervisors. They even wrote the Premier of 
this province, and still nothing was done. This is in a direct 
contradiction to the rules that are already in place for their 
superiors. And I’m going to quote from the Public Service 
Commission’s rules and regulations, PS 807-C, and it says: “It 
is misconduct for managers and supervisors who know of 
workplace harassment not to take immediate corrective action.” 
 
[12:45] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there were numerous people who knew that 
this harassment was going on and nothing was done to these 
people. Terry Scott is the only person that faced any kind of 
reprimand whatsoever, but there were other people other than 
Terry Scott who knew of these things going on and chose to do 
nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to send this to committee 
to have this investigated to find out why nothing has happened 
to those people. These are the questions that we need to have 
answered. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cannington has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Cannington. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I would like to introduce my 
constituency assistant who is in here today, Jean Ball, with her 
son, Aaron. 
 
Jeannie took a day off today from work to bring her youngest 
son, Garrett, and his girlfriend in from the farm to Regina to 
catch the bus back to Calgary. Garrett and his girlfriend, like 
many young Saskatchewan people, are now living and working 
in Alberta, and that’s the kind of young people that we need to 
have returning.  
 
So I would like to ask the House to welcome Jeannie and Aaron 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
Motion No. 5 — Undertaking an Inquiry into Management 

of Harassment Complaints 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, what is 
needed is to have the proper procedures that are in place to 
make sure that those things are being followed. One of 
Murdoch Carriere’s victims in an interview with the 
Leader-Post said, and I quote . . . This is from March 27, 2007: 
 

“We were ignored” . . .  
 
“We laid complaints and they said we weren’t going 
through the proper channels . . . which we thought we 
were doing just [that] by going to (our) superior.” 
 
“It makes you feel really worthless” . . . 
 

And I find that sad, Mr. Speaker, that in this day and age 
women would be so ignored to the point where they would feel 
worthless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an all-party committee to investigate what went 
wrong is necessary. I hear about the situation when I go home. 
Both men and women are disturbed by the government’s 
actions or lack of action on this file. And as I said earlier, there 
are questions that have been left unanswered. I’m going to go 
through some of those now. 
 
The first question is, why weren’t earlier harassment complaints 
taken seriously? We’ve heard from at least one of the victims 
that she was originally harassed by Murdoch Carriere as early 
as 1994. Yet nothing was done until the Gillies report came out 
in 2002. And the NDP didn’t act until this became a political 
liability for them. And we need to know why these women were 
ignored for almost a decade. 
 
Another question is, why did the NDP, despite their own 
harassment legislation stating otherwise, refuse to take action 
against the numerous individuals who ignored the harassment 
complaints? And as I stated earlier, there was policies in place 
where it is misconduct for supervisors to not take any action. 
And those people have not been disciplined. 
 
Another question is, when did the former Environment minister 
learn of complaints against his friend, Carriere? And I know 
that members on the other side keep saying that they’re no 
buddy of Murdoch Carriere. Well I wouldn’t want to be a 
buddy with him either. 
 
But the reality of the situation, Mr. Speaker, is that on 
December 2002, Murdoch Carriere phoned the former 
Environment minister asking for help in light of these 
allegations. And I don’t know about other members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but if I was facing something as 
serious as that, I wouldn’t be calling the minister. I would be 
calling my friends to find out exactly what I should be doing. 
And who did Murdoch Carriere call? He called the former 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

Environment minister. 
 
How many other people did Murdoch Carriere harass? There 
are nine that we know of. But considering that these complaints 
went unanswered for almost a decade, I’m wondering if there 
were other women who were harassed by Murdoch Carriere, 
who saw the futile fight that these women were in, trying to be 
heard, and thought that it was just easier to stay quiet. And if 
there are other women, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that 
they’re taken care of as well. 
 
And why wasn’t Murdoch Carriere fired years before 2002 
when his peers and supervisors knew of these complaints? The 
harassment of these women wasn’t a secret from the people 
who were required to help them, and those people failed to 
defend them. How many other complaints were filed prior to 
2002? As I said, we know that there was incidents in 1994 and 
1997. And we need to know how many other complaints went 
ignored. 
 
We also would like to know why the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission continues to tell us that the nine women 
were checked with — and those are her words, not ours — 
checked with before Carriere was given his $275,000 payoff, 
when we know that they weren’t checked with. The minister 
was very clear when she told us that the victims were checked 
with, but we know that that isn’t true. His settlement was signed 
on January 9. The cheque was dated and delivered on January 
26, and the women weren’t notified, some of them, until after 
the NDP sent out a press release on February 27. 
 
And why did the NDP keep their settlement with Carriere a 
secret from his victims? Again, Carriere’s victims weren’t told 
of the deal that the NDP had struck with Carriere. The press 
release went out, and some of these people only found out by 
voice mail. 
 
And why didn’t the NDP fight for these women in court as they 
promised to do in 2002? And I go again to the former NDP 
Justice minister who promised that the NDP government would 
fight this vigorously in the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the questions that require 
answers. These answers are required not only for us but for the 
nine women who were victims at the hands of Murdoch 
Carriere. 
 
The NDP say that they have a zero tolerance. But if you’d ask 
these nine victims, they would tell you otherwise. They went to 
the Premier. They wrote him a letter to notify him of what was 
going on. They were even trying to look out for the other 
women in Regina who could potentially be harassed by 
Murdoch Carriere when Carriere was going to be transferred to 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP talks about having a zero tolerance 
policy, so I went online and found a brochure that’s put out by 
the Public Service Commission about myths and facts about 
harassment in the workplace. And I’ll quote from that. The first 
says, “Myth: Ignoring harassment will put a stop to the 
behaviour.” And it goes on to say: 
 

Fact: Ignoring the harassment may actually encourage the 

harasser, who may interpret the lack of protest as 
acceptance of the behaviour. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Carriere’s victims didn’t ignore this 
harassment that they faced. They talked to people. They talked 
to supervisors. They talked to the deputy minister, to the 
associate deputy minister, and they even alerted the Premier. 
The only people who ignored this situation were the people in 
positions of power — people who were in the position to 
protect these women. And that didn’t happen. 
 
It goes on to say, another myth, “Managers are not responsible 
for the behaviour of the staff who commit harassment.” And it 
says: 
 

Fact: Managers who are aware of harassment are 
responsible for stopping the harassment and preventing it 
in the future. Supervisors who knowingly tolerate 
harassment may be subject to disciplinary measures. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen. 
 
I also found a report called the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Women on the Status of Women office website, and I quote: 
 

Harassment is a growing problem in the workplace that is 
affecting the health and safety of workers. The 
Government of Saskatchewan wants to be a role model for 
healthy and safe practices in the modern workplace. 

 
I don’t think that if you talk to any one of Murdoch Carriere’s 
victims that they would say that the NDP has been a role model 
in addressing harassment in the workplace. But this is the 
information that the NDP government is providing, but they are 
not backing up their own words with any actions. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, the government wants to introduce 
amendments to the occupational health and safety guidelines, 
but we need to know what we need to fix before we can 
introduce new legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s 
why we need to send this to committee so that we can look into 
this to find out what went wrong so that we can fix it so we can 
protect women in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not the only one and this party’s not the 
only one who’s upset by this. There’s other groups, 
organizations, individuals who are concerned. And I’ll read a 
press release dated February 27, ’07 from the SGEU 
[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 
and it says: 
 

News that government settled out of court with Murdoch 
Carriere and provided a $275,000 . . . [payout] plus 
pension repayment options was greeted with outrage and 
dismay at SGEU. 
 
“We’re appalled” . . . “I can only imagine the pain and 
suffering the women he harassed have felt, and now they 
see him being compensated. This will be . . . very painful 
. . . for them.” 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2007 

“This is a precedent that never should have been set . . . By 
this action, the message that [this] government is sending 
to women who are sexually harassed in the workplace is 
that the government won’t take their complaints seriously 
and their harasser will be rewarded in the end. It’s a sad 
day for Saskatchewan government workers, but especially 
for women who work in executive government.” 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also have a press release from the north 
Saskatchewan business association which states: 
 

The NSBA would like the Provincial Government to come 
clean about their reasons for paying Carriere an out of 
court settlement. 
 
The NSBA is also concerned about the cost and the 
message it sends to the victims that were involved. 
 
Executive Director of NSBA Shirley Ryan says once the 
dust settles, the taxpayer will . . . [be] . . . on the hook for 
about half a million dollars, which is a substantial amount. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have said repeatedly that they had to 
settle, that they had no choice. And by the way, it would have 
been insensitive . . . As the member for Regina Wascana Plains 
said last week, it would be insensitive to drag these women 
through further court proceedings. The problem with that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the NDP never asked them. They never asked 
these women if they wanted this to go to court. These women 
weren’t given the option of being defended. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there’s many questions that are left 
unanswered. There’s a precedent set from the Channel Lake 
affair that allows the government to release its legal opinions, 
whether from the Justice department or otherwise, and have this 
sent to committee for an investigation. 
 
And because of these questions that are left unanswered, Mr. 
Speaker, I move today, seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies undertake an inquiry pursuant to rule 146(1) to 
consider and report on the following matters: 

the government’s handling of harassment complaints 
made by various government employees against 
Murdoch Carriere; 
the government’s treatment of the complainants before, 
during, and after the Murdoch Carriere harassment 
investigation; 
the government’s initial disciplinary action taken against 
Murdoch Carriere on February 12, 2003; 
the government’s subsequent decision to overturn the 
initial disciplinary action and fire Murdoch Carriere; 
the government’s decision to provide Murdoch Carriere 
with a $275,000 out-of-court settlement and full 
pension; and 

that once the said committee is satisfied it has verified the 
facts of the matter, it will make recommendations in its report 
as follows: 

the steps that should be taken to learn from and act on 
mistakes made; 
what should be done to ensure the greatest extent possible 

a safe and harassment-free workplace for all employees; 
what should be done to ensure that when harassment 
allegations are made, they are dealt with appropriately; and 
further 

that pursuant to rule 146(5) the committee be instructed to 
initiate its inquiry immediately. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would hope that the members 
opposite would support our motion today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the member from 
Martensville, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena, 
will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today on behalf of the official opposition to 
second the motion moved by my colleague, the member from 
Martensville. I’d like to start by telling her . . . by thanking her 
for outlining in detail the issues surrounding this case and 
bringing the timelines forward so the people of the province can 
understand the issues; so that they understand what we’ve been 
talking about and the fact that there are many, many questions 
that have to be answered in some manner. 
 
Since the first day of this session we started asking questions 
about the issue of harassment in the workplace — specifically 
harassment in a government workplace. I mentioned this last 
week when we talked about the fact that this NDP government 
tries to show that people in the workplace are often not 
harassed, in a government workplace. Mr. Speaker, this 
happened in a workplace in a government department. 
 
We have so many questions that need to be answers . Questions 
like the NDP’s government refusal to come clean on why they 
won’t table the legal opinion on the $275,000 payout to 
Murdoch Carriere that led the government to decide not to take 
the issue to court, to fight it in court like they promised they 
would do. The member from Martensville mentioned the 
number of times that the former minister of Justice stood in this 
Assembly and declared that he would fight for women in the 
House. He would fight for women in the workplace, and he 
would defend it on behalf of his government. 
 
But there seemed to be a change in opinion of this government. 
They seemed to have decided that this wasn’t an important 
issue and it’s one of the many things that we need, the people in 
the province need to have an answer for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need answers to questions like, why did this 
government say they’d consulted with women who were 
harassed when they . . . when we know, when the women know, 
and when the people in the province know that they were never 
talked to. Why did harassment complaints that were brought 
forward to the supervisors, to the ADMs [assistant deputy 
minister], and to the deputy minister since 1994, why were they 
never acted on? Who had the authority to decide that these 



April 12, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

didn’t have to be acted on? 
 
In fact the women were told . . . Women who had been sexually 
harassed in the workplace, women who were hurting and knew 
that something had to change, they had the courage and strength 
to go to their supervisors and they were told, that’s just 
Murdoch. Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of thing that adds insult 
to injury; that made women feel like less than lower life when 
they can’t even go to their superior and be protected. 
 
Why was Murdoch given a top-up to his pension even though 
people of Saskatchewan were told that he was fired? The people 
of Saskatchewan, not just women but all citizens know that if 
someone is fired for cause, they don’t get a top-up on their 
pension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to get a . . . go through the timeline a 
little bit just so people understand that there is an issue that this 
government has known about for many years. We know from 
the letters that have been given to the members on this side of 
the House that since 1994 there have been women who have 
been trying to get the attention of this government to know that 
there’s been problems in the workplace. 
 
Back in 2002 Murdoch Carriere was the provincial director of 
fire management and forest protection in Prince Albert, and 
there was a report . . . when a report by a government-appointed 
mediator alleged he had been . . . had sexually harassed or 
intimidated six female employees. Carriere was disciplined and 
transferred to another position. 
 
After the newspaper story the minister responsible for the 
Public Service Commission at that time was . . . fired him in 
April 2003, despite warnings from government officials a 
minister should not get involved in personnel matters. Carriere 
contended that the investigator’s report was inaccurate and did 
not contain his full response to the allegations against him. 
 
In February 2006 he was acquitted of six sexual assault charges 
but he was found guilty on two counts of common assault and 
he was given a six months suspended sentence. Just two days 
later, a few days later, the provincial government settled the 
litigation with a $275,000 payout to the man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we heard a government minister wonder out 
loud if the NDP would be given time or would be speaking to 
this motion. I’d like to bring to the attention of the House, to the 
members opposite, that they’ve had a number of private 
members’ days. The minister had time in question period. But 
they have had time and opportunity themselves to bring this 
issue up where they could have clarified — not just for the 
members in the House, but for the general public — all these 
questions that we’ve been asking. 
 
There was lots of opportunity to do that and they have never 
taken that chance. They have never spoke in the House and said 
let’s us talk about this today. They’ve waited for us to bring this 
up and asked it to go to the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee so we can get the answers that not just we want to 
hear, but that the people of the province wanted to hear. They 
had the opportunity. But did they do it for the women of this 
province? No, they did not; they refused. 
 

My colleague from Martensville has brought forward a motion 
that would allow this whole issue to be taken to an all-party 
committee. We learned yesterday that this government is 
looking at new anti-harassment legislation. We’re looking 
forward to seeing their ideas. But we need to know, the people 
of . . . and the people of Saskatchewan need to know what the 
problem is with the current legislation. 
 
The question that is asked most often, is there anything wrong 
with this legislation or is this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being the hour of 1 o’clock, I 
must bring this debate to an end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — This House will stand adjourned until 1:30 
p.m. on Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1253 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1254 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1255 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1280 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holocaust Memorial Day 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1255 
 Girl Guides 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
 Best Wishes to Legislative Interns 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1256 
 Property Sales Booming in Southern Saskatchewan 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1256 
 Kahkewistahaw Hurricane Wrestling Team 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
 Federal Conservatives in Saskatchewan 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
 A Memorable Hockey Season for the Cupar Canucks 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Medical Coverage in Prince Albert Parkland Health Region 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1258 
 Forest Fire Fighting Policies and Plans 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
 Compensation for Former Deputy Minister 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1262 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1263 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Seniors’ Drug Plan 
  Junor ..............................................................................................................................................................................1263, 1274 
  Borgerson ......................................................................................................................................................................1266, 1274 
  McMorris.......................................................................................................................................................................1267, 1274 
  Addley ............................................................................................................................................................................1269, 1274 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1272 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1274 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 5 — Undertaking an Inquiry into Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1282 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 




