






















































Hansard: April 03, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 41A  TUESDAY, APRIL 3, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1147 
 April 3, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again this afternoon to present a petition to the 
Assembly in regards to the needs of individuals on dialysis in 
the Broadview area and the wish to have a dialysis unit placed 
in the hospital to address the high costs that people on dialysis 
face as they travel for services. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by folks 
from the communities of Regina, Moosomin, Broadview, 
Cowessess. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition brought to my office by individuals from the 
constituency of Cypress Hills concerned about the closure last 
week of the SaskPower office in the town of Shaunavon. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s four pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Shaunavon, Admiral, 
Frontier, and Eastend. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

This petition comes from the good people of Fairlight and 
Maryfield. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
of people who want to drive Highway 5 and survive and arrive 
alive. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe these signatures are from the city of 
Saskatoon, and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
communities of Chaplin, Central Butte, and Herbert. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition of citizens concerned with the closure of a SaskPower 
office. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and the surrounding areas. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the good town of 
Rosetown. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read 
another petition from citizens opposed to possible reductions of 
health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Landis and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens that are extremely 
concerned that the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche 
and District Health Centre would cause undue hardships to 
residents, particularly seniors. And I’ll read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens throughout southern 
Saskatchewan that would be affected by such a closure. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan and especially the Southwest that are 
concerned with the government’s handling of the rural school 
closures. And as in duty bound, your . . . I’ll read the prayer 
first of all: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from Limerick. I so 
present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition concerning the conditions of Highway 368 
starting four miles south of Lake Lenore to four miles south of 
St. Brieux which has endangered the safety of drivers and 
harms economic growth in area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lake Lenore 
and St. Brieux. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Imperial, and Govan. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: does 
SaskEnergy allow other companies to utilize the billing 
distribution network for advertisement purposes? And if 
so, what financial remuneration does SaskEnergy receive 
for this service? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many local 
phone customers has SaskTel gained in Saskatoon since 
Shaw cable introduced its own local phone service? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following question: 
 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many local 
phone customers has SaskTel lost in Saskatoon since Shaw 
cable introduced its own local phone service? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many local 
phone customers has SaskTel gained in Regina since 
Access Communications introduced its own local phone 
service? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the final question, I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: how many local 
phone customers has SaskTel lost in Regina since Access 
Communications introduced its own local phone service? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to all 
members of the Assembly several folks in the west gallery who 
are here to observe second reading of The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2007, an Act which will provide civilian job 
protection for Canadian Forces reservists here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we are joined today — and if I could ask the folks just to 
give a wave when I say your name — Frank and Joan Simpson. 
Frank is the provincial president of the Saskatchewan 
Command of the Royal Canadian Legion. Retired Brigadier 
General Cliff Walker of the Canadian Forces Liaison Council; 
Lieutenant Vaughn Scofield, the provincial Chair of the 
Canadian Forces Liaison Council; Major Brad Hrycyna, 
commanding officer of the Saskatchewan Dragoons. Sergeant 
Tim Huckle and his wife, Maria, Tim is a member of the 
Saskatchewan Dragoons who is preparing to depart for 
Afghanistan; Sergeant James Richards who is also preparing to 
depart for Afghanistan with the Saskatchewan Dragoons; and 
Dave Barth and Derek Schmidt both former members of the 
Dragoons and members of the committee to support Canadian 
Forces reservists. 
 
The members of the committee to support Canadian Forces 
reservists — the Canadian Forces Liaison Council, the Royal 
Canadian Legion — have been instrumental in bringing the idea 
of job protection for Canadian Forces reservists to 
Saskatchewan. And it’s been my pleasure to work with them 
over the last couple of months. So I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to too join with the Minister of Labour on behalf of the 
official opposition and recognize the guests that are in the 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in late November 2006, the Office of the Official 
Opposition received a letter regarding the idea of protecting 
Canadian Armed Forces reservists’ jobs in legislation for when 
they train or volunteer for tours of duty. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party fully supports that type of legislation, and 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming these fine 
people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, along with 
my colleagues and the minister, I’d like to welcome members 
from the committee here today. There’s a number of friends of 
mine in the audience that I would like to just acknowledge. 
Brigadier General Walker, we’ve had an association for a 
number of years, as well as Vaughn. Major Brad is a long-time 
acquaintance. 
 
But I’d like to really introduce Tim and Maria. We go back 
actually a number of years, Mr. Speaker. Tim’s father and I 
used to fly together. 
 
So I’d like to welcome all the rest of the members of the 
committee to the Assembly, to their Assembly, and please join 
me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
some of my colleagues may have noticed, I have some friends 
in the west gallery, and I’d be extremely pleased to introduce 
them to you and to all members of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 
we have joining us today the Montessori School of Regina, the 
grade one and kindergartens. 
 
And I had a little, a very brief discussion with them early on 
and told them that I would read, since it’s not a big group, all of 
their names into Hansard where it would be recorded forever 
and will share that with them then in the next couple of days. So 
joining us today are teachers: Mrs. Joyce Van Bendegem, Ms. 
Flaman. 
 
Students Mira Cappello, Roan Carter, Christain Enmark, 
Alexander Husain, Maria Husain, Justin Jeon, Harrison 
Lars-Hansen, Skylar Moen, Spencer Prost, Kanyn Rogers, 
Sydney Runge, Mayson Sonntag — some would recognize that 
name — Avram Tcherni, Ryan Gailing. 
 
And parents Mike Cappello; Virginia Wilkinson, some would 
recognize that name; and Meika Sonntag, some would 
recognize that name; and Amanda Carter; Don Capewell; and 
also my office staff person from here in Regina, Deanna 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Obleman. And I hope I’ve not missed anybody. 
 
I certainly welcome them here today, and I know they’ll be 
meeting with myself and I think actually the Premier just a little 
bit later for a picture as well. So I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings, and we’ll see all of you in a few minutes. Please 
join me in welcoming them to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 13 
grade 8 students from the great school of Milestone. They 
travelled in the half hour to be part of the session and view part 
of the session. I think it’s significant. They’re joined with their 
teacher, Mr. Hawkins. 
 
And many times when we see school groups come to the 
Assembly, they have many, many different chaperones along 
accompanying them. But I know from experience that the 
students in Milestone High School are so well mannered and so 
well behaved that they don’t need a number of chaperones. And 
as I say, I know that from experience. 
 
I also want to just make special recognition of Mr. Hawkins 
who does just an absolutely great job at the school. He’s been 
involved and knows as much about the parliamentary system, 
the British parliamentary system, as I think probably any of us 
in here do. He’s had the Speaker come to the school and do a 
mock parliamentary session, as well as he’s been part of the 
Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute that we are having at our 
Assembly. They’re not in the gallery today, but they were here 
yesterday and will be here again tomorrow. So he’s taken part 
in that and has a great understanding which I think only benefits 
all the students, especially in the Milestone High School. 
 
So I look forward to meeting them after question period and 
answering any of the questions that they may have. I’d like all 
members to join me in welcoming them here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Spring Fling Fundraising Event 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, a number of my 
colleagues and I attended Spring Fling, the Regina and District 
Association for Community Living annual fundraising event. 
 
Since 1952 the association has been working hard on behalf of 
children with intellectual disabilities and their families, 
providing information and support and advocating for positive 
and meaningful change. The focus of the Association for 
Community Living is making the dreams of people with 
intellectual disabilities come true and ensuring that they can 
participate fully as valued citizens in the community. 

Funds raised on Saturday will go to supporting ongoing services 
and programs such as Best Buddies, a program that matches 
university students with adults who have a disability and creates 
opportunities for friendships to grow; and the Planned Lifetime 
Advocacy Network that assists families to plan a safe and 
secure future for their relative with a disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the sponsors, volunteers, and 
organizing committee of 2007 Spring Fling for a wonderful 
evening. The Danakas family was honoured as founding 
sponsor of Spring Fling and I want to recognize Mia, John, 
Voula, and the late Peter Danakas today. And I also want to 
acknowledge everyone associated with the Regina and District 
Association of Community Living for their ongoing work and 
dedication on behalf of those with intellectual disabilities. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Celebrates 100 Years 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 
April 3, marks the 100th anniversary since the passage by this 
legislature of the university Act and the 100th birthday of the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The university Act itself made no mention of a location for the 
new university, and much debate about where to put it ensued. 
Although Regina promised 1,000 acres of free land for the 
university, it was ultimately the city of Saskatoon that was 
awarded the facility on April 7, 1909. 
 
According to Saskatchewan historian Bill Waiser, one 
Saskatoon MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] sent a 
telegram home that day that said quote, “Everything OK. Got 
university, will be home tomorrow.” One foreign visitor to the 
city in 1913 said this about the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], quote: 
 

The University of Saskatchewan is the most startling thing 
I saw in the West . . . It is a massive group of fine 
buildings so obviously built to last for five or six hundred 
years. 

 
Over the last 100 years the U of S has become one of the 
nation’s finest post-secondary institutions. Under the leadership 
of President Peter MacKinnon, the university is keenly aware of 
its place in today’s global economy. It looks to the future and 
has embraced innovation. 
 
This special day is being commemorated with celebrations on 
campus and across the province, the launch of a new postage 
stamp by Canada Post featuring the College Building and the 
release of the U of S centennial lily. I would like to ask all 
members of this Assembly to join me in wishing the U of S 
happy 100th anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

Head-Milestone. 
 

Supporting Parkinson’s Disease Research 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is 
Parkinson’s Awareness Month and I would like to make this 
Assembly aware of an event that took place in the Queen City 
over the weekend. 
 
The Saskatchewan Parkinson’s Foundation 14th annual Curling 
Classic for Parkinson’s. The curling took place at the Callie 
curling club, and there were also live and silent auctions on 
Friday night at the Victoria Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Phyllis Fox, mother of Canadian actor, Michael J. 
Fox, came to Regina to help out the cause and participate in the 
celebrity curling match that included members of the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders, Regina mayor, Pat Fiacco, and 
several members of the city’s media. 
 
All the money raised from this weekend’s events goes towards 
the research of two University of Saskatchewan neurologists, 
Dr. Ali Rajput and his son, Dr. Alex Rajput, who are world 
renowned for their research in Parkinson’s disease. Mr. 
Speaker, the generosity of the people in Regina and area, 
combined with the hard work and dedication of countless 
volunteers, meant that a total of $63,000 were raised for 
research into Parkinson’s disease. 
 
I would like to make particular mention of the Victoria Club 
here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, with their generosity towards this 
worthwhile event. In addition to putting on what I heard was a 
spectacular event on Friday, the Victoria Club also donated 
$10,000 to the cause. I would like to ask all members of this 
Assembly to congratulate all that were involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Youth Salute 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For well over a 
decade Larry Raynard and Joanna Kirsch of Focus 91 
Photography here in Regina have been spearheading Youth 
Salute, a community project to recognize some of Regina’s 
finest high school students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Youth Salute 2007 showcases 75 very talented 
high school students — five from each public and Catholic high 
school as well as Luther — who give back to their community 
through their schools, churches, musical associations, sports 
associations, and community organizations. 
 
An exhibition consisting of portraits and biographies of each of 
the students being recognized is currently underway at the 
Regina City Hall and in coming months will move to other 
locations throughout the city. 
 
I had the privilege of attending the Youth Salute 2007 awards 
ceremony a few days ago. Mr. Speaker, the five students from 
Scott Collegiate in the fair constituency of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre constituency who are being recognized by 
the Youth Salute project are Kevin Bear, Jane Kard, Cassidy 
McFadzean, Keith Nay, and Tasha Pelletier. I want to 
congratulate each of them. This honour speaks directly to their 
personal integrity and their outstanding commitment and 
contribution to the community, as it does for each of the 75 
individuals that were selected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank this year’s sponsors of Youth 
Salute 2007, and in particular I want to acknowledge Larry 
Raynard and Joanna Kirsch for excellent ongoing commitment 
to this very tremendous program. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Oungre Memorial Park Fundraiser 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday, the member from Weyburn Big-Muddy, along with my 
husband and I, attended the 16th annual Dr. Brown fundraising 
supper and auction held in the Communiplex at Oungre 
Memorial Park. Mr. Speaker, after a delicious steak supper, the 
bidding got underway on around 100 items in the live auction. 
There was also approximately 100 items in the silent auction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this park has experienced many trials in the past, 
but 18 months ago the community feared the park would close 
because of increased power and energy costs. But of course the 
community was not about to let that happen and came up with 
innovative ways to keep their park open, and they continue to 
work tirelessly in that regard. 
 
Hats off to the community of Oungre and surrounding areas, to 
the planners, the volunteers, donors, buyers, and everyone who 
attended this event. Special thanks to Kevin Lackey of Lackey 
Auction in Weyburn who, for the 16th year, donated his auction 
services. Of course Kevin is well known in the Estevan and 
Weyburn area for his generosity at charitable and community 
events such as this. Kevin also has the knack of being so 
entertaining while auctioning that one loses track of how much 
money you’re actually spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members to visit Oungre 
Park. It is the hub of that community, and I ask all members to 
join me in saluting the community of Oungre on a job well 
done. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Opinions on Equalization 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
what Prince Albert’s Member of Parliament had to say about 
the topic of equalization when he was in opposition, quote, 
“The equalization formula that we have has totally shafted the 
province of Saskatchewan from every standpoint.” And then he 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

went on to say quote, “The Conservative Party has clear-cut 
policies on this matter.” 
 
Well the Conservatives certainly do have clear-cut policies. 
They clear cut literacy programs. They clear cut Kyoto. They 
clear cut child care, and they clear cut equalization. Brian 
Fitzpatrick may have believed what he had said at the time, Mr. 
Speaker. After all he went as far as to write a letter to Stephen 
Harper, basically begging the Prime Minister to keep his 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan and to our Premier. We 
all know how that turned out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To quote a popular radio talk show host in this province, quote, 
“Turns out a Conservative campaign promise and a quarter will 
buy you a phone call.” 
 
And what about the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker? Their failure to 
even allow us to debate a motion calling for Saskatchewan’s 
federal Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] to vote 
against the federal budget clearly shows them once again siding 
with their federal cousins against the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination for Regina Dewdney 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, well, well, more good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the pleasure of 
attending the Saskatchewan Party nomination for the next 
member of the Legislative Assembly for the Regina Dewdney 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — After a hard fought but collegial race between 
three successful and well-established Regina professionals, the 
day was won by Mr. Don Saelhof, a professional and lifetime 
Saskatchewan resident with a track record of innovation and 
positive change in Regina and the province. 
 
Don’s background includes the following and much more: 
founder and principal of Aurora Consulting Inc., a business 
services provider to Regina area businesses since 1992; 
chairman and CEO [chief executive officer] of BTC bioenergy 
inc.; a member of the University of Regina senate since 2004; 
member and executive in various industry and trade 
organizations including Western Canadian Agribition, Crop 
Protection Institute of Canada, and the Saskatchewan biodiesel 
task force; provincial director, Regina branch president, and 
over 30 years as a member and director of his professional 
association, the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don’s skill set and work ethic will be a welcome 
relief for the good voters of Regina Dewdney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the numerous harassment 
complaints against Murdoch Carriere were never investigated 
until 2002. We’ve asked this NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government on numerous occasions, how long were they 
sweeping this under the rug? How many previous harassment 
complaints were never investigated? And when was the first 
sexual harassment complaint against Murdoch Carriere brought 
forward? Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally answer that 
question today? When did the women start making sexual 
harassment complaints against Murdoch Carriere, and how 
many complaints were brought forward that were never 
investigated? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that a formal 
complaint was lodged by the women in September 2002. The 
way process works is Mr. Carriere was removed from the 
workplace. He was placed on a leave of absence with pay. On 
February 12, after the deputy minister dealt with Mr. Carriere in 
terms of discipline, he was demoted three pay grades. He was 
transferred to Regina. And his income was red circled and he 
was placed on a leave without pay for three months. That was 
the discipline that was meted out to Mr. Carriere. As you know, 
the legislature became aware of the situation on I believe it was 
April 1, and on April 2, 2003, Mr. Carriere was dismissed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
received a signed statement from a woman who used to work in 
the Environment department in Regina. She reports a number of 
incidents involving Murdoch Carriere. The first one happened 
in 1994. She said she was called into a meeting with Murdoch 
Carriere and then she said, and I quote: 
 

Not having any reason to distrust Mr. Carriere, I 
concurred. Mr. Carriere was hiding behind the door and he 
jumped out and grabbed me and kissed me directly on the 
mouth. When he removed his lips, he said “just wanted 
you to know what brown lips taste like.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, this incident way back in 1994 was reported to 
Murdoch Carriere’s superiors. Why was it ignored by your 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve clearly indicated to 
the member opposite that there is a process for people to go 
through when they believe that they are facing harassment in 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

the workplace. And they are protected under the occupational 
health and safety legislation. 
 
I will say to the member opposite that we have clearly changed 
the process for situations such as this. We have clarified that 
there is absolutely zero tolerance for any type of workplace 
harassment. We’ve said in serious cases of harassment the 
permanent head must consult a panel of peers and provide a 
comprehensive written report. 
 
The Public Service Commission now keeps records to ensure 
that harassment cases with similar circumstances will result in 
similar discipline. Periodic reports are provided to the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission and in the most 
serious cases, Mr. Speaker, people will be terminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this woman’s statement goes on 
to detail how the incident was handled by this government. She 
says, and I quote: 
 

Later that day, I went in to our Deputy Minister and 
informed him of the situation. [And] the . . . reaction was 
“oh, that’s just Murdoch.” When I had time to think about 
the situation more thoroughly and to recover from the 
shock . . . I told my supervisor. [And] his reaction was 
basically the same — [oh] “. . . that’s just Murdoch.” 
 
Needless to say, my anger, my confusion and my fears 
were not taken seriously. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP government claim to have a 
zero tolerance harassment policy when serious allegations like 
that are just laughed off? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member may 
know, the procedures for harassment have been clarified 
significantly since April 2003. I have a copy of the harassment 
resource manual that employers or managers are to certainly 
follow. It’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, I think the member is 
talking about some time ago. I don’t condone any kind of 
behaviour such as that that is reflected in the member’s 
question, but I will say to the member opposite that we have a 
significant change in the procedure that is used by the public 
service. I will also say that a lot of work has been done with 
employees throughout the public service so that they understand 
the process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this woman reported a very 
serious allegation of sexual harassment to her supervisor and to 
her deputy minister. She told them that Murdoch Carriere called 

her into a private office. He jumped out from behind a door and 
he kissed her on the mouth. Didn’t her supervisor and her 
deputy minister, even in those days, have an obligation to 
immediately investigate this obligation? Why wasn’t it done 
even then? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member will know — and I 
have said this in the legislature before — it was not until 1993 
that this Legislative Assembly introduced an amendment to the 
occupational health and safety legislation where harassment 
was an issue under the occupational health and safety 
legislation. The member will know that the member from 
Cannington moved an amendment to delete harassment as a 
provision. And then the member will know that their 
predecessors voted against changes to the occupational health 
and safety legislation. Up until 1993, Mr. Speaker, workers had 
no rights when it came to harassment in the workplace, but 
we’ve come a long way since 1993. It is now 2007. Four years 
ago this policy was changed to significantly improve the 
process under which the public service must adhere to when it 
comes to workplace harassment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, by doing nothing the government 
was approving of Murdoch Carriere’s behaviour and putting 
other women in jeopardy. Mr. Speaker, this woman reports of a 
second incident in 1997. In 1997, Mr. Speaker, she says that 
following a meeting, and I’m quoting now: 
 

I proceeded to the cloakroom which is part of the meeting 
room on the second floor. Unknown to me, Murdoch 
remained behind. He grabbed me around the chest and I 
pushed him [I pushed him] away. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this incident happened in 1997, and it was also 
reported to the woman’s superiors. Why was that incident never 
investigated? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, and of 
course I will say this very clearly, that we are absolutely on 
record as being opposed to any kind of workplace harassment 
that takes place. Whether it is personal harassment, whether it is 
harassment based on the way a person looks, any kind of 
harassment is unacceptable in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have come some distance in this 
province when it comes to harassment in the workplace, both in 
the private sector and the public sector. Workers simply don’t 
have to put up with this. They are protected in occupational 
health and safety legislation. They are protected by the Human 
Rights Code. And, Mr. Speaker, every manager that works in 
the public service now knows what the procedure is when it 
comes to workplace harassment, and they must act, Mr. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Speaker. And if they don’t act, there are serious consequences. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, her statement goes on to say, and 
I quote: 
 

I reported this incident to my supervisor. I know to this 
day that no conversation ever took place between Murdoch 
and my supervisor. I became very vocal in the Deputy 
Minister’s office but no one would admit that what 
Carriere did was wrong. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP claims to have a zero tolerance 
harassment policy. But this woman reported two allegations of 
sexual harassment to her supervisor in 1994 and in 1997, and 
both of them were ignored. What is the NDP government doing 
today to find out why these serious allegations were ignored 
even then? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have said to the 
member opposite that it is unacceptable in this province that 
workplace harassment allegations go unanswered by managers 
that work in the public service. It’s unacceptable. 
 
Now we have, I believe, significantly amended the policy. 
There is zero tolerance for harassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we need to look at, certainly 
in occupational health and safety legislation, is a better 
definition of harassment. And I guess I would ask the members 
opposite: if this legislature was to include an amendment to the 
occupational health and safety legislation in this session of the 
legislature, where we cover the waterfront when it comes to 
harassment, I’d be interested in knowing whether the members 
opposite would support those amendments to further protect 
workers in the workplace all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know what women in 
Saskatchewan know right now. They know there’s something 
seriously wrong when for years and years women were ignored. 
In the meantime their harasser got $275,000 as a payoff from 
the NDP government. 
 
The supervisors who ignored this situation and the serious 
allegations have never faced any type of disciplinary action. 
What is the government doing to investigate why these 
allegations were ignored for so many years, or are they just 
going to sweep it under the rug again? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the 
member that she raises some very specific concerns. I would be 
interested in having the member share with me the detail around 
this. And we can look into this, Mr. Speaker. I can give that 
assurance to the member. 
 
I would say this: that we have settled with Mr. Carriere in terms 
of past issues around his firing. I would want to be very careful 
as I pursue this not to create other issues that may lead to 
further statements of claim from Mr. Carriere. 
 
So I will undertake to the member, if she can share the 
information with me, to examine this situation very carefully to 
see whether there needs to be some action taken inside the 
Department of the Environment. And I guess that’s all I can say 
to the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read another part of the 
woman’s statement. I quote: 
 

I wish to take this opportunity to apologize to the victims 
involved at this stage. Because of my fear and weakness, I 
was unable to pursue this further. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want the people to imagine this. The woman 
who was herself a victim of harassment feels she has to 
apologize to other victims. She feels guilty because she couldn’t 
do more to stop the harassment before other women were 
victimized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she went to her ADM [assistant deputy minister]; 
she went to her deputy minister — and she was ignored. What 
is the NDP government doing to find out how Murdoch 
Carriere’s harassment could go on for so long and hurt so many 
women? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear from what 
the member has provided us in terms of this legislature that this 
woman whose letter she reads feels guilty that she didn’t pursue 
this. And, Mr. Speaker, no one should have to feel guilty about 
working in a workplace where there is behaviour that is totally 
unacceptable. If what the woman says is accurate, Mr. Speaker, 
I will say this. I made a commitment to the member opposite. I 
will look into this. 
 
But I will say this to the member. There may be a need to 
significantly improve occupational health and safety legislation 
when it comes to the definition of harassment in order that all 
workers in this province are protected, very tightly protected. 
And, I guess, I would ask the member opposite, given that we 
have this new process for legislation, would she agree to some 
amendments to the legislation that would significantly improve 
workers’ rights in this province? 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what women in this province — 
in fact, everybody in this province — needs to know is not what 
the minister knows. We want to know how much she cares 
about it. That’s what we need to know. 
 

Certain individuals [and I’m quoting again] may feel that I 
have nothing to complain about . . . But the fact that this 
individual felt he could invade my person . . . in this way 
and get away with it . . . is beyond my comprehension. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that speaks volumes about how a woman feels 
when she’s a victim of sexual harassment. It’s an invasion and 
it’s a violation and you never get over it. And what’s worse, this 
woman and many others were violated again when their 
allegations were ignored and when this NDP government paid 
their harasser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ignoring harassment complaints is in itself a 
violation of the harassment policy. What is the NDP 
government doing to find out why the incidents were ignored 
for so long? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have said to the member 
I’m going to look into this. But I will say this, that we need to 
seriously consider as members of this legislature amendments 
to the occupational health and safety legislation in order to 
protect workers against what I call personal harassment. 
 
And I ask the member opposite — and I think it’s a very good 
question, given the process in terms of legislature — if we were 
to introduce some amendments to the legislation, could we get 
them through in this session of the legislature to give workers 
further protection? I think that’s an important question for all 
members of the legislature because I think we may need to do 
that in order to ensure that workers are really protected against 
workplaces where harassment is taking place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, here’s how the woman concludes 
her letter: 
 

I know what the victims are feeling. I know the character 
of this individual. I know that what he did is wrong, but 
most of all . . . I know that Justice will be served in the 
end. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what she wrote in February 2003. Today she 
does not feel that justice was served in the end. The bad guy 
won. Mr. Speaker, the man who was fired for harassment and 
convicted of assault got $275,000 from the government. And 
nothing has been done about the people who looked the other 

way and said, that’s just Murdoch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister really believe that this situation 
was handled correctly by her government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I will say again, as soon 
as it became clear the nature of the allegations, the minister, the 
former minister of the Public Service Commission 
recommended to the Premier that he be fired. And as you know, 
that occurred. He was fired. 
 
Now he was, I will say this, and I think we have said this 
numerous times, that there were a number of issues around his 
firing because proper process was not used. Now I think it’s an 
important question for the members opposite. I think that we 
can significantly improve our occupational health and safety 
legislation when it comes to harassment. 
 
Now we’ve got a new process where we introduce the Bills in 
the fall and we undertake to complete the amendments in the 
spring. Will the members opposite support significant 
improvements to the occupational health and safety legislation 
that will further protect people against personal harassment? 
Because that’s very important to workers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about bringing 
forward new legislation and bringing forward amendments and 
all the things that she might do for people in the future. I don’t 
think any woman, any person in this province can feel confident 
until they can look back and say the government was willing to 
deal with the situation that was the problem in the first place. 
 
So let’s hear how this member, how this government is going to 
deal with what did happen. What was the process and how did 
they deal with the people that ignored that situation for so many 
years? Then we can talk about what can happen tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I guess I’m not clear what the 
member’s position is, Mr. Speaker. But I will say this, that 
workers in this province since 1993 have had the right to be 
protected from harassment in the workplace. 
 
Now harassment is defined. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we 
need to significantly improve the definition of what constitutes 
harassment in the workplace, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that 
there needs to be some amendments to the occupational health 
and safety legislation to protect workers not only in the public 
sector but also in the private sector as well because workplace 
harassment takes place everywhere, both in the private and the 
public sector, Mr. Speaker, and workers need to be protected. 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

So I ask the member again; it’s an important question: if we 
introduce amendments to the occupational health and safety 
legislation during this session of the legislature, will those 
members support it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
past few days we now have pretty compelling evidence that 
serious harassment complaints were ignored dating all the way 
back to 1994. 
 
Saskatchewan people are wondering, how could this happen? 
How can we ensure that it never happens again? This is why the 
Saskatchewan Party has been calling on the government to 
allow an investigation by an all-party committee. The Public 
Service Commission falls under the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee. If the NDP is truly serious about stopping 
harassment in the workplace, will it allow an investigation by 
the Crown and Central Agencies Committee to find out why 
these allegations were ignored for so many years, and to make 
sure it never happens again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased to see 
the deputy leader for the Saskatchewan Party is on his feet 
today because I think that we have on many occasions during 
this session of the legislature responded to the issues that have 
been identified by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that we need to significantly improve 
our occupational health and safety legislation in terms of how 
we define harassment and the procedures that are used to 
investigate harassment so that all workers have protection in the 
province. We have, we have protection, Mr. Speaker, but I 
believe it could be strengthened. And I guess I ask the members 
opposite once again, given it’s the deputy leader, will the 
opposition support amendments to the occupational health and 
safety legislation that would significantly improve workers’ 
rights under the anti-harassment provisions of that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
hear from the minister that in 1993, the legislation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
legislation introduced in 1993. We have now heard from this 
lady that two incidents — 1994 and 1997 — went ignored. 
They were ignored by the NDP. There were serious harassment 

complaints against Murdoch Carriere and those harassment 
complaints were ignored. The question is, why did that happen, 
Mr. Speaker? Did that put other women in jeopardy because 
this NDP government chose to ignore those complaints with 
legislation that was already in place? 
 
They agreed to pay Murdoch Carriere $275,000 for harassment. 
He was convicted of assault, Mr. Speaker. That’s the part that 
this government does not understand. Those are some of the 
questions that need to be answered. 
 
In 1998 the NDP allowed that kind of inquiry to take place into 
the Channel Lake scandal. Why won’t the NDP allow a similar 
investigation into the Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in 1993 we were the first 
jurisdiction in North America that included harassment as a 
protected right under the occupational health and safety 
legislation — the first jurisdiction in Canada. Mr. Speaker, we 
are very proud of that. 
 
Now I will say to the members opposite, I believe that we can 
significantly improve the legislation certainly by changes to the 
definition of how harassment is defined and some of the 
processes around harassment provisions in the legislation. What 
I ask the member: it is now 14 years later. They voted against it 
in 1993. It’s now 14 years later. If we introduce an amendment 
that significantly strengthens the legislation and strengthens 
workers’ rights, will they vote for it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here’s 
really what happened. This government touts its legislation that 
they put in place in 2003. It took 10 years . . . From 1993, sorry. 
It took 10 years before a group of women, nine women had to 
band together to put forward their concerns. And it wasn’t until 
the Gillies report was leaked that this government finally 
recognized that there was a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a big difference between the NDP and the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I want to tell you that the 
Saskatchewan Party would not have paid Murdoch Carriere 
$275,000. We would have fought Murdoch Carriere in court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Like it was suggested by the Minister of 
Industry, we would have been defending the women against 
Murdoch Carriere. And the Saskatchewan Party would allow a 
complete review of this entire process instead of writing a big 
fat cheque, which is the NDP’s approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the NDP allow an all-party committee 
to review the Murdoch Carriere scandal? What are you hiding? 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order please. Order 
please. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if we had followed their advice, their counsel in 1993, 
workers would have no protection against harassment. And in 
fact, these women could have been fired, Mr. Speaker, if we 
followed their advice. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have said very clearly that it is quite clear 
that we need to strengthen the occupational health and safety 
legislation when it comes to harassment provisions. These 
members opposite voted against it in 1993, and in fact moved to 
delete harassment under the legislation, the member from 
Cannington. 
 
I guess I ask the members again, if we are to introduce some 
significant amendments to the legislation that further protect 
workers and further define the definition, will those members 
opposite vote in favour of the legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
[14:30] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, 
The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No 60, The Revenue and Financial Services 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and read for a the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I hereby inform the 

Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 
received from the Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of the 
election and return of Nancy Heppner, the member for 
Martensville and as a member now for Martensville. I hereby 
table the return of the writ. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 922 to 963 
inclusive. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 992 through to 963 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today in support of The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 
2007 and will formally move second reading of this legislation 
at the end of my remarks. 
 
This amendment — based on an idea from the Nova Scotia 
legislature, brought to Saskatchewan by the committee to 
support Canadian Forces reservists, the Canadian Forces liaison 
council, and the Royal Canadian Legion — will ensure that 
Saskatchewan workers who volunteer with the Canadian Forces 
reserves will be able to fulfill their reserve commitment without 
fear of losing their job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is renowned for its volunteerism. 
The strength, commitment, and number of our volunteers are 
one of the things that set this province apart from the rest of 
Canada. This NDP government knows the important role 
volunteers play in making our province the best place in Canada 
to live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Because we value the service of volunteers to our communities, 
the service that the members of the Canadian Forces reserves 
provide to our country, we are amending the labour standards of 
this province to provide job protection for Saskatchewan 
reservists who take a leave from their place of employment in 
order to fulfill their responsibilities with the Canadian Forces. 
 
Now when a citizen of this province volunteers to work on 
behalf of his or her fellow Canadians to ensure peace and 
security abroad, they deserve to know that their jobs are waiting 
for them when they get home. When these Saskatchewan 
reservists are called to fight floods, fires, or other disasters in 
Canada, we have a responsibility to ensure that they can do so 
without the fear of losing their job. 
 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this job protection will create more than just 
peace of mind. As Sergeant Tim Huckle and Sergeant James 
Richards of the committee to support Canadian Forces 
reservists point out in a letter sent to me in November, they say, 
and I quote: 
 

Many reservists are young and in the prime earning years. 
Employment protection legislation may encourage young 
reservists to stay in Saskatchewan and to return to 
Saskatchewan following a military deployment. Such 
legislation may also attract other reservists to our province 
for military as well as civilian employment. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t have said it better myself. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the right thing to do. And it’s one of the many 
things that this Premier and this NDP government are doing to 
make life better for reservists, their families, and all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
In addition to introducing this amendment, I’m also pleased to 
announce that we will be consulting to find similar protections 
that may be appropriate for reservists who are post-secondary 
students. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the idea of job protection for reservists was 
first raised by the NDP in Nova Scotia. It is an area though 
where all political parties across Canada are finding common 
ground, and it is my pleasure to give second reading to an 
amendment that I know all members of this Assembly will 
support. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 
54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 54, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to stand today and talk about Bill No. 54. 
 
It’s ironic that the minister would get up and talk about how it 
was an NDP idea and how it was their idea because I think, if 
you look at the evolution of what’s happened in this province, it 
was some of the reservists that actually approached us and 
talked about this particular Bill. And we had worked on a 
private member’s Bill to introduce it into legislation. Then all of 
a sudden, the light comes on with members opposite, and they 
say we had better do this because this sounds like it’s the right 
thing to do. 
 
So now we have a government across the way that is trying to 
take credit for it where — believe it or not — the credit actually 
lies with the people that are sitting up in the gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the reservists, the Legion, former reservists, 
former members of the military, people that are very involved 
with the military . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the member to continue 

with his remarks but to not involve anybody in the gallery into 
the debate. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is people like 
the reservists. It is people like former members. It is people like 
members that are very concerned about the military. It is people 
like the Legion folks that are very, very concerned about our 
young people that are reservists and volunteer for duty and are 
unable to retain their position if they volunteer and are away for 
a period of time. 
 
This Bill — as again I will reiterate one more time — that the 
NDP wish to take credit for it, they should take no credit at all. 
Let’s put the credit where the credit is due, is with those people 
that actively come forward with the idea that this should happen 
in this province. 
 
I very much agree with the Bill and the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. We look at job protection. We have political people 
that have job protection. Members of this Assembly have job 
protection when they’re elected. Some of them when they get 
unelected, they will go back or have the opportunity to go back 
to their former positions, some I hope sooner than others but . . . 
And now what we’ve done, we’ve got men and women, men 
and women that volunteer for the Canadian forces, reservists, or 
actually in any capacity, and we are chastising them for their 
regular job. 
 
So why would we not offer job protection for these men and 
women? This has been done in other jurisdictions and other 
countries. Mr. Speaker, it’s only fair that we do it here. Now it 
seems ironic again, when I relate back to the political people 
that can have job protection, and yet people that put their life on 
the line for protection of our rights and freedoms, that we would 
not offer them the same degree of job protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House fully, fully support 
the direction that this legislation is intended to go. I guess the 
only problem that I have with this so far is much of the meat of 
the Bill is prescribed in regulation and that hasn’t been 
published yet. Only time will tell when the regulations come out 
if it will be strong enough to ensure, to ensure that a reservist 
who volunteers to serve in our Armed Forces, through training 
or a tour of duty, will have job protection. And I want to repeat 
that. This will come in in regulation, and the regulations must 
be strong enough to ensure that these members will have job 
protection. 
 
And it’s funny, the member for Moose Jaw North is laughing 
about it. But it’s Moose Jaw that has a strong military presence, 
and he has a tendency to laugh about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know businesses, I know businesses have a 
propensity to allow members of the reserve to take leave, take a 
leave of absence. However, however this does not guarantee 
them job protection. Most of the business are very, very pleased 
to let reservists go on a period of leave or extended leave 
without any legislation or regulation and allow them to come 
back to work. But legislation that enables them to guarantee job 
protection and guarantee seniority is very, very important, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think who really deserves the credit, I’ll say again, is the 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

people that were involved — the reservists, the Legion people, 
the retired reservists, the people that have been very much 
involved with the military over the years — and I would like to 
commend them for the introduction of this Bill. We’ll have to 
wait now to see what the regulation does provide. And if the 
regulation provides enough meat, substantive meat in regulation 
to allow for job protection, we’ll be very, very pleased with this 
Bill. 
 
So that being said, Mr. Speaker, one more time, I’d like to 
commend the individuals that were involved in putting this 
forward. And because there are people that wish to speak to 
this, and there’s still some input coming from other 
jurisdictions, I think we should adjourn debate on this Bill at 
this time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. It has been moved by the 
member for Wood River . . . Order please, members. Order. It 
has been moved by the member for Wood River that debate on 
second reading of Bill No. 54 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. At the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving 
second reading of Bill No. 56, The Municipalities Amendment 
Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Municipalities Act came into force on 
January 1, 2006. It provides municipalities with the broad 
powers necessary to deal with matters that are of a local nature. 
What we have heard from the municipal sector is that they want 
more flexibility, greater autonomy, and less provincial 
management in a number of areas. I believe this Act moves us 
in this direction. 
 
The Municipalities Act is also helping to modernize the 
relationship between the province and municipalities and, I 
believe, provide citizens with better, more accountable local 
government. As such, we continue to work with municipal 
leaders to improve this legislation, and the amendments 
presented today are a result of ongoing consultation with the 
municipalities since the Act has been implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will see similarities between the amendments 
to this Act and those that we introduced in the fall of 2006 to 
The Cities Act. Today’s amendments ensure that we treat 
matters of a comparable nature in a consistent and fair way 
among the municipalities and cities. 
 
This Bill addresses some significant issues. It responds directly 
to requests from the municipal sector and the municipal liability 
review committee to update and enhance the statutory liability 
provisions in the Act, and to keep these provisions consistent 

with The Cities Act. 
 
It introduces policy amendments that municipalities and 
stakeholders have requested to improve the effectiveness of the 
Act. It clarifies the wording of certain provisions identified by 
the cities, municipalities, Government Relations, and 
Corrections and Public Safety. And it makes clear that 
municipalities may make reports to the public regarding theft or 
fraudulent diversion of municipal funds and property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments I believe will serve to 
strengthen the legislation. 
 
I want to take just a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to highlight the 
more significant changes that the Bill proposes. Of particular 
note are the amendments related to municipal liability. In recent 
years, Saskatchewan’s municipalities have brought forward 
issues with respect to the scope and nature of the liability 
protection that is afforded to municipal corporations under 
Saskatchewan’s municipal statutes. 
 
[14:45] 
 
To look at these matters further, a working group of officials 
from Government Relations, Saskatchewan Justice, 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, and the city solicitors from 
the four major cities began work on the review in late 2004 and 
continued through the first six months of 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say this Bill addresses all of the 
review committee’s recommendations. These amendments will 
provide municipalities with a level of protection from liability 
that is equivalent to or consistent with the protection afforded to 
the provincial government and its Crown corporations and to 
municipalities in other provinces and territories across Canada. 
The provisions will also address a number of long-standing 
issues and provide support for other provincial and department 
initiatives directed towards improving the financial 
sustainability and quality of service in our community. The 
same amendments have been proposed for The Cities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the members of the review 
committee for its excellent work and diligence that have led to 
these provisions in the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also seeks to address other issues that 
municipalities have encountered as they have implemented the 
Act. An example includes provisions that currently allow a 
council to reimburse either a councillor or a mayor for legal or 
other costs if a citizen is unsuccessful with an application to 
have him or her disqualified. Mr. Speaker, all of the 
stakeholders agree that the existing provision is unclear. If an 
elected person can be reimbursed, then why not a citizen? That 
is a matter of fairness. The proposed amendment would extend 
council’s discretionary authority to also reimburse the legal or 
other costs of a citizen where there is a successful application to 
have a member of council disqualified for reasons approved by 
the courts. This amendment is proposed both for The Cities Act 
and The Municipalities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some might think that this amendment could 
increase the number of trivial actions against council members. 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

However I would like to assure that the grounds for 
disqualification are specifically set out in the Act and are 
limited to significant issues like becoming ineligible to hold 
office for being convicted of a criminal offence. A judge would 
have to determine that grounds exist in the first place for 
disqualification to occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe this amendment makes government 
more accountable and supports the ability of electors to bring 
forward legitimate actions and allows council the discretion to 
recognize those individuals. 
 
In another area we have made amendments, Mr. Speaker, that 
allows municipalities to use tax increment financing. This tool 
will allow municipalities to finance public improvements in a 
designated area by the increase in property taxes generated by 
private development. Using this tool may help to encourage 
development in areas where development might not otherwise 
occur. Mr. Speaker, while The Municipalities Act already 
provides flexibility and autonomy, its taxation provisions were 
largely carried forward from previous legislation. We believe 
that in areas such as assessment, taxation, and local election 
procedures, legislation needs to be as clear and specific as 
possible. 
 
This new authority will help municipalities with another way to 
address their infrastructure challenges. In this instance we have 
included regulation-making authority because tax increment 
financing is new to Saskatchewan and refinements may be 
necessary in the context of practical application. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already stated, we recognize that 
municipalities or municipal governments are often in the best 
position to make local decisions for the benefit of their 
residents. In support of this, some of the amendments proposed 
provide greater flexibility for municipalities to respond to 
existing and future needs of their communities in innovative 
ways. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes some minor 
housekeeping amendments that are intended to clarify the intent 
of the legislation or improve the wording or practical 
application of the various provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this package of amendments was developed in 
consultation with a working group of municipal representatives. 
I would like to take this opportunity again to thank the 
municipal representatives who provided their professional 
experience, advice, and time to help refine the legislation that 
will help improve Saskatchewan people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the important place 
the municipalities have in our province’s future and we want to 
continue working with municipal leaders to build a quality of 
life we desire, and provide a future for our working families and 
young people. Today’s amended Act is just one step in this 
direction. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 56, The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 56, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise this afternoon and speak briefly on Bill No. 56, An 
Act to amend The Municipalities Act for our consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister acknowledged and thanked in 
particular the members of the municipal authorities who 
participated with the government in the drafting of this 
legislation. And I would like to join my voice in thanking those 
individuals as well. Certainly on an ongoing basis it’s very 
important for our legislature to make sure that we are keeping 
our legislation up to date and meeting the needs of those 
constituent agencies that serve so tremendous and important a 
critical purpose in our province — and municipal authorities are 
certainly one of those institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note in the number of pages of this Act or this 
amendment that it is designed to clarify a broad number of areas 
that the minister outlined and to make sure that The 
Municipalities Act appropriately addresses the needs and 
concerns of municipal authorities across this province. 
 
Many of these amendments deal with the Municipal Board, 
which is an oversight body that is important in the way our 
government functions in this province. And it makes a number 
of changes that will clarify these relationships and clarifies the 
responsibilities and duties of members on these boards and 
municipal governments and their relationship with citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this would seem to be rather housekeeping 
in nature, it I think is very important in that it addresses some 
long-standing issues. And I know that our critic in charge of 
municipal affairs is going to be very interested in having 
discussions with the municipal authorities to ensure that this 
legislation not only makes some changes, but actually meets the 
needs of municipal authorities in an appropriate way. 
 
And so in order to facilitate that to happen, Mr. Speaker, at this 
time I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 56 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate having the opportunity to speak to this Bill today, the 
Human Rights Code amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
this is very important. We’ve had a number of people that are 
getting close to the retirement age and getting to that point 
where mandatory retirement would affect them, but on the other 
hand have very much to offer to society and for that matter 
especially to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Remembering that we have a labour shortage in the mix right 
now and the experience and the knowledge that we would lose 
when people of that age would have to step out of the 
workforce and be replaced by someone with probably far less 
experience, I think would . . . By pushing this Bill through or 
passing this Bill, I think is a real plus, because in many cases, in 
fact in cases where people wish to carry on and could still 
supply that knowledge and expertise to the job that they’ve had, 
would be a very good plus for everyone concerned. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to people that are very concerned 
about what is being brought forth in this legislation and feel that 
we could pass this on to committee, and we’ll have some 
questions at that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 9, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 9, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 8 — The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to talk a bit about Bill No. 8, The 
Paramedics Act. A couple of the things that come to mind right 
off the forefront on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is in the 
minister’s remarks he talks about that it will regulate 
approximately 1,800 emergency medical service personnel in 
our province. And the idea of this Bill deals with self-regulation 
under the College of Paramedics. 
 
But it’s interesting to note that as of now, the numbers that I 
have, there’s only approximately 100 of them that are current 
members of the College of Paramedics. So we have something 
in the neighbourhood of 1,700 people that’s going to be 
regulated under this Act that are only 100 members of the 
organization right now. So I think that’s something that we’re 
probably going to have to look at, as to why there’s only so 
many under the College of Paramedics right now and 1,700 that 
are not. And why are they not and why are they going to be 
forced under this particular Act? 
 
The self-regulation is going to be the legal authority to register, 
license, and discipline emergency medical responders and all 
levels of emergency medical technicians. Mr. Speaker, that 
gives rise to a couple of issues. 
 
When we look at regulation related to EMTs [emergency 
medical technician], any emergency medical people, we’re 
always kind of looking at, what are the standards going to be? Is 
there going to be a two-standard system? Or is there is going to 
be one standard that everybody throughout the province is 
bound by? 
 
And the reason I raise that today, Mr. Speaker, is we look at 
what the firefighters were putting forward a few years ago, and 
the firefighters had talked about the same kind of regulatory 
discipline, where you could talk about needing four firefighters 
before you could engage in fighting a fire. In downtown urban 
centre, that’s very understandable. But I actually have a 
situation at home where in fact two people went out to fight a 
grass fire and an authority happened to be there — when I say 
an authority, there was somebody that was very familiar with 
the legislation — and they stopped them. They said, you cannot 
fight a fire until there’s four people here. 
 
So the fire went raging on while three people got into a little bit 
of verbal hassle as to why you need four people to fight a fire 
when the fire is burning on its own, going more and more wild. 
In the meantime some people come along and put the fire out, 
as the three individuals were talking about it. So the point being 
here is, there is regulation and legislation that is binding to 
people, but it doesn’t make common sense in a lot of cases. 
 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Now in this particular Bill, if you have regulation that dictates 
certain aspects of the EMT, what is it going to do when it 
comes to rural areas? I can use an example, Mr. Speaker, of 
ambulance services when we had direction and legislation that 
was . . . put the requirements in where you had to have so many 
X’s filled to operate an ambulance. And you have some small 
towns where you have volunteer ambulance drivers. You have 
volunteer people. They’ve had an EMT course, and all of the 
sudden comes regulation or legislation that dictates that you 
have to have more and more and more training. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So what do you do when you are a volunteer organization? How 
do you afford this? Do individuals pay out of their own pocket? 
Or in order to comply with the regulation in a rural setting their 
hands are tied. They are unable to in a lot of cases. So I was 
actually confronted with a situation similar and I would give 
this to the people of the province to think about. 
 
We were dealing with a box ambulance where you had to have 
a certified qualified driver that had X number of courses where 
he or she could be a certified ambulance driver. Whether it be 
downtown Toronto or downtown Regina or downtown 
Glentworth, it didn’t matter. And at the same time at the back of 
the ambulance you had to have two qualified EMTs — and I 
understand that; it’s nice in the regulation — qualified to, again 
all of the courses, everything that had to be done to follow the 
regulation and the legislation. 
 
The scenario I was confronted with, Mr. Speaker, is we had a 
young individual that was injured. We could not put that person 
in the back of a box ambulance with two people as EMTs 
because they did not have the X’s filled. And so by law they 
could not use that ambulance and the two EMTs to take that 
young person to a medical facility. Now this is the part that 
really gets ludicrous. What we did is we put a mattress in the 
back of a van and had somebody that had a first aid course take 
this individual to a medical facility. 
 
Now you think about that. Where is the patient better served? In 
the back of a box ambulance with people that have not quite 
finished all of the X’s? They’re trained as EMTs. We have a 
driver that wasn’t allowed to drive because he didn’t have that 
last little course that marked the X on his licence, but he could 
sure drive the van. He could get into that van and drive the van, 
because he was licensed to drive the van with a mattress in the 
back and somebody that had a first aid course. 
 
And that’s part of the issue that I am little bit concerned about 
within this Bill is how directive it’s going to be, how much of a 
disparity there’s going to be between the treatment of EMTs in 
remote settings vis-à-vis EMTs in the urban settings. 
 
And we know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that in the rural areas the 
ambulance service and the EMTs are very, very important. We 
know that 52 hospitals have been closed in rural areas — it 
might be up to 55 now — so ambulance service is more and 
more important to the rural areas because it’s a longer distance 
to get to a medical facility. And we know that over the roads 
that we travel on, it is that much more of an issue and a problem 
when it comes to ambulance drivers and even for patients in the 
back of some of these vehicles. 

So as hospitals close . . . And now we’re finding again recently 
and I think in most rural constituencies, we have hospitals, you 
attend a hospital and there’s a sign on the door that says 
whoops, sorry, closed. What do you do? So now you have to 
again get to another medical facility who knows where. And in 
order to do that if it’s a real issue, a medical issue, you may 
need an ambulance. And I just go back to the situation that I 
just talked about. Is it better to have a van or the back seat of a 
car for somebody to go to the next facility or is it better to have 
an ambulance and people with some training to do it? 
 
I’d like to just go a little farther on that also, is with the 
ambulance service. And we know the attempt before to try and 
put ambulance services under the auspices of . . . in other words 
take away the private ambulance operators. They’re trying to 
put it under the health districts and thus would have eliminated 
private ambulances in the province. Now where would that go? 
We’ve got some very good ambulance private operators but the 
distance they have to travel is horrendous in some cases. 
 
And also another factor in this particular whole scenario is the 
lack of cell coverage. How, if you’ve gone to a facility that has 
a big sign that says, closed, lack of nurses, lack of doctors, try 
your luck 75 miles down the road — recent cases were from my 
constituency to Swift Current — and how do you now . . . 
You’re there with your patient, if you wish, that you’ve come 
from a farm possibly. You’ve got them in the back of a car. And 
now you get to a hospital with a sign that says closed on it. How 
do you then get them to a facility that’s open? Or how do you 
know where a facility is open? 
 
And now with the cell coverage the way it is . . . And we’ve had 
a situation such as this in my area where the individual couldn’t 
even use a cellphone to call an ambulance and an EMT, and 
they had to drive the patient to Swift Current. Now that is 
absolutely uncalled for. 
 
We had a case just south of Moose Jaw in the hills where they 
couldn’t get a hold of an ambulance where the accident was, 
and somebody had to drive something like 3 miles to get a hold 
of 911 service so they could get an ambulance. And guess what 
happened? An ambulance was dispatched from Moose Jaw out 
to the scene. And Moose Jaw was . . . the ambulance from 
Moose Jaw was farther than the one from Assiniboia, but 
Assiniboia was a private ambulance company. And so the 
Moose Jaw ambulance headed out there and got lost. So there’s 
an awful lot of conditions that need to be met to make 
something like this paramedic Bill have more teeth to it. 
 
And the member wants to yip about 911 service. I’ll give an 
example, a couple of examples that happened. A 911 call came 
from my area and was actually at that time handled in Prince 
Albert, if you could believe. They dispatched an ambulance. 
They got lost. And by the time they arrived, the patient — some 
three hours later — the patient had passed away. And it’s 
somebody that I do know fairly well. So is that system 
working? No, it’s not. It needs improvements. And that’s why 
I’m a little concerned about this Bill. This is very tunnelled in 
some aspects, and I think it has to be looked at a little bit more. 
 
I have another case — and probably other people have 
situations very much the same — where an individual could not 
get a hold of an ambulance. And they drove the individual in a 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

car, and by the time they reached the health centre — well 
hospital I guess it was — in Gravelbourg, the individual had 
passed away. 
 
So these are some issues that I’m very concerned about in the 
rural areas. The direction within the Bill, where it’s going? Is 
there going to be some clauses in the Bill that allow for 
situations that would require the training to be at a minimum 
standard rather than at a high standard? Or at a standard that . . . 
These people are well trained, but at a standard that is maybe 
unattainable because of whatever reason. 
 
So I think a minimum standard needs to be met. There’s no 
doubt. But also there’s got to be a common sense factor. And 
unfortunately when it comes to that side of the House, common 
sense is something that’s really not in their phraseology. 
 
So we need to look at whether it’s going to be better to use the 
back seat of a car with a first aid person or use a proper facility 
with some EMT people. I think that’s something that has to be 
looked at. So we have to look at minimum standards. Now if 
that’s done with blinders on from a perspective of a large urban 
area, I do have some concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that being said, I believe that the answers . . . or 
the questions that we have can be answered in committee. So I 
recommend that this Bill go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 8, The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that Bill No. 8, The Paramedics Act be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 8 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill No. 8, The Paramedics 
Act stands referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 13 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I am pleased 
to enter the debate on Bill No. 13. A number of my colleagues 
have already spoken to this Bill and pointed out the changes 
that the Minister is proposing in this particular piece of 
legislation. I’m going to very briefly deal with each of the 
changes. But I think most of the questions — and there are a 
number of questions that we have — need to be dealt with when 
it is sent to committee, and I mean to do that as soon as I’m 
finished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the changes is they want to increase the 
number of board members from 10 to 12, and the reason given 
by the minister was the growing demands that are placed on the 
boards to deal with the corporation’s accountability. I know that 
approximately two to three years ago there was some issues to 
do with the past president and CEO of SaskEnergy. And he 
was, well he was let go at that point in time because of those 
issues. 
 
So have they increased the accountability that the board 
members are responsible for? We need to find out why they feel 
the need to increase the number of board members. What 
changes have been made within SaskEnergy that makes the 
workload of the board members more demanding? So those 
would be questions that I’m sure we will be obtaining answers 
to once the Bill is moved into committee. 
 
The significant change that I feel is that this Bill will permit 
SaskEnergy to transport energy-related products — by-products 
other than gas — on a non-exclusive basis. The products that 
the minister cited in his speech when he spoke to this Bill was 
carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and ethanol. 
 
Again there’s a number of questions that we have. Number one 
is, who asked for that change? Who is asking for SaskEnergy to 
have the capacity to be able to transport other products through 
their network? Who has SaskEnergy consulted with, or the 
government, the minister, consulted with to see if this will have 
an impact on private industry, private investment? Presently 
how are the other commodities being transported? 
 
Another area that I think we need to know some answers to is 
will this require an extensive expansion of the network, of the 
infrastructure within SaskPower? If not, then are we using . . . 
like how many lines does . . . I’m sorry, I said SaskPower 
earlier. It’s SaskEnergy. How many lines or pipelines does 
SaskEnergy have that’s not in use, that we don’t need to use on 
a consistent basis for gas transmission? So do we have pipelines 
available that we can then transmit a different commodity, and 
what percentage would that be? Where would those pipelines be 
located? 
 
So in essence we need to know what direction SaskEnergy is 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

hoping to go in. What is their future projections? Why did they 
feel a need to make this change to the legislation? 
 
The third area, Mr. Speaker, of significance in the Bill allows 
SaskEnergy and TransGas the ability to change pipelines where 
there is an encroachment by a building or structure. And 
currently the only authority, as my understanding in the Act, is 
for SaskEnergy or TransGas to remove the building and this 
allows them to reroute the line. 
 
Now I have to admit I’m very surprised that they haven’t had 
that ability prior to this. It seems rather odd to me that 
SaskEnergy or TransGas didn’t have the ability to move a line 
if they needed to or reroute a line if they needed to. 
 
[15:15] 
 
It also deals in what authority SaskEnergy and TransGas will 
have if they need to have a building or structure removed or 
moved aside for safety reasons. Safety reasons is very 
important, and we agree with that. But we hope that they also 
have the policies in place that will ensure that there’s fair and 
adequate consultation before modifications are made, and not 
that they’re just made in a bullying type of manner and then a 
bill is sent to the private individual for the moving. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, I have a number of 
questions on this Bill. It’s not a particularly long Bill, but it 
does touch on three fairly significant areas. And I will be 
looking forward to the answers when this Bill is moved into 
committee. So with that, I recommend that Bill No. 13 is moved 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy that 
Bill No. 13, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to answering the member’s questions as I would 
move that the Bill be referred — The SaskEnergy Amendment 
Act of 2006, Bill No. 13 — be referred to the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy that Bill No. 13 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Bill stands referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today we’re talking about the miscellaneous statutes Act being 
amended, Bill No. 17. 
 
And I guess the requirement of this Bill came forth because of 
the tax revolt that was in the province here a year or two ago, 
and actually may happen again, even though these penalties are 
put in place for municipalities that don’t forward on taxes 
collected on behalf of school divisions or other authorities that 
they collect taxes for. 
 
I notice in here, Mr. Speaker, that municipal hail . . . And I 
know the municipal hail directors are hoping this passes 
because they want their dollars that are collected on their 
behalf. And I think that’s very fair, and we certainly won’t be 
holding this Bill up to that extent. 
 
Although having said that, I think there’s a number of things 
that have caused this Bill to be put in place, these amendments 
to be brought forward. And the main thing being is that the 
province of Saskatchewan or the government of the day, the 
NDP government, has been on record as saying that the status 
quo is not on. I believe the Premier has made that on a couple of 
occasions. He’s made that comment to SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] convention and possibly to 
other conventions and urban councils — saying the status quo is 
not on and that we will be dealing long-term, sustainable 
funding for education, and we will take some of the burden off 
of municipalities of all kinds, whether it’s cities, villages, 
towns, or RMs [rural municipality] in this case. 
 
I also know, Mr. Speaker, as I read this Bill, that RMs are being 
penalized here, to the point where there’s actually penalties in 
this Bill for RMs that withhold tax and do what they did a 
couple years ago. 
 
Now having said that, we all realize that the school divisions for 
sure need their dollars to fund education of our kids and 
grandkids. But on the other hand, if the government of the day 
would see fit to bring forward long-term, sustainable funding — 
in fact a far more fair portion of the education tax instead of the 
downloading that has gone in the past 15 years in this province 
— we probably wouldn’t be in this mess, and we wouldn’t need 
legislation such as that we’re talking about today. If we had a 
government that was actually paying attention to what was 
happening in rural Saskatchewan, we wouldn’t need 
amendments like we’re talking about today to this Bill. 
 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

Now I know there’s a lot of concerns out there, Madam 
Speaker. I know RM administrators are somewhat concerned. I 
see part of the Bill says that a report, a financial statement has 
to be passed forward every month, except for January and 
September, about the amount of taxes collected on the school 
division’s behalf. Things like this are actually going to cause 
more paperwork for the municipalities, whatever it is, and 
therefore actually add costs to that municipality. But I guess 
then that really wasn’t the concern of this NDP government 
because they really neglected to bring forward new funding and 
long-term sustainability in funding. So I’m sure that something 
like additional administrative costs certainly aren’t going to 
bother this NDP government, especially this NDP government 
when it comes to rural Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, I think we have a number of concerns yet 
with this Bill. I think probably after we’ve gone through 
committee down the road and get our questions answered, then 
this Bill will be forwarded on. But I think at this point, Madam 
Speaker, we have a number of concerned people with what is in 
the Bill here. I know our rural administrators, rural councils 
have a number of concerns over this and would like some 
questions answered and are going to be forwarding many of 
those questions on for when we get in committee and look for 
the answers that they need. So at this point, Madam Speaker, I 
would like to adjourn debate until we’ve had time to further 
reassess what is really in this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The Regional 
Health Services Act. Madam Deputy Speaker, I understand that 
this amendment has been brought forth because of the 
insistence from the Provincial Auditor who has pointed out that 
formal service agreements need to be put in place with service 
providers such as affiliated hospitals or other non-designated 
health care organizations that may provide services to regional 
health authorities. And certainly we in the Saskatchewan Party 
agree in principle that a formal service agreement should be 
necessary and should be in place, Madam Deputy Speaker — 
formal agreements that will ensure performance standards are 
met, outline responsibilities more clearly, and ensure at the end 
of the day that the Saskatchewan Health is accountable for the 
services it contracts and provides of these services. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we understand — we’ve been 
told by the auditor and by the groups involved — that the 
formal agreements are long overdue, and as I had mentioned, 

the Provincial Auditor has asked that the regional health 
authorities comply with this recommendation from the auditor 
for a number of years. But saying that, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
there still are a number of concerns from the groups concerning 
this Bill, and that’s one of the duties of the Saskatchewan Party, 
the official opposition, is to speak to all the stakeholders 
involved. And as a result of this, we have found that the 
Saskatchewan emergency measures service association has 
some concerns. 
 
Now I’d like to point out some of the concerns that have been 
outstanding issues prior to this Bill — well, over the number of 
years that this Bill has been asked for by the auditor and by the 
above-mentioned group. Madam Deputy Speaker, this 
government’s history with The Ambulance Act, where it failed 
to do the consult with ambulance operators, and it certainly is 
part of the concern about bringing in a Bill without actually 
speaking to or giving proper consultation with the stakeholders 
involved. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan emergency measures services 
association have a number of concerns, and we have discussed 
these issues with them. And one of the concerns, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is that there is one year’s notice can be given 
without cause, is a concern because it makes it difficult for 
operators to secure financing when . . . just what it says. When 
they only have a one-year contract, what bank is willing to give 
a long-term loan on the business plan that basically is only 
possibly one year? And so it certainly is very difficult for the 
association members to go to a bank to obtain financing when 
it’s only a one-year, only a one-year contract given out at a 
time. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, once notice is given, is served to 
terminate the contract through our provisions for the regional 
health authority to buy out the operator at fair market value. 
However what the association has been saying, the ambulance 
operators argue that if the extent of any contract is only one 
year, the value of their business is greatly diminished. And that 
would only make sense, that even though the regional health 
authorities would buy out the business, I mean, if it’s only 
based on a value of one-year’s business, that certainly would 
greatly reduce their value of their business. 
 
And one other point that the emergency measures services 
association pointed out, that the provision gives 14-days notice 
to remedying any service disputes followed by the cessation of 
payments, and they find that as problematic. They feel that, 
operators feel that there needs to be a longer period to resolve 
disputes before payment ceases. 
 
Now we understand that there is discussions. There is 
negotiations in place, and there is some progress in these areas. 
And we certainly would hope that the government takes into 
account these issues before this Bill is moved on. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we certainly understand how 
important ambulance operators and people that work in the 
health care profession are. And certainly in the rural areas we 
find how extremely important they are, and how really the 
challenges out there are — when you’re talking about rural 
health — everything from as my colleague was talking about 
cellphone coverage in areas and having the health care 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

professionals able to find where an accident is. If it’s in a more 
remote area, we also . . . you know, when you talk about 
ambulances travelling to unknown areas, just being able to find 
the location. 
 
You know the condition of the roads is certainly a factor 
depending on the weather. Certainly we’ve talked about the 
condition of roads and highways and, you know, naturally we 
know ambulances will travel anywhere, wherever there’s an 
accident. But certainly it’s a tremendous, it’s a possible problem 
when there’s a need to travel to a area that is rather remote. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, certainly now the distance to go 
to hospitals, as more and more hospitals are closed across the 
province, it’s also a matter of getting the patient from the 
accident site to a hospital, to a hospital first that may be closed 
because there’s lack of health care professionals or there’s lack 
of doctors, and actually the knowledge of people whether that 
hospital is closed and which is the next closest hospital they 
should go to and those types of issues. 
 
So when we talk about these types of services, we have to look 
at the service as a whole of the province and of the region 
because of the really the uncertainty of health services in more 
remote, in areas more . . . rural areas because we’ve had many 
really horror stories about patients finding it difficult to find a 
health care professional or a hospital that they thought would be 
open and then to find out when they get there that it’s not open 
and they have to travel further. And of course the health and 
welfare of the patient is at risk. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I have outlined some of the areas 
where the emergency measure association has concerns. 
Certainly we will continue to discuss these issues with them. 
But I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in light of all the 
concerns that are out there, we certainly would want to keep 
this Bill in adjourned debate until these issues are resolved. We 
don’t feel that this should move on yet because of the concerns 
around the questions that the Saskatchewan emergency 
measures service association has concerning this. 
 
Now as I had said, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor has pointed out that these agreements should have been 
in place many, many years ago. And one wonders why the 
government’s taken so long to introduce a Bill concerning 
something that’s been pointed out to them by the Provincial 
Auditor for many, many years. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
also you know, obviously the Saskatchewan emergency 
measures service association members obviously were wanting 
these contracts in place so that, so that they would have a better 
. . . be able to make more long-term decisions. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now we find, Madam Deputy Speaker, that they’re only 
one-year contracts. So it creates some difficulty concerning the 
length of the contract and the viability of the business on a 
long-term basis as far as doing business plans and also being 
reimbursed by the regional health authority if they decide to sell 
their assets to the regional health authority. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, certainly we want to 
continue to talk to the stakeholders and we will do so. So, 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 28 — The 
Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today and talk for a few minutes on The Cities 
Amendment Act. What this Bill does is gives the cities a 
comparable level of protection from liability to that of the 
provincial government and Crowns. 
 
One of the issues I guess, the first thing that comes to mind 
when I look at The Municipalities Amendment Act, is the 
consultation process that is used or the lack of consultation 
sometimes that is used by this NDP government. And we go 
back to the original Municipalities Amendment Act and we 
know there’s a real rush from this government to put the Bill 
through. And there is pressure, pressure from all directions to 
put the Bill to committee and have it passed. And then we find 
out that there are so many amendments that the Bill has to be 
pulled and reintroduced. And I don’t think that is what one in 
any circle would call having done the consultation process to its 
best and fullest degree. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in this Act it gives discretionary 
power to reimburse a citizen’s legal expenses if they should 
successfully have to . . . applies to have a councillor 
disqualified for reasons that meet the approval of the courts. 
And that is probably good in some areas but I don’t know if 
that’s one that needs to be debated and discussed in committee 
or not. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it also deals with provisions to allow 
the cities the use of tax increment financing. And that’s in 
addition to the existing powers in the Act. Now one of the 
things that at first blush on this . . . And the minister has stated 
this in his remarks. Because tax increment financing is new to 
Saskatchewan and refinements may be necessary, it really begs 
the question is . . . if it’s new to Saskatchewan, why is it coming 
from this NDP government that’s very, very loathe to put 
anything new into this province? And so I think there’s going to 
be some questions that we will have related to that in 
committee. 
 
The minister had said this may help to encourage development 
in areas where development might not otherwise occur. I’m 
wondering if that means that tax increment financing will help 
development in the province of Saskatchewan, because it seems 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

like right now there is very much a lack of development in this 
province because of NDP policies. So I wonder if tax increment 
financing is going to help grow the province and help all of 
Saskatchewan. I’m not really sure that that’s what the tax 
increment financing is going to do. But maybe it’s a step in the 
right direction. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m wondering if this raises some 
questions as to whether this really is another tool to lead city 
councils into taking on more debt. I don’t think the minister 
really expounded on that particular aspect of this Bill. City 
councils will also be given more flexibility in making their own 
policy when it comes to selling certain parcels of land. And I 
think there may be some questions that we would have on that 
also. 
 
That being said, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe all of the 
further questions that we would have on this Bill can be 
answered in committee. So at this time I would move that this 
Bill be forwarded to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion on The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2), Bill No. 
28, that it now be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 28, The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Government Relations that Bill No. 28, The Cities Amendment 
Act, 2006 (No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by of the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 37 — The 
Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 
modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and it’s a 
pleasure for me to join the debate on this particular piece of 
legislation today. I once again am presented with a Bill here 
that seems amazingly short. I’ve had the privilege of addressing 
very short pieces of legislation in the past, but I’ve been amazed 
also by the fact that their brevity sometimes belies the 
importance of the legislation. Length does not necessarily 
indicate significance. 
 
And today we have a piece of legislation called the Act to 
amend the Court of Appeal Act, 2000 which on the surface of it 
sounds like it’s probably not a bad idea. It’s reducing the size of 
the Court of Appeals from nine members to seven. But I think, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, before we get too excited about that 
particular provision in the legislation, we need to consider some 
of the circumstances surrounding this piece of legislation and 
ask really for the justification to make this particular change. 
 
I notice that the Minister of Justice, when he introduced this 
legislation, made some comments in which he alluded to the 
fact that the former Chief Justice of the court had suggested 
these changes in speeches to lawyers’ organizations in which he 
indicated the reduction in the size of the court would be 
appropriate in light of the workload of the court. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, without challenging the views of 
the former Chief Justice, I do have some concern about this 
language coming from the Minister of Justice whose veracity on 
this topic might be challenged because of the comments he’s 
made regarding other pieces of legislation before this House. 
I’m not sure that the Minister of Justice entirely characterizes 
his position and the legislation he’s sponsoring in a manner that 
is fully supported by the facts, and whether or not this particular 
piece of legislation is supported by fact remains to be seen. 
 
I think the critic for the official opposition who handles issues 
relating to justice wants to have a very careful look at this 
provision, wants to have an opportunity to talk to judges and 
justices of the court through their association and also talk to 
legal representatives, whether it be the bar association or the 
Criminal Lawyers’ Association. Whatever facets of information 
he can determine, I think our critic would like an opportunity to 
do that before we move too far down the road with this 
particular Bill. 
 
The Minister of Justice alluded to the fact that the workload at 
the Court of Appeal level is light. And I find that interesting, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of the reality that faces courts, 
not just in Saskatchewan but around the world, frankly, in 
countries where democratic systems prevail, where justice is 
handled in an effective and impartial way because, by and large, 
court systems are not finding themselves faced with light 
workloads. 
 
In most instances they’re bogged down and so we hear reports 
continually about court cases that are put off, backdated, and 
held off to such lengths of time that in some occasions — some 
rare occasions maybe, but in more and more frequent occasions 
— the person who’s charged with a crime is allowed to go free 
because he didn’t get his day in court in an appropriate and 
timely manner. There is the statement that we’re all familiar 
with, that justice delayed is justice denied. And in many cases I 
think that we’re finding justice delayed too long. 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

So if the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal is finding its workload 
too light to accommodate the full bench of nine judges, then I’d 
be surprised by that. And I think I’d like that particular 
comment verified by the details of the court record and the 
number of cases facing the court. 
 
The other interesting thing about this particular piece of 
legislation is that while it sets the number at seven as opposed 
to the current number of judges at nine . . . and we have to 
change the legislation to achieve that. If in the future we should 
find the backlog of cases so heavy that we need to increase the 
number of judges at the Court of Appeal, it can be 
accomplished according to this piece of legislation simply by 
regulation that the Lieutenant Governor in Council — that 
means the government or the cabinet — can increase by 
regulation the number of judges on the Court of Appeal. So 
while we need to change the legislation to reduce the size of the 
court, we won’t need that inconvenience to increase the size of 
the court in the future if, in fact, it’s necessitated by a heavier 
workload. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular piece of legislation 
causes me some concern I suppose in that it’s almost 
tantamount to an admission of defeat, I believe. The province 
over the last number of years has shrunk significantly in terms 
of population. I believe in the tenure of this particular Premier 
we have seen 10,000 people stroked from the population 
numbers of this province. We have seen the Department of 
Learning forecast a reduction of 30,000 students in the public 
school system before the end of the decade or by the end of the 
decade. We’ve seen reductions in services in rural 
Saskatchewan because there’s nothing happening out there, 
according to the government. 
 
The population loss has caused this government to take steps to 
reduce services in many, many communities in rural 
Saskatchewan. And in fact we’ve been talking about that just 
recently again in petitions that we’ve presented here. There 
have been petitions regarding funding for schools. And the 
argument of the government is that there isn’t enough funding 
to go around and we certainly don’t need to put it into areas 
where there is a reduced school population and a reduced 
general population. 
 
We’ve seen the closure of SaskPower offices in a number of 
communities around the province again just in the last few days. 
And that is just the latest round of closures of offices that 
support customers of Crown corporations in communities 
around the province. 
 
This province has seen a retraction and a reduction of 
population numbers and attendant government services. And it 
would appear that the government’s view of the court system is 
that that should follow suit. 
 
There is one area of growth in this province however, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and that is in the size of government. This 
most recent budget just made provision for several hundred 
more employees and I think in the time of this Premier’s tenure 
we’ve seen another 1,500 people added to the size of 
government. And if that isn’t indicative of the way the current 
government thinks of things, I guess they probably won’t be 
happy until just about everybody’s on the government payroll at 

some level or other. 
 
And those of us who pay taxes at a significant rate already 
believe we’re sort of on the government payroll. But 
nevertheless, the fact of the matter is that the size of 
government has grown significantly under this Premier. And 
yet, and yet the legislation that the Minister of Justice has 
introduced here is talking about reducing the size of the Court 
of Appeal in this province. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that there’s plenty of reason to 
question whether this is a prudent decision, whether it’s a wise 
and appropriate decision at this time. I think that we need to 
investigate further the court backlog and the workload of the 
court before we could say one way or the other. And we need to 
have that opportunity. So while we are trying to ascertain the 
validity of this particular piece of legislation, I would move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a privilege to stand again today and speak to Bill 38, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I started speaking on, it was 
March 14 regarding this Bill. And as time was running out at 
the end of the day and I wanted to speak more on it, I did not 
adjourn debate at that time. 
 
Now many of my colleagues here are saying that because 
members on the opposite side did not get the drift of what I was 
talking about in regards to this wildlife habitat protection 
amendment Act, that I should start over again. And it was 
overwhelming decision that I do that and so I don’t know if we 
have enough time today either to get through it. 
 
I just want to make some references to my comments that I 
made regarding the habitat wildlife amendment Act, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and that’s in regards to, years ago it was 
critical habitat wildlife land and now it’s been changed to 
wildlife habitat protection amendment land. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, some time ago there was good 
reason to put this land under protection. There was a lot of work 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

being done in order to do that. All the lands were scrutinized as 
to which lands would be there for the protection of wildlife and 
wildlife habitat, and credit to the people that did that. Even the 
government officials at that time, a credit to them for taking the 
initiative to look at the lands in the province of Saskatchewan 
and keep it in the natural state for the preservation of wildlife 
and wildlife habitat. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I made comments in regards to 
some of the land in and around my area of 
Spiritwood-Shellbrook area where that land was under the 
jurisdiction of wildlife habitat protection land. And through the 
processes that have taken place, some of that land has been 
taken out of protection land, and I know some of it was for to 
satisfy TLE [treaty land entitlement] claims. And with the 
stroke of the pen it was done that. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, now I believe it was in 2003 that 
they decided to put land back into the habitat protection land to 
offset the land that came out. The problem with that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is when you have the best land available in the 
province of Saskatchewan that’s given protection for wildlife 
and wildlife habitat, why would you take it out? Why would 
you take it out of that existence and exchange it for another 
parcel of land from Timbuktu that may be not or probably 
doesn’t have the same land base or the land equity that was 
originally in there in the first place? It could be land that just 
has forest on it or whatever. It doesn’t pertain to the original 
land that was under the wildlife protection land. 
 
And I’m going to give you an example. If we were to take a 
town and Main Street was full of businesses, and every year we 
dropped one of those businesses and changed it to residential, 
well what’s going to happen to the town? It dies because all that 
property has been taken out and given to another jurisdiction. 
That’s the same with the protection of wildlife habitat land that 
we have in this province. It was in protection land at one time 
and it was taken out. 
 
Now I know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am not the only one 
that has talked on this issue time in and time again. The wildlife 
federation has vigorously talked to government and government 
officials, especially in SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management], to change that; to leave the land that is 
originally under the critical habitat wildlife land, to leave it 
alone. 
 
Now I know, Madam Deputy Speaker, in comments from the 
minister, that I believe he was talking about how much land is 
under the wildlife habitat protection land and I believe that it is 
something like . . . Oh, here it is here. It protects 1.4 million 
acres. Now I remember back in 2003 there was 776,000 acres 
taken out before anybody knew about it. Not the wildlife 
federation, not anybody knew that that land was taken out. Now 
over the years, the process — and this is part of the process 
with this amendment Act that we have today — is to put land 
back into there. But the whole idea was, it was there for a 
reason and now it’s taken out. So that we’re just going to 
substitute it for something else now. 
 
And in maybe some cases that is okay, but I can guarantee you 
in land that’s around my area, between Spiritwood, Shellbrook 
and whatever have you, that is not the case. That is not the case. 

And land that has been taken out that has been substituted by 
other land is not even close to the land that should be left in the 
habitat protection land. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was reading what the minister 
from Environment was saying about The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act and it says in his comments, and I quote: 
 

Some of the land the lessees want to buy or trade has 
existing important natural values located on the land. We 
will continue to protect those values through conservation 
easements. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that is a good point. That should have 
been brought in a long time ago. The question I have for the 
minister is, why now do they protect that land with conservation 
easements? Why wasn’t this started years ago when they started 
taking land out of the wildlife protection land back in 2000 or 
2001? Why wasn’t there conservation easements attached to 
that land at that time? 
 
Here according to what the minister says, that the easements are 
attached to land that will be sold to farmers or ranchers. Now 
easements on the land will give protection to the wildlife and 
the wildlife habitat, but is that going to be the same for all lands 
that’s transactioned out of the wildlife habitat land? I beg to 
differ. I don’t think so. But the farmers and ranchers will have 
easements on their land. 
 
Now we know, and the minister has said, that the stewards of 
the land, whether it be farmers or ranchers, are good stewards of 
the land. Well so is everybody else good stewards of the land. 
They have to be if there’s easements attached to it. So why 
wasn’t the easements attached to this land a long time ago? 
They’re not, and they should’ve been. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we in the province of 
Saskatchewan have a resource that is fairly abundant, and that is 
wildlife and wildlife in the province. But we are not going to 
protect the wildlife like we were doing back years ago if we’re 
going to take this wildlife land and move it out of that 
protection and give it to jurisdictions. With the easement that 
the farmers and ranchers have, they have to protect the wildlife 
and the wildlife habitat. But not everybody will have that same 
chance to protect the land that should be given to the wildlife 
and the wildlife habitat. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I also notice that there was a 
map given with this of all the lands and the transactions that 
were taking place. And I noticed that in the list of land and the 
land locations, there is approximately, well just over 3,000 
acres that has been removed again from the wildlife protection 
habitat land and for some possibly good reasons. Some of these 
are just ranchers that need land. It fits nice into their operation. 
And with the easements that’s been attached to it, they will be 
able to graze cattle on there and also protect the wildlife. 
 
I notice that down in the Beechy area there was 320 acres that’s 
been taken out. And that is simply for, I presume, somebody to 
purchase the land. And just in mentioning with the purchase of 
the land, anybody that is in the position to take possession of 
land that’s under the critical habitat wildlife land, I believe the 
land would be sold for fair market value. I believe that is how it 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

works. Who determines fair market value of that land? And if it 
is to be sold, who all pays for that land other than farmers or 
ranchers? Does everybody pay for that land at fair market 
value? 
 
I also notice, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in this Bill it also 
tells or talks about some of the First Nations with their 
entitlements on the land, that they are withdrawing their 
interests on a list of some of the lands. And I look at the map 
and there is 320 acres just north of Pelly, Saskatchewan. And 
that land is going back to wildlife habitat protection land. 
There’s also land by Saskatoon where the Little Pine First 
Nations has rejected that land. And there’s a couple other ones, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It begs the question, why do the First 
Nations not want to take this land? Why have they turned it 
back? What is the reasons for that? 
 
It maybe is starting to show, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the 
land that once was under the protection of the wildlife 
protection land is now not worth protecting — that the land that 
was in there before, Madam Deputy Speaker, has lost its value 
when it comes to wildlife and wildlife habitat. Maybe that is 
why the First Nations have decided, no, we don’t want that land 
any more. 
 
With the amount of land that’s in this Act, 1.4 million acres, 
776,000 was taken out some years ago. There’s been land taken 
out ever since that they started taking land out. I would beg to 
differ that the fact that most, if not all, the land that originally 
was put in has now been changed over once, twice, or whatever. 
So maybe that’s why the First Nations don’t want this land. 
There is no value in this land. Maybe the land that we have 
designated under protection of the land is of little use to 
anybody. So we’ve lost our power to put this land into 
protection. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the land parcels that 
have been taken out is for good reason. I noticed the one, it’s 
only 40 acres but it’s up around Nipawin and it is to develop 
recreation cabins as part of the Torch River land use plan. Now 
incidences like this are maybe good for the prosperity of 
Saskatchewan and areas within the province of Saskatchewan. 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to look at this land and 
we need to stop taking land out of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act before all the land that we have is of no value 
whatsoever. And in order to do that, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we have to have a real look at the land left. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in my area where there was some land 
that was under the protection of wildlife habitat land, was 
changed over to TLE process. And I talked about this briefly 
last time I was up speaking, and that is the problem that we’re 
having with wildlife damage in and around the province. And I 
know first well around my area that we have an extensive 
amount of damage done by wildlife. Again when it comes to 
wildlife damage, it’s covered under crop insurance but yet they 
have to pay a deductible. 
 
In other words, the farmer that claims for wildlife damage can 
only collect 80 per cent. And it begs the question why, Madam 
Deputy, Speaker. Why should farmers that have no recourse or 
no control over the wildlife in the area have to pay deductible 
on that land? It’s bad enough trying to farm, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, now without having something that you have no 
control over take your livelihood or percentage of your 
livelihood away, and you’re the one that has to suffer for it. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now the problem with the wildlife damage is a result of some 
of this land being changed from critical habitat wildlife land 
into — at this point in time and in this particular instance — 
First Nation TLE land. When you allow the occupancy of that 
land to hunt or utilize that land more than what it was before 
because it was protected before, the animals move out of the 
area. When animals move out of the area, so will the predators 
follow. 
 
Well now these animals that were in there — like for instance 
deer, moose, elk — they come out into the private land and 
that’s where the damage occurs. With the damage done to the 
crops, with the damage done to the grain in the bins, the farmer 
can only collect 80 per cent. Then on top of that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, then we have the problem with the predators 
following these animals. When the predators follow those 
animals, they also end up on the private land. 
 
Well last year, Madam Deputy Speaker, when we didn’t have a 
lot of snow as compared to this year — this year we have a 
tremendous amount of snow — last year we didn’t have a lot of 
snow, and those predators rather than chase deer to try and 
catch their food for the day, they decided to feed on the 
farmers’ beef. And they can catch that beef in 5 minutes, so 
why would they take time to chase a wild animal when they can 
get a tame one? There again, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
farmer was again at a loss. 
 
It all comes back to when you take wildlife land, the protection 
off wildlife land and the habitat out of the system that gives 
them a safe haven for them to live, especially in the wintertime, 
where they are not hunted or chased or harassed, that’s where 
the animals go. The predators stay there. The predators feed off 
the wild animals which that’s what it should be. Now we’ve 
changed the environment and now they feed off the farmers. 
But is there any compensation for the farmers? Absolutely 
none. 
 
When it comes to predator problems, and I know the minister 
will agree to me that over the last few months we’ve had many 
meetings to deal with the predator problem. And I can say that 
by sitting down with the minister regarding the predator 
problems, we have come to a consensus that there had to be 
some changes and they are working. To the credit of the 
minister, they are working. The people, the farmers, the rancher 
in my area that they are dealing with the predator problem are 
somewhat happy with what’s going on in the predator control. 
There still begs the question that there is little or nothing as 
compensation for them. The same with the grain farmers, 
there’s little or no compensation for them. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to ask more questions 
about this Bill. But we also need to do more emphasis on what 
is protection of this wildlife habitat land, why it was there 
originally, why shouldn’t it be now and forever, not only for 
ourselves but for our children and our grandchildren. 
 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

So the sooner the minister stops taking land out of the 
protection of the wildlife habitat, the better off we’ll be. But 
how many years have we gone on where land has been taken 
out? It just keeps going on and on and on. And it begs the 
question, is the government listening? If I was the only one up 
here speaking about this issue ongoing, hey I wouldn’t, believe 
me. But I’m not alone. The wildlife federation, other members, 
other farmers, ranchers, or whatever are saying the same thing. 
But no one is listening. So it’s time for them to listen, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I know, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in committee we 
will have a chance to ask questions of the minister regarding 
this. And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like 
to move this to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 38, 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 38, The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
the Environment that Bill No. 38, The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 43 — The 
Payday Loans Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a privilege for me today to stand in this 
Assembly and speak to Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act, 
brought in by the hon. minister. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when we talk about payday loans I 
was actually, as I was doing a bit of reviewing as to the 
necessity of this piece of legislation — why it would be before 

us — I was actually shocked by some of the information that I 
was going through. 
 
I guess, Madam Deputy Speaker, there were a number of . . . 
very few people, if you will, that really take advantage or utilize 
payday loans. And one would have to first of all ask why 
anyone would use a payday loan, especially when there are so 
many other avenues that individuals can look into and can use if 
they find themselves in a position where they may need a few 
dollars before they get to their next paycheque. 
 
What surprised me, Madam Deputy Speaker, was the number of 
Canadians who do use payday loans, and I believe the number’s 
in the . . . around two million people annually use payday loans 
which really surprises me. And the other thing, according to an 
Environic survey, the majority of customers are educated, have 
bank accounts at major financial institutions, and make close to 
the average wage in Canada. 
 
So one would ask, with that type of information, why would a 
person choose to utilize a payday loan when in most cases, and 
in fact the majority of cases, individuals while the . . . You look 
at trying to ensure that your account would have the financial 
resources available to meet your everyday needs or your 
monthly needs if you find that every once in a while a major bill 
comes forward that really draws down on your financial 
account. There are ways in which you can set up interim 
financing such as just ongoing personal lines of credit. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the majority of Canadians 
possibly choose that, have small interim lines of credit available 
which can tide them over until they’re able to get their account 
back into the financial shape that they would like to see it rather 
than being forced to use a payday loan. 
 
And when you think about the interest rates that can be charged 
— and I don’t have any information here that would indicate 
what is normally charged — but I understand under Bill 347, 
the federal piece of legislation, that Bill limits the interest rate 
that can be charged to 60 per cent. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I thought that 19 and 20 and 21 
per cent interest rates in the late ’70s, early ’80s were exorbitant 
interest rates at that time. And we all know how that impacted 
people across the province of Saskatchewan, and no doubt 
across Canada, where young families who had just maybe 
entered into agreements to purchase a house and all of a sudden 
saw their loans jump from 9 to 12 to 15 and to 21 per cent. And 
it put many of those individuals in situations where it was 
impossible for them to continue to own their own homes. 
 
And as a result of a change in government in the early ’80s, 
there were some restrictions put on the amounts that could be 
charged, which helped a lot of the people out and gave them the 
ability to continue to make payments on their homes and 
eventually own those homes. And so when you look at 21 per 
cent, 21 per cent is certainly a lot lower than the potential of 
having to pay 60 per cent. And you ask yourself, now why 
would you put yourself in that kind of a position? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister had indicated in his 
second reading speech that payday loans are expensive. They 
are an expensive way for consumers to meet their temporary 
needs. And he also indicated that even a number of companies 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

already — in the payday loan business — have realized that and 
recognized the fact that they need to have some guidelines in 
place so that you don’t have the unscrupulous abuse of 
consumers by payday loan lenders in offering avenues whereby 
individuals can access cash for a few days. 
 
The minister also acknowledged — and I believe the industry 
recognizes this as well which again surprised me — the fact that 
despite the high interest rates, despite a lot of cases, the hidden 
costs, that many people don’t take the time to actually read the 
fine print on their loan agreements and find out when they go to 
pay their loan off that they’re actually . . . In some cases, that 
loan which may have been just a small 2 or $300 loan — and I 
believe the average is about $280 — can amount to well over 3 
and $400 by the time you pay it off, and that’s in just a matter 
of 10 to 20 days. 
 
So it certainly appears that we need to have some specific 
guidelines in regards to payday loans. And I appreciate what the 
minister had indicated. He mentioned that there are a number of 
concerns, and some of the concerns include the high cost of 
payday loans and the inadequate disclosure of costs and terms, 
and the excessive fees charged for the rollover payday loans and 
unfair debt collection practices. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we can see that there obviously is 
a need to bring regulatory change in regards to payday loans to 
protect the consumer from the unscrupulous payday loan lender 
who would be out there to take advantage of consumers, while I 
also acknowledge from the surveys that many of the payday 
loan lenders also recognize the need to have regulatory 
guidelines to protect their industry. 
 
The legislation, I guess, is . . . A recommendation also has come 
from the payday loan lenders themselves and I forget the 
number. I did have it down here a moment ago. I believe over 
two-thirds of the payday loan lenders have come forward with 
recommendations. And I believe the minister indicated that that 
was part of the reasons for this piece of legislation because the 
industry themselves want to ensure that the reason that they 
exist is to provide interim financing for individuals, that they’ll 
be able to do it in a meaningful and forthcoming way, that 
people who find themselves on the short end of the stick have 
access to a means of some short-term financing in a way that 
certainly would not only assist the individual but also does it in 
a very scrupulous manner, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister indicated that the 
amendments will allow provinces and territories to set limits on 
the costs of payday loans as part of a comprehensive framework 
for the regulation of payday lenders. And it also provides the 
borrower with the right to refund of all monies paid in excess of 
the amounts or fees permitted to be charged in the Act or 
regulations. So it would certainly appear, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that there are some sound reasons to come forward for 
this piece of legislation. 
 
I understand, just going through the news release, it also allows 
the borrower the right to cancel a payday loan without penalty 
before the end of the business day following the date the loan 
was made, which, Madam Deputy Speaker, if an individual all 
of a sudden finds themself with the financial means to address 
that shortfall and then to go in and pay off that loan, I believe 

that that is only appropriate. And certainly the industry I believe 
recognizes that as well, if I understand correctly, that the 
industry was quite forthcoming in some of their 
recommendations in regards to this legislation. 
 
[16:15] 
 
It prohibits payday lenders from having more than one payday 
loan with the same borrower at the same time. I think, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that’s only fair and only appropriate as there 
are situations where consumers might find themselves caught in 
a bind. And rather than finding other ways of addressing their 
issues, taking out more than one payday loan, and then the next 
thing they know, they have put themselves in such a financial 
bind that they really have difficulty addressing and meeting 
their obligations in paying back that payday loan which can be 
quite an impediment to the family or to all the extended 
individuals who might be involved, whether it’s family 
members or whoever. 
 
It also prohibits payday lenders from requiring a borrower to 
sign over future wages and prohibits payday lenders from 
making a loan contingent on the purchase of another product or 
service. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think there are a lot of good 
arguments, good reasons for this piece of legislation that we 
have before us.  
 
And however, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s also 
important, the fact that we haven’t had a lot of time yet as this 
piece of legislation has been recently brought before the 
Assembly. And it’s imperative that we, as Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition, do take due time to go over the Bill, to review the 
Bill, to talk over to stakeholders to ensure that this piece of 
legislation is indeed going to meet the requirements and the 
guidelines that the minister has given as reasons for this Bill, 
Bill No. 43, The Payday Loans Act. And therefore at this time I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 44 —The Class 
Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi 
sur les recours collectifs be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up to speak on this particular Bill, The Class 
Actions Amendment Act. I think dealing with a piece of 
legislation, if reading right, that it was first brought in in the 
year 2001. 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

Unfortunately in our society now it seems like we need more of 
this legislation. There seems to be more class action suits 
coming along. I know in Saskatchewan there hasn’t been many. 
But I know when you watch the news throughout North 
America, there has been many of them being brought forward. 
In fact many, many movies have been made on different class 
action suits that have been down in the States — some fictional, 
some not. I know it seems to grip the people on that when it 
comes to class action suits. 
 
This particular piece of legislation I think needs to be studied 
and also put out. I notice that our critic, Justice critic, will be 
putting it out because it affects many people, whether it’s the 
bar society, lawyers, even people that are involved in it. I know 
going through this legislation that it allows to file a suit now in 
Saskatchewan that your residents don’t have to be from 
Saskatchewan. And now that many suits do cross across 
provinces, that it’s probably a good piece of amendment to 
come forward. 
 
I haven’t heard any comments, I guess, for it or against it yet. I 
mean, that’s why this Bill has just been brought forward, and 
that’s why we’re in the mode of debate right now, to find out 
what people’s thoughts and concerns are with this particular 
Bill. 
 
But I know one of the things that’s been in the news recently is 
been with pet food. You know, and they’re already talking 
some action, suit action there, you know. And I know that that 
will be . . . You know, not only does it cross provinces. It also 
goes across North America. Now whether this particular Bill 
makes it a little easier to help residents that feel that they’ve 
been wronged, that they can join a class action suit. 
 
I notice one thing in this Bill. It’s a question I have which may 
be answered later. I don’t expect it to be answered today in the 
debate. But it talks about that a class action suit can be 
registered here in Saskatchewan, even though the residents can 
be not from Saskatchewan or . . . and from Saskatchewan. Does 
that mean that if there is no residents from Saskatchewan, you 
can still actually file the suit from Saskatchewan? 
 
The only reason I’m asking that is I know in the States that 
some jurisdictions seeing the laws are a little more . . . If I 
remember right — hearing a story — that some states the law is 
a little more lenient, so a lot of class action suits will be brought 
forward in that particular state rather maybe a state where there 
is actually more plaintiffs from. Now that’s a question that I 
know that our Justice critic will be asking later on, and it’s kind 
of one that I’m a little curious on with that. 
 
This Bill, you know, can affect a lot of people. As we go 
forward in society there can be, there will be many class action 
suits probably brought forward. And as time goes on, it seems 
unfortunately that there is more of that. 
 
And there’s also a need for it because, I mean, it also protects 
consumers from companies or anybody that’s going to do 
something fraudulent out there throughout North America. So 
there is a need for legislation. There also is a need for 
legislation to be crafted so that it helps the people and also so 
that there can’t be just frivolous lawsuits brought forward, too, 
to just put pressure on a company just to maybe make some 

minor changes. 
 
So there’s a delicate balance there when it comes to legislation 
with this particular Bill, that it be brought forward in the right 
manner and the right things are trying to be accomplished with 
this Bill. Because when you bring forward a piece of 
legislation, that’s one of your main goals, is that you want to 
create a situation that’s better for the people. 
 
And with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know that there’s 
many aspects of this Bill, when it comes to law, there’s many of 
them I don’t understand. But I know that I’ll have to talk with 
the Justice critic on this particular piece of legislation just to see 
what I get, what his thoughts and feelings are and also what . . . 
I’m even curious when I go back home to even ask if, you 
know, if this is a big concern with some of the people and talk 
about class action suits. Because back in my constituency, you 
mostly hear about class action suits just on the TV, and it’s 
usually in some other jurisdiction other than Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know, I think this legislation is just kind of bringing us 
in scope with some of the other jurisdictions, some of the other 
provinces throughout Canada, I think, just being so that we’re 
all on the same page when it comes to lawsuits. I know that this 
is supposed to possibly help, that you could bring forward one 
class action suit, that you’re not actually involved in 
jurisdictional, different class action suits which I understand can 
be . . . before this had to be spread out maybe in a couple of 
provinces. And then as a resident maybe in Saskatchewan, you 
had to, because there was other residents who were out of 
province, you were dragged into that particular lawsuit where it 
might be a little easier and simpler for the residents of just 
Saskatchewan to actually deal with that particular class action 
suit. 
 
So there’s, you know, many aspects of this particular Bill that 
are very interesting. And with that . . . and questions I think that 
have to be answered, that I certainly can’t answer, that will have 
to be answered by our Justice critic over here and some 
questions he may want to ask in committee. But right now, 
Deputy Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
hon. member that debate be adjourned on Bill No. 44, The 
Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 46 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 46 — The Crown 
Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
it’s a pleasure to rise in the House and speak to Bill 46, The 
Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007. 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

As you would guess, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition is 
reviewing this legislation, consulting with the stakeholders. In 
fact I just had a discussion today with the Minister of Industry 
about this particular piece of legislation. We understand that it 
is also connected to Bill No. 48 which is the freehold oil and 
gas production tax. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you are dealing with a couple of Acts 
that are interrelated with an industry as important as the oil and 
gas sector in Saskatchewan, you have to make sure you do your 
homework and understand fully what the implications of such 
legislation might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did review the comments made by the minister. 
And he talks about the fact that these changes that are being 
proposed have no revenue or net-back implications to the 
province or the oil and gas companies. But he says that it’s as a 
factor of simplifying The Crown Oil and Gas Royalty 
Regulations, as well as The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 
Tax Regulations, 1995. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you would know, the oil and gas 
industry is particularly important to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. We are 
on the edge of the Shackleton find which is one of the large 
natural gas discoveries in the province of Saskatchewan. As 
well, there has been oil production for quite a few years on the 
very west side in the Elrose and Eston areas. And this industry’s 
been paying the bills for a long time, so it’s important that we 
treat these industries correctly. 
 
If the minister is correct and if in fact this is a simplification of 
regulations that is approved by the industry and is beneficial to 
the province of Saskatchewan and doesn’t have any negative 
side effects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can be sure that the 
opposition will be supporting this legislation. 
 
The reason we want to look at it carefully is because the NDP 
government has a history of doing about six things wrong for 
the industry for everything they do correct for the oil and gas 
industry. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was the old CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] government that actually ran the 
industry out of Saskatchewan, an industry that was prepared to 
be headquartered in the city of Regina. The Premier at the time 
— Mr. Douglas — told them they weren’t welcome. And the 
rest is history as they say, as the oil rig moved out of 
Saskatchewan and it struck a gusher at Leduc, Alberta, and then 
the oil industry headquartered itself in Alberta. That province 
then surpassed Saskatchewan in population, and we’ve been 
struggling with a reputation that’s not very positive in the oil 
and gas industry. 
 
Now if this is a positive piece of legislation that we’re looking 
at today, and if Bill 48 is also a positive piece of legislation, that 
might go a couple of steps towards untarnishing the province of 
Saskatchewan as far as the industry is concerned. And if that’s 
the case then, Mr. Speaker, obviously we will support that 
because we want to see the industry thrive. We want to see the 
industry be responsible, create jobs, be environmentally 
responsible, and provide funds so we can provide better health 
care and education and better highways in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am convinced that the 
only way that we will really restore the confidence of the 
industry and reignite this industry in Saskatchewan is if we 
have a change of government. Now I know that’s a debate for 
another day, and we’ll probably have that debate fairly soon. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Sask Party 
official opposition critic for this piece of legislation is 
consulting with stakeholders, and I don’t think the verdict is 
finally back. We appreciate the input from the minister, and he 
seems to make some very relative points with regards to Bill 46. 
But we want to hear directly from some stakeholders and make 
sure that this is one of those one in six positive directions for 
the industry rather than those five negative that we traditionally 
see from the NDP. 
 
Given that background, Mr. Speaker, we note that the original 
Bill that’s being amended was made in 1969. That of course 
raises a bit of a flag because that’s when a lot of the trouble 
occurred in the industry. That’s when a lot of the oil and gas 
companies were vacating the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
why we’re not just rubber-stamping this piece of legislation. 
 
I’ve noticed, and I noticed it again shortly after question period, 
the government suggested, well why doesn’t the opposition just 
immediately move a Bill on to committee and just rubber-stamp 
it all the way through, practically before we’ve even had a look 
at it, even though we’re on record as supporting the concept or 
the principle behind a piece of legislation. 
 
If the minister’s correct, we certainly support the concept 
behind this piece of legislation — that it would simplify the 
regulatory regime, it would be friendly to government, make it 
easier for government to monitor and regulate the industry as 
well as make it better for the industry to comply with the 
regulations imposed on it by government. If that’s the case, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’ll move this Bill forward. It will follow the 
appropriate path that Bills follow through the legislature. It will 
be approved, given Royal Assent, and take effect in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But being a very responsible official opposition, we take 
nothing for granted. Unfortunately, we’ve found we can’t 
always trust the government, so we have to review each piece of 
legislation on its own basis. That’s the reason why, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I would move — until we find out more 
information — that we adjourn debate and renew this 
discussion at a later date. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I thank the member. 
The motion before the Assembly is adjournment of debate on 
Bill No. 46, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

Bill No. 47 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 47 — The Fatal 
Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 47, 
the Act, the amend the fatal accident amendment Act, I’m 
wondering why did the government pick the date of August 1, 
2001. Is there any significant reason why we’re not concerned 
with what happened before then and just particular date like 
that? Or if there is a reason. 
 
I’d also like to know about the government’s definition of a 
child. Now it says the definition doesn’t include stepchildren. 
And I’m wondering about some of the strange situations and 
circumstances that do happen. I was talking to one of the other 
members here and we were saying, now what if you’ve lost 
custody of your children and your ex-wife remarries, and then 
you have a fatal accident with their stepfather? Where are the 
definitions going to fit in there? And these strange things have 
happened. 
 
And it also fits in their definition of parents. Where is that going 
to fit in? They haven’t defined it more specifically. And that’s 
what I’m looking for. Let’s get specific on these definitions. 
 
The Bill says it does not include grandparents. Well what if the 
grandparents have custody of the children? That’s got to be a 
concern because we have seen a lot of cases where custody has 
gone to the grandchildren, and I’m not sure that the Bill doesn’t 
deal with it. I mean I’m not a lawyer so maybe it is worded in 
there. But I don’t see it. 
 
And then I’m also wondering, how do they arrive at 60,000? Is 
it just a number we picked out and 30,000 for the children? It 
doesn’t tell me anything, why we’re getting there. 
 
And then the Bill says that a spouse is living separate or apart 
that they are excluded from payment. Well what about the 
situation if the wife has custody and the ex has been paying 
child support? Does it fit in then? So the child support thing has 
not been answered. 
 
And then another question I have is third party liability — I 
have questions on that. How does it get involved in this Bill? 
 
And this Bill is very, very short and we’re wondering if due 
diligence has been done. When we’ve seen the government get 
into trouble with Bills before, and I’m thinking particularly of 
the smoking Bill how the government got in trouble with that 
one because due diligence and they did not consult with First 
Nations. So we wonder on these quick, little, short Bills that 
come up so fast, was due diligence done? Because it’s an 
important feature. 
 
And for these reasons and for the questions that I have that are 
going to take some more debate and understanding, at this time 
I would adjourn debate. 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Batoche is moving adjournment of debate on Bill No. 47, The 
Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 48 — The Freehold 
Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to enter into the debate on this Bill. 
I read the minister’s second reading comments and looked at 
the Bill, and it appears to be a Bill that is very similar to Bill 46 
in that it’s simplifying regulations and basically making the 
environment, a working environment for both industry and 
government, a lot simplified and removed a lot of red tape 
which certainly is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister said in his second reading comments, he said 
both Bills 46 and 48 are very similar. And I think the member 
from Rosetown-Elrose certainly made a lot of good comments 
and brought out quite a number of good points with regards to 
Bill 46, and I would certainly endorse those comments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I did find the minister mention that Saskatchewan is producing 
twice as much oil as it did 10 years ago. So I guess the question 
I would have is — I mean this government’s been in place for 
going on 16 years, you know — why some of these moves 
weren’t made earlier so that we could have seen the positive 
results of regulation change and the streamlining of bureaucracy 
and red tape and so on that we have now seen so recently. 
 
If we would have had done, taken a few of these steps earlier 
on, it would have been a signal to the industry that 
Saskatchewan is a good place to do business and so on and we 
would, as I said, we would have reaped some of the benefits 
much earlier than we are now. But it’s certainly good to see that 
we are taking a step in the right direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so there are just one or two items in this Bill that I think we 
would not be doing our due diligence if we didn’t consult with 
the industry just to clarify a few points. And so therefore, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would at this time adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member is 
proposing adjournment of debate on Bill No. 48, The Freehold 
Oil and Gas Production Tax Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Bill No. 45 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 45 — The 
Agricultural Societies Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today in the Assembly to speak on Bill 45, the ag 
societies repeal Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a pretty short 
Act in length. It’s going to repeal The Agricultural Societies 
Act and make amendments to The Auctioneers Act, The Cities 
Act, and The Municipalities Act where those pieces of 
legislation reference the ag society Act. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve talked to several people that are 
involved with ag society in my constituency and they seem to 
be fine with this Act. Although the first day I raised it with 
them, when I first saw the Bill, there was a bit of concern, but 
apparently that’s been cleared up and they are fine with the Bill 
in its form. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency is 
served by some very strong and active agricultural societies. 
There’s one in Coronach and one in Bengough and one in 
Weyburn — and that’s the one that I’m most familiar with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note that the Weyburn 
Ag Society goes back nearly 100 years. In fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a century ago it was the Weyburn Turf Club, and then 
in about 1908, they changed, they reorganized and changed 
their name to the Weyburn Agricultural Society. And as I think 
all ag societies in the province do, they provide a tremendous 
service — for not only our rural people, but also for the urban 
areas — in promoting rural life and the rural way of life, and a 
number of events are held every year. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the Weyburn Ag Society, you 
only need to look at the history of the ag society and some of 
the people that have played a role in the ag society. And it’s 
really an indication of the people that have played a strong role 
in our entire community in being founding people of our 
community. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although about 100 years ago the 
ag society originated, in April 1959, the Weyburn Ag Society 
Act was actually a private Act, was incorporated or was 
proclaimed in this Assembly, and the petitioners for that Act — 
and I would like to read their names into the record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: G. Murray McFadden, Carman Metheral, Preston 
Andrews, Fred Zabel, Reginald Saunders, Edgar Pettit, and Paul 
Erb. They were the original petitioners of the Weyburn Ag 
Society Act. And when you look around Weyburn today you 
can’t help but see that their legacy lives on in terms of things 
that are named after these people. 
 
And I can think of Zabel Bay, and it’s not far from where I live. 
And the Metheral name is quite well known in the area, and it 
just, it really speaks to the history. The ag societies, whether 
they be the Weyburn ag societies or other ag societies in our 
province, really speak to the history of our province and the 

important role that ag societies played in the early days and also 
today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to mention while I’m on my 
feet, I put a little bit of a plug in for the Weyburn Ag Society. 
It’s a very active society and we have a number of upcoming 
events this year. We’ve replaced our grandstand in the last 
number of years — the ag society did — at the fairgrounds in 
Weyburn. Last fall they actually put the last third of the new 
seats in, and they’re raising money currently to put a roof over 
top of the grandstand. And they hope to have that completed by 
next year, by 2008, which will mark the 100th anniversary of 
the Weyburn Ag Society. 
 
Recently, a couple of weeks ago, for four days running in 
March, at the Legion hall we had the ag society’s fourth annual 
dinner theatre. And it was a three-part play. It was The Girls of 
the Garden Club and I attended opening night. My wife, 
Amanda, happened to be playing a small part in the play and it 
was fantastic. It was a great night. It was a great night and four 
days running, and they did a tremendous job. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ag society also does a ranch 
rodeo, and they raised funds last year for the grandstand, and it 
was a great time. The CCA [Canadian Cowboys’ Association] 
rodeo was held last year and I hope to see it back again. 
 
The Weyburn fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I’ll just close 
with this — last year the Weyburn fair, the 98th annual 
Weyburn fair had over 9,000 people in three days visit the fair. 
For a community our size, it’s a tremendous fair. And one final 
note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invite all hon. members of this 
Assembly to visit Weyburn for this year’s fair. And also May 
29 is the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Musical 
Ride. Weyburn Fair Ag Society will be hosting it. And so I’ll 
move to adjourn the debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I just would like some 
clarity from the member. Is he moving, is he proposing second 
reading or is he closing debate? Are you adjourning debate, or 
are you wishing to let this go to second reading? Could you just 
clarify that? 
 
Mr. Duncan: — I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 45, The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 49 — The 
Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act be 
now read a second time.] 
 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Thunder Creek. I’m sorry; I didn’t realize a 
member was going to rise on this matter, so I recognize the hon. 
member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 49, An Act respecting 
Mortgage Brokerages, Brokers, Associates and Mortgage 
Administrators and to make consequential amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill appears to be of a more or less a 
housekeeping nature. It’s a very extensive Bill containing some, 
I think, 37, 38 pages of changes and so on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
It refers to the responsibilities of the superintendent with respect 
to licensing; eligibility for licences for mortgage brokers and 
requirements for licence or endorsement; the financial security 
that may be required, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to become a licensed 
mortgage broker; and the actual mechanics of issuing licences 
and endorsements; also the effects of licences and endorsements 
as they pertain to mortgage brokers and brokerages; and of 
course suspension or cancellation of licences and endorsements, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; also appeal in case of disciplinary action 
having been taken, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It also deals with 
appeal procedures for brokers. 
 
In brokering mortgages, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it talks about the 
principal broker and prohibition of unlicensed individuals from 
practising the business, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and duties to act in 
private investors’ best interests and duties owed to the 
borrower. 
 
On the face of it, that all seems responsible. Sometimes, 
however, the devils are in the detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
when we move on to Part V of this Bill, we talk about the duty 
to maintain records, and we hope that that won’t be too onerous. 
We see many circumstances in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where red tape and record keeping requirements are 
detrimental to business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Act goes on to talk about the capital requirements for 
brokers and brokerages and the record keeping requirements of 
course, and that may be a cause for concern. It goes on to talk 
about the trust accounts that are kept by brokers and annual 
filing requirements of annual returns and so on, advertising and 
communications, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and powers of the 
superintendent. 
 
Actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill, it’s a very complicated 
and far-reaching Bill that goes on to talk about appeals, appeals 
to court, and so on. This Bill on the face of it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, appears to be something that may be needed. We just 
hope that the regulation is not cost prohibitive for brokers and 
brokerages in this province and that this is reasonable all the 
way through. It’s very new to us, this Bill, and it’s obviously 
going to take some consultation with the principals, and 
accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Thunder Creek is moving adjournment of debate on Bill No. 49, 

the mortgage brokerages and administrators Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 50 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure this afternoon to rise and address Bill 
No. 50, An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it appears to me that there’s three sections 
involved in this Act. The first section relates to the terms of the 
chairperson and vice-chairperson and a requirement that some 
changes be made so that their terms of office will coincide with 
the municipal employee pension plan’s fiscal year. This seems 
to be pretty straightforward, and I don’t think we certainly 
would have any problem with that. It also allows for the 
transition period so that the year ending December 31, ’07, the 
new terms of office would be in place at that time. 
 
The second provision is somewhat more complex. It appears 
that the Canadian Revenue Agency have some requirements 
regarding what are deemed to be flexible benefits in the 
municipals pension plan, which are no longer allowable in the 
pension plan formula. So these are being removed. 
 
And although it seems straightforward, the reason they’re being 
moved is because the CRA [Canada Revenue Agency] has 
deemed that they should be. I think we should be spending 
some time with those stakeholders involved — the municipal 
employees, both present and past, with SARM and SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] — just to 
assure everyone that what is being done here, because it’s 
basically, it is changing the plan considerably, is discussed. 
 
The last provision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a provision that 
allows for a pension allowance to be paid to a new spouse 
attained after the member’s date of retirement. That, like 
number one, I do not see that we would have any problem with 
this provision. But at this time I would move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 50. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cut Knife-Turtleford is moving adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 50, The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That’s carried. 
 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2007 

Bill No. 51 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 51 —The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill No. 51 
is an Act to amend the Public Employees Pension Plan. There’s 
a number of items involved in this Bill. Firstly it allows 
members to contribute to the pension plan for leaves of absence 
after the age of 65. So basically with changes in our mandatory 
retirement provisions within this province, this becomes an area 
that needed to be addressed. 
 
The second area involves . . . It allows active and inactive 
members to move their money into the pension, public 
employees pension plan. And this provision is allowing the 
public employees pension plan to be, I would say, more 
competitive with other pension plans that are available after 
retirement where people have decisions to make as to where 
they put their funds and how they can be drawn. This actually 
provides that people can take the choice to take their own RSPs 
[retirement savings plan], if you like, if they are contributing to 
the public employee pension plan, and have those funds moved 
into the public employees pension plan and have that become 
their funding retirement. 
 
The last item is a bit more concerning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
that it was obviously written before the federal budget which 
has now passed and refers to what needs to be done once a 
person reaches the age of 69 years and cannot be found, but that 
has monies in their public employees pension plan. Now we 
certainly have some sympathy for these lost souls, but with the 
change in the age from 69 to 71, I would suggest that this 
legislation if passed in this manner will just have to be amended 
in the very near future to coincide with the new federal age of 
71 years — that being the age at which prior to December 31 
you must make arrangements to start drawing on your pension 
funds. 
 
So I think I would suggest that certainly we would move to 
adjourn debate at this time and recommend that we consider an 
amendment so that the legislation, when passed, will actually be 
in line with the federal legislation. So once again I will move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cut Knife-Turtleford has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 51, The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife 

Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I briefly 
want to put a few comments on the record with regards to this 
particular Bill, An Act to amend The Wildlife Act. 
 
Looking through this, and in summary from the minister’s 
comments on here as well, there is some housekeeping points 
that have to be made and some areas that have to be kind of 
restructured and refocused to make sure that it’s both focused 
on what needs to be done, it’s not redundant, and to use the 
correct words in conjunction with some of the other wildlife 
Acts and Acts that apply to wildlife. 
 
One of the things that it does is it actually takes away the role of 
the deputy wildlife officer, but then again turns around and 
redefines the deputy wildlife officer to be what is known in the 
Act as a wildlife officer by that particular name. So both 
wildlife officers, deputy officers are now called wildlife 
officers. And they are elevated in this legislation as police 
officer status. 
 
One of the things that we certainly have to do for the protection 
of the environment and the protection of the wildlife and so that 
my grandchildren will be able to enjoy the wildlife that we are 
blessed with in this province is that there has to be regulation 
and controls and supervision. By putting these amendments in 
place and giving the actual police officer status to the wildlife 
officers, I think it can accomplish, help accomplish what needs 
to be done under the section called inspections or investigation. 
 
The concern of course would rise that these people, for want of 
something better to do, might find reasons for instigating an 
inspection, or on the pretext of doing an investigation become 
more involved in the wildlife and the protection of wildlife than 
need to be. But I think we have to make sure that when these 
people are designated as such, that they are given both the 
training and the responsibility and accountability for making 
sure that what is intended under The Wildlife Act is in fact what 
they are tasked to do and will endeavour to do that without 
really causing undue concern for the people that are trying to 
both enjoy The Wildlife Act. And certainly anybody that is 
abusing the wildlife in any way, they should in fact be subject 
to these conditions, inspections, and investigations. 
 
Some of the wording again allows for the inspection of vehicles 
and for the . . . changing the meaning for constitutional clarity 
and for obtaining records. And I noticed in here as well that 
there is several Acts. There’s The Wildlife Act, the fisheries Act 
for instance. And under the fisheries Act there was a provision 
that was unconstitutional, deemed unconstitutional. And I think 
this change will be welcome to make sure that there is 
compliance with both the intent and the direction needed for the 
wildlife. 
 
With that I will adjourn debate on Bill 52. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Lloydminster has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 52, 



April 3, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That’s carried. I 
recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
Deputy Government House Leader that this House do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1148 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1148 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Spring Fling Fundraising Event 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
 University of Saskatchewan Celebrates 100 Years 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
 Supporting Parkinson’s Disease Research 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Youth Salute 2007 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Oungre Memorial Park Fundraiser 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Opinions on Equalization 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
 Saskatchewan Party Nomination for Regina Dewdney 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1152 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 60 — The Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1157 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2007 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1158 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2007 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1159 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1160 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1161 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................1161 
 Bill No. 8 — The Paramedics Act 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1161 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................1163 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1163 
  Thomson (referral to committee)...........................................................................................................................................1164 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1164 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
 Bill No. 28 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1166 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1167 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1167 
 Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1168 
  Nilson (referral to committee)................................................................................................................................................1171 
 Bill No. 43 — The Payday Loans Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
 Bill No. 44 —The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
 Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1173 
 Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Bill No. 45 — The Agricultural Societies Repeal Act 
  Duncan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
 Bill No. 49 — The Mortgage Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Bill No. 50 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2007 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Bill No. 51 —The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2007 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 Bill No. 52 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


