






















































Hansard: April 18, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1313 
 April 18, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege today to present another petition of behalf of the folks 
surrounding the Broadview area in regards to a dialysis service 
in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the folks 
of Cowessess and Grenfell. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the good people of the Maryfield 
and Fairlight communities. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
— you guessed it — Highway 310. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Buchanan 
and Kuroki. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous 
practice of transferring patients from one ambulance to another 
on the highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Central Butte. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
a petition with citizens concerned of the safety of Highway No. 
5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, 
Saskatoon, Lake Lenore, and Burr. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
southeast Saskatchewan who are very concerned about the 
condition of Highway 18. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville and 
Weyburn. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
present another petition from the citizens of Wilkie who are 
opposed to possible reductions in their health care services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wilkie Health Centre and 
special care home maintain at the very least their current 
level of services. 
 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens of Landis and Biggar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to present a petition on behalf of the 600 children 
under six years of age and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency regarding a much needed elementary 
school in the Arbor Creek-Willowgrove neighbourhood of 
Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek and Willowgrove. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Petitioners today come from the area of northwest Saskatoon — 
Wright Terrace, Wickenden Crescent, and Kenderdine Road. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of southeast Saskatchewan that would like a dialysis 
unit in the Broadview Union Hospital. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signators of this petition are from citizens from 
the southeast constituency. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring a petition of Saskatchewan people that are deeply 
concerned about the presence of sexual predators that are 
present in a threat to their communities: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up public disclosure process so 
that communities are alerted to the presence of known sex 
offenders in their community as soon as possible. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Cudworth. I so 
present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House to present a 
petition requesting an allocation of funding for an elementary 
school in the Stonebridge neighbourhood of Saskatoon. The 
prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Stonebridge. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Martin 
Crescent and Gordon Road in the Stonebridge area of 
Saskatoon Southeast. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 53 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the breakdown by 
profession of the new health care workers that have been 
recruited as a result of the recruitment grant provided by 
the provincial government last October, including the 
number of registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, 
medical laboratory technologists, respiratory therapists, 
pharmacists, physical therapists, and other professionals 
respectively? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: is SaskPower 
liable for damages to farm equipment if that equipment is 
struck by an overhead power line when passing 
underneath? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the House, Bob 
Meldrum, CMA [certified management accountant] and trustee 
in bankruptcy from the Saskatoon firm, Saskatoon office of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers. He’s seated in your gallery in the 
back row. 
 
Mr. Meldrum attended a family services bureau fundraising 
dinner last year and participated in a silent auction and 
purchased a day with the Saskatchewan Party. Today he has 
endured my bad jokes, but this has been more than offset by the 
wit and wisdom of my Saskatchewan Party colleagues. I’m 
pleased to introduce him to the House and ask all members to 
join in welcoming Mr. Meldrum. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Legislative Assembly a group of 37, 37 grade 8 students 
seated in the western gallery. They are from Sacred Heart 
School. They are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Hall and 
Ms. Digney. 
 
Sacred Heart, I’ve got some very interesting ties in there. I 
know Ms. Dziaduck. I went to school with her a while back. I 
don’t know if you kids know Ms. Dziaduck. And I even went to 
school with Ms. Grebinski, but that was a bit before that as 
well. But Sacred Heart is fairly close to where I live, Mr. 
Speaker. I know it’s a great school. There’s a lot happening and 
I’m looking forward to going to the bingo in about a week and a 
half. Anyway, please welcome these students to their 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to all 
the members of the Assembly, I want to introduce someone 
who’s certainly no stranger to those of us in the legislature. 
Seated behind the bar is my young friend, my good friend Dale 
Flavel, the former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood. Dale blessed us with his 
presence in our caucus meeting earlier today. 
 
Unfortunately I didn’t have much time to visit with him so I’ll 
be catching up on that in a few short minutes. But it’s always a 
pleasure to welcome colleagues from previous legislatures to 
their Assembly. And I ask all hon. members to join me in a 
warm welcome for Dale Flavel. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed as well in the 
government gallery there are guests from Saskatoon that are 

certainly worthy to be introduced to this House. So through and 
to you to members of this Assembly, it’s a pleasure to introduce 
two individuals instrumental in organizing the Saskatoon 
Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast. Don Funk and Les Mandtler have 
joined us here, and members will know that the prayer breakfast 
this year exceeded 2,400 people at the Prairieland exhibition 
centre, and it takes a lot of work to put on an event like that. 
 
This year’s event honoured those in the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] and in our Armed Forces and in 
protective services, especially those who have paid the ultimate 
sacrifice on behalf of our country. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming these two 
hardworking volunteers from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Golf & Country Club 100th Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Saturday I had the great pleasure to attend the 100th 
anniversary celebration of the Saskatoon Golf & Country Club. 
I was extremely pleased to have the opportunity to take part in 
this special evening to honour the club’s heritage and to 
recognize the many contributions the club makes to the quality 
of life in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Golf & Country Club is a first-class 
golf facility that is family-friendly and youth focused and has a 
strong, supportive, and extremely dynamic membership base. 
The club hosts annual golf tournaments in support of local 
charities; is a responsible leader in environmental stewardship; 
and as part of the larger community, actively contributes to the 
high quality of life that makes the city of Saskatoon and the 
province of Saskatchewan the best place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Saskatoon Golf & 
Country Club on their 100th anniversary. And as well I want to 
thank the club’s centennial committee and staff and volunteers 
for the wonderful evening and wish them every success with the 
events they have planned throughout the golfing season to 
celebrate their centennial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Golf & Country Club has a proud 
heritage and thanks to the dedicated individuals and the board 
and management team, I am sure they will have continued 
success throughout the next 100 years. So I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
April is National Cancer Awareness Month. Last week we 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

learned of a new report that showed that the national death rate 
for breast cancer had dropped 25 per cent in the last 20 years, 
thanks for the most part to a comprehensive screening program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a screening program can have such a major 
impact on death rates for breast cancer, just think about what 
the comprehensive screening program could do for colorectal 
cancer. 
 
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cancer killer in Canada 
after lung cancer and if caught early, colorectal cancer is 90 per 
cent preventable. Last year 620 new cases of colorectal cancer 
were diagnosed in Saskatchewan alone and an estimated 280 
people died from this disease. According to the Colorectal 
Cancer Association of Canada, a screening program would 
reduce the mortality rate from this disease by 30 per cent. 
 
Last fall Ontario became the first province to introduce a 
comprehensive screening program, followed shortly after by 
Manitoba and Alberta. Yet here at the home of medicare, this 
NDP government fails to act, Mr. Speaker. With the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government refusing to cover the drug 
Avastin and forcing patients to pay tens of thousands of dollars 
out of their own pocket for the standard of care, the least this 
government could do would be to launch a comprehensive 
screening program for colorectal cancer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Honorary Consul for the Federal Republic of Germany 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I take 
great pride in my German heritage and so it was both a great 
pleasure and a great honour to attend the inauguration of Ms. 
Barbara Hoggard-Lulay as the new honorary consul for the 
Federal Republic of Germany for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Hoggard-Lulay has been a member of the 
country’s foreign service since 1981. 
 
She first came to Canada for the Open Skies Conference held in 
Ottawa in February 1990. It was at this conference that an 
agreement was reached between the foreign ministers of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, the then German Democratic 
Republic, France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and 
the United States on the start of the historic Two-Plus-Four 
talks which led to the fulfillment of Germany’s dream of 
reunification. 
 
Since June 2004, Ms. Hoggard-Lulay has lived in Saskatoon 
where she works for her husband Bruce’s company, Hoggard 
International, as well as for the University of Saskatchewan. 
She teaches German at the German Language School and chairs 
the German Days Committee. 
 
Her tasks as honorary consul will include supporting 
immigrants with German passports and tourists in consular 

affairs, but maybe even more importantly, contributing to 
strengthen the Saskatchewan-German and Canadian-German 
relations in the various fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank outgoing 
honorary consul, Dr. Gunter Kocks, and congratulate honorary 
consul, Ms. Hoggard-Lulay, on her inauguration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Martensville Residents Receive A&W Gold Award 
for Excellence 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise today to acknowledge the accomplishments of business 
owners in my constituency. Brian and Bernice Buffin own and 
operate the A&W restaurant in Martensville. The member for 
Swift Current and I had the pleasure of meeting this 
hard-working couple earlier this year. They are very proud of 
their business, and their whole family is involved in helping 
out. 
 
Having only opened the restaurant in 2001, Brian and Bernice 
have worked hard to make it one of the best. They were recently 
awarded the Gold Award for Excellence in A&W restaurants in 
Canada. They are now in the top three A&Ws in this country, 
which is quite an achievement for a restaurant in small town 
Saskatchewan. The Gold Award recognizes excellence based on 
sales and operating standards. 
 
Brian, Bernice, and their family are hard-working and 
dedicated, and are committed to providing the best service 
possible for their customers. 
 
The A&W in Martensville is more than just another restaurant. 
It is a meeting place where going for a morning coffee is how 
many local residents start their day. 
 
I congratulate Brian and Bernice Buffin for this great 
achievement and I ask all members of this Assembly to join me 
in congratulating them on their recent success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Writer Disappointed with Federal Government 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, on March 28, 50 of 
Canada’s greatest artists were invited to Ottawa to help 
celebrate 50 years of the Canada Council for the Arts. One of 
these artists was Saskatoon resident Yann Martel, author of the 
Man Booker Prize winning novel, Life of Pi. 
 
What should have been a great experience for these artists was 
in fact a disappointment. The governing party barely even 
noticed the presence of these artists. Minister of Canadian 
Heritage Bev Oda gave a speech that Mr. Martel described in 
the April 14 edition of The Globe and Mail as “short.” Martel 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

goes on to describe the reception the artists received from this 
government as, quote, “Fifty years of building Canada’s 
dazzling and varied culture, done with in less than five 
minutes.” 

 
And what was the reaction of the Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker? 
Mr. Martel describes how, quote, “The Prime Minister did not 
speak during our brief tribute . . . I don’t think he even looked 
up.” 
 
The previous day at a reception held for the artists, the Prime 
Minister did not even bother to show up. This is shameful 
treatment of our artists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prime Minister Harper needs to learn to better appreciate the 
arts in Canada. Mr. Martel has agreed to send Mr. Harper a 
work of fiction every two weeks to help him do just that. The 
first one sent to Mr. Harper was The Death of Ivan Ilych by Leo 
Tolstoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if members of this House would like to learn more 
about Mr. Martel’s plan, they can visit Mr. Martel’s website at 
www.whatisstephenharperreading.ca. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Public Response 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Responses to 
our mailout on the Murdoch Carriere scandal continue to pour 
into our office and I would like to share more of those 
responses with the members opposite. 
 
From Lloydminster I quote: 
 

I am quite shocked to learn this. For many years your NDP 
government has been strongly supported mainly by 
unionized workers, who as you know, fight for a ‘no 
harassment’ workplace. We fight for workers’ rights to be 
treated with dignity and respect. What are you doing? . . . 
Wonder why you’re losing votes? 
 

From Prince Albert I quote: 
 

I am a card carrying NDP member. I volunteer for the 
party. I was so surprised that the so-an-so got paid by the 
government. In my estimation he should have been 
ordered to make a public apology to these women, 
following that, be dismissed from his position and never 
be allowed to work with the provincial government again. 
Who, in government, were the people who decided to pay 
him a 1/4 of a million dollars? And WHY! Is it a new 
government policy for harassers to win a jackpot? 
 

From Saskatoon I quote: 
 

The pay-off of 275,000 was shocking. More disturbing to 
me was the total lack of transparency. 
 

And also from Saskatoon I quote: 

There are law abiding citizens living on small incomes and 
paying taxes. It is wrong that this tax money is used to pay 
a convicted civil servant — convicted of crimes against 
other government employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, more than 90 per cent of these cards we are 
receiving echo that same sentiment. I have more to share but I 
will be sharing them at a later date. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Employer and Employee Relationships 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party would have us believe that Murdoch 
Carriere is an NDP insider. He talks about Carriere — how he is 
a buddy of the NDP cabinet ministers, how he is intertwined 
with NDP cabinet ministers. If you listen to the Leader of the 
Sask Party, it’s as if Murdoch Carriere was the best friend ever 
the NDP cabinet ministers ever had. 
 
The truth of the matter is Murdoch Carriere was an employee of 
the government. And if the definition of close personal friend is 
going to extend to employees, then the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party has a lot of explaining to do. I mean the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was working for Pat Smith in 
her office. Was he a personal close friend of hers? Was he an 
insider when she got, according to The StarPhoenix, quote, free 
“booze by [the] case”? 
 
He also worked in Graham Taylor’s office. Was he a close 
personal friend of Graham Taylor? Was he around when Mr. 
Taylor ordered $2,635 worth of free liquor for a big going-away 
party? Was the Leader of the Sask Party a close enough friend 
to be invited to the event? 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party also worked for John 
Gerich, Mr. Speaker. You remember, the one who went to jail 
for fraud. I was just wondering if they were close personal 
friends. 
 
Murdoch Carriere worked for an NDP cabinet minister in a 
department with thousands of other civil servants. According to 
Sask Party, that makes him a close personal friend. The Leader 
of the Sask Party worked with three or four other people in the 
offices . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Flooding Conditions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, at this moment at Fishing Lake, 
there’s a caravan of families and trucks and cars and trailers 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

moving furniture and belongings out, so they won’t be ruined. 
Their homes and cottages will be flooded, some beyond repair. 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy are on hand, ready to cut off utility 
services. The situation has passed serious. 
 
Ten years ago when this area flooded, people were told that it 
was a 1-in-100-year occurrence. Well that 1-in-100-year 
occurrence has now happened three times in the last 10 years. 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: please outline to the people of 
Fishing Lake what this government has done in the past 10 
years to prevent the flooding of homes and businesses in the 
Fishing Lake area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course the past year and a half, the past two years have been 
particularly bad circumstances for flooding — a particularly 
high snowfall this past winter season, the moisture conditions 
before that which have led to what some people are describing 
as a 1-in-100-years circumstance in terms of flooding for some 
parts of the province. 
 
The Department of Corrections and Public Safety through the 
past year, but particularly over the past months, has been 
working very closely with affected RMs [rural municipality] 
which we expect will be affected by the runoff. There’s a 
regional operation centre that has been set up in Nipawin. 
There’s a command centre that’s been set up on Red Earth 
which is expected to be the worst of the situation. And there’s 
more on the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there’s also more water on the 
way for the people in this area, and we’ve had 10 years for 
government to look at this area. I have had pictures of this 
situation in Fishing Lake, and they were emailed in to me this 
morning. And I’m going to send these pictures over to the 
minister right now. 
 
The pictures tell it all. The photographer couldn’t even get 
down one of the roads to take pictures because that road was 
flooded. The editor of the Foam Lake Review says, and I quote, 
“It is really a disastrous situation.” There’s still a lot of snow to 
melt. The ice is still there, ready to wreak havoc if the wind 
comes up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the NDP government going to come up 
with a long-term solution so people don’t have to be worried 
about their homes and their livelihoods every year? And what is 
the real solution from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 

Hon. Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this past weekend, 
myself, the Minister for Government Relations, the president of 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], the 
president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], we went out to investigate the situation 
first-hand out in Nipawin to observe the operations of the 
regional operations centre that’s been set up in the face of this 
circumstance. 
 
We were able to see what’s happening at Red Earth and the 
great preparations that have been made there in terms of the 
preparations around dikes, around sandbagging, and in terms of 
an evacuation plan at Red Earth. 
 
We were also able to go to the town of Arborfield where of 
course in the past number of years they’ve had some very 
drastic experience in terms of flooding. This year those folks, in 
combination with the right kind of weather conditions and some 
very dedicated preparations, they’re very confident that they’ll 
be able to face the oncoming flood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that some of 
the areas are going to be able to face the disaster, but some of 
them aren’t. And some of those people live in my constituency 
in Fishing Lake, and their situation is disastrous. Immediate 
assistance is needed right now, Mr. Speaker. There’s between 
50 and 70 cabins that are going to be flooded this weekend 
probably. 
 
We all know that a long-term solution is needed, but we also 
know there’s short-term solutions that may be needed. Can the 
minister tell me, besides looking at the situation, what the plans 
are to help the people in this area right now? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be 
able to tell the House that the Department of Corrections and 
Public Safety, together with officials from the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority, together with officials from Sask 
Environment, Highways, Community Resources, Government 
Relations, they’ve not just been watching the situation, but 
they’ve been working very closely with the people on the 
ground in terms of doing the preparation work that needs to be 
made to do the best possible job in terms of diverting water 
where possible. Fishing Lake is a particular circumstance where 
it’s of course its own closed watershed, so there’s some work 
that has been done in advance of this circumstance. 
 
It’s a very serious situation, Mr. Speaker. We take the situation 
very seriously, and we’re working very hard on a hourly basis 
with the local authorities to make sure the response is as best as 
can be possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Flooding is becoming 
a major problem across the province, and my constituency is no 
different. The flooding has gotten so bad that a huge section of 
Highway 15 has been washed out. That means people are 
struggling to get to work, and businesses are incurring extra 
cost to get their product in and out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the minister plan to do to make sure the 
flooding problem not does become more severe in my area? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
want to tell that member that within government we have been 
working together with the different departments. The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, I have met with them 
recently to determine what we might be able to expect. 
Obviously in some areas spring runoff is creating some unusual 
circumstances. When we see mayors from local communities 
suggest that in 50 years they haven’t seen these kinds of 
conditions, I think we have to expect that we’re going to have 
some difficult circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways in some instances 
has called seasonal workers back early. We have put more and 
more dollars into our provincial Highways budget. There’s an 
increase of $44 million with respect to maintenance and 
preservation. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the officials and 
the workers within the Department of Highways are working 
very hard in terms of public safety and highway safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Highway 15 near 
Nokomis is basically gone. There’s a 40-foot section of the 
highway that’s gone. And that highway is the only section of 
Highway 15 that’s been rebuilt and is good condition. The rest 
of Highway 15 is full of potholes. 
 
You were told, when that highway was built a few years ago, 
that there would be a flooding problem, Mr. Speaker; there 
would be a flooding problem. Where it was washed out, they 
put in one 20-inch culvert. They could have looked and put 
better culverts in that area. 
 
So my question is to the minister, Mr. Speaker: when are you 
going to open this highway for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to put 
all of his questions through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, when will the minister open this 
highway so the residents of the area can use it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister.  
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps 
everyone but the members of the Saskatchewan Party will 
understand that the government does not control weather. We 
don’t control the amount of moisture that is in the areas because 
of snow and because of rain. And I think most members will 
understand as well that the department officials are doing what 
they can in the spring to clear culverts that are frozen and to 
work with the local municipalities. 
 
But I want to say to that member, with respect to Highway 15 
and other highways around this province, this government has 
put more money to the provincial highway system than ever in 
the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. Much of it goes to 
preservation and maintenance. Much of it will go to flood 
control. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the 
men and women who serve these communities, who work for 
the Department of Highways. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 
received the latest update of flooding and damage in the 
Invermay-Margo area and the RMs that surround those two 
villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the village of Invermay, homes are in 2 to 3 feet 
of water. The Invermay School is close to being flooded. And in 
fact a storage shed that has never been in water is in 2 to 3 feet 
of water with damage to all equipment that’s in that storage 
shed. Mr. Speaker, as of 11:15 this morning, the school in fact 
has closed as a result of water that has entered the community. 
The village of Invermay is unable to keep its sewage plant 
pumping, and as a result of that, they have had to shut the water 
system down. There is extreme damage in the community. 
 
And I’m wondering if the Minister of Public Safety understands 
the significance and the comprehensiveness of this problem. 
What specific steps is the minister taking to ensure that there is 
help provided for this emergency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Public 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take and the 
officials in the Department of Corrections and Public Safety 
take this situation with flooding, particularly in the east central, 
northeast part of the province extremely seriously. We take it 
extremely seriously because the officials have been . . . You 
know the circumstance that we’ve got here is exceptional in 
terms of the factors that have come together in terms of 
snowfall, ground moisture levels, and the way that the melt is 
proceeding. 
 
But we’ve been doing work to get out ahead of the situation, 
working with the local RMs, who are the primary authority in 
these circumstances, to back them up in terms of what can be 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

done around protecting key resources in the affected areas, in 
terms of mitigating the situation, in terms of diversion of water 
where possible, and in terms of the emergency planning. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s no 
secret that there has been a large snowfall. We’ve known this 
for months. And in fact the RMs of Foam Lake and the RM of 
Invermay are reporting today that dozens of grid roads are in 
fact closed as a result. 
 
I just went on the highway hotline before question period, Mr. 
Speaker, and I note that Highway No. 8, north of Swan Plain, 
closed during to washout, use alternate route; Highway No. 47, 
south of Preeceville, closed due to washout, use alternate route; 
Highway No. 5 between Invermay and Rama, washout, flag 
persons in attendance, one-lane traffic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these were conditions that the government knew 
about, that officials in the department knew about. What plan 
have they put in place to deal with this emergency, to deal with 
the damage that will be created? Will the assistance that was 
provided last year to both urban and rural municipalities, will 
that plan be in effect and in fact will it be enhanced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety in conjunction 
with the other relevant departments, particularly the Sask 
Watershed Authority, have been working on a regional basis 
not just in the past weeks but in the past months to make sure 
that the local RMs and the local municipalities are prepared for 
this circumstance. 
 
Foam Lake in particular, I know that they’ve done some good 
work in terms of emergency planning and getting ready to face 
the kind of emergency that is inherent in a flooding situation. 
Certainly the town of Foam Lake went through some very 
serious incidents with fire. There was an emergency planning 
association conference two weeks ago where they had the 
highest attendance of delegates in all the years that they’ve had 
this conference. The RMs that are affected with the flooding 
were well represented in that situation, and they’re working 
very hard together with government officials to face this 
head-on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 
is a critical week for many communities across the province. 
Flooding or potential flooding is a reality in many areas 

throughout Saskatchewan including Fishing Lake, Wakaw, 
Invermay, Red Earth, the Carrot River valley, and more. 
 
And more highways than just Highway No. 15 are washed out 
or falling apart. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve just been informed 
that 39 roads are flooded currently in the RM of Foam Lake. 
This is certainly a dangerous experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps has this government taken to ensure the 
safety of Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
will probably know that we have been meeting with rural 
municipalities, that there have been regional meetings. I think 
the member will also know that we don’t control the weather. I 
think the member will also know we don’t the control the 
amount of snowfall. 
 
And I think the member will understand that the engineers who 
designed these systems, the roads and the highways, both 
municipal and provincial, design them for catastrophic years, 
but they don’t overdesign them. They design them for 1-in-50 
in a lot of cases kind of flooding arrangements. 
 
But when we have these kinds of circumstances, you do have 
bridges and roads that are washed out. We have been clearing 
culverts. We’ve been working with local municipalities. We 
have spent an enormous amount of money over the winter on 
aggregate in preparation for repairing these roads. And I would 
say to the member opposite that the professionals within the 
Department of Highways and Public Safety officials around this 
province have a very good handle on what’s happening in our 
province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may be correct in the 
fact that the government has no control over weather, but the 
government has a responsibility to put in place a plan of action 
to deal with the emergencies of this nature. 
 
In fact some of the communities affected by flooding haven’t 
received funds from the province for last year’s flooding and 
are again in the midst of more floods. In fact some claims date 
back to 2005-2006 and haven’t been settled yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this situation is dire. MLAs on this side of the 
House understand the severity of this problem and would like to 
invite the Premier and members of his government to tour some 
of these critical areas this Friday, enabling government 
members to get a clearer understanding of the seriousness and 
act immediately to help these communities. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Premier and members of his government join my colleagues 
in a tour of the flooded area? 
 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 
situation, and that’s exactly why officials from this government 
have been working very hard in terms of preparation, holding 
regional meetings, sharing information with the local 
authorities. And that’s exactly why, myself and the Minister for 
Government Relations, were in the affected region on Saturday 
along with the presidents of SUMA and SARM. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we take this situation very seriously. 
There have been a lot of preparations made for this very unique 
circumstance. It’s something that’s being monitored on an 
hour-to-hour basis. We’re working very closely with the local 
authorities who have that authority under the legislation of this 
province to be the primary actors in these situations. We’re 
there to back them up, to make sure that’s where they need 
extra help in terms of the regional operation centre and on. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Blackstrap Ski Hill 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I was 
asking questions in estimates regarding Blackstrap. And I was 
absolutely frustrated and quite frankly shocked at the lack of 
information this minister had at his disposal. 
 
What I learned last night is that a contract was let to an 
individual to operate a ski hill that was supposed to stay open 
till April 15. Everybody in Western Canada knows that ski hills 
will not operate well into April that this government had signed 
the contract for. In fact it closed in March. 
 
In the end Blackstrap was operated for roughly 36 days. The 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan wound up paying the operator 
$373,000 to operate a ski hill from February 9 to the end of 
March. That’s just over $10,000 a day for this operator, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Taxpayers are also on the hook for two lifts and — get this — 
$10,000 to build a hut for the lifties, absolutely astonishing. Mr. 
Speaker, this was all installed at great expense because it was 
done in the middle of the winter. Mr. Speaker, at $900,000 for 
seven weeks, how can the minister justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after many years of 
receiving questions from that member, I’m not surprised that, 
even though he had different information what he actually laid 
out today given to him last night, he went back to his original 
false perspective on what’s going on here. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a provincial park where there was an 
activity where we wanted to continue with skiing in this year as 
we move forward to looking out for a long-term plan for 
Blackstrap to provide recreation for the Saskatoon area. And 
there are a number of details around what happened this year 
where we have preliminary figures. I assured that member that I 
would be providing him with more detail, but the information 
that he has just laid out now is his misconception at the start of 
this, and he does not take into account even what I told him last 
night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I was absolutely astonished 
when asking this minister, after spending $900,000 on this ski 
hill, there was absolutely no long-term plan. Mr. Speaker, it 
wasn’t bad enough that they didn’t have a short-term plan going 
into the fall and winter. They finally made up their mind that 
they’re going to operate the ski hill in December. So what had 
to happen is they had to install some new lifts. Taxpayers had to 
foot the bill for pouring cement and running power to these lifts 
in January and February when it should have been done July 
and August or even next July and August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers are on the hook for $900,000 in this 
ski hill, and there’s absolutely no long-term plan. What is the 
government’s plan next year? This operator has no obligation to 
operate the ski hill next year. What’s the government’s 
long-term plan after it’s put $900,000 into this boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the funds that were 
expended this winter included a number of capital items which 
will remain with the parks system, and they will be used in any 
of the proposals as we move forward. The plan is to develop a 
long-term relationship with operators who will run this ski hill 
in the park, and that is what’s being worked on right now. Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to look out for the young people of 
the Saskatoon area who want to learn how to ski and use what 
has been a long-term asset in the Saskatoon area because it’s 
also a valuable asset in the provincial park system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to providing information that that 
member can understand at the earliest possible opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources to respond to a question from yesterday. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Rebates 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to provide a response to the oral question that I took 
notice of on our last sitting day. 
 
The response to the member from Cannington’s questions 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

yesterday regarding the deduction of SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] rebate cheques from income support 
benefits is this. I would like to point out that my department 
was preparing documents to make sure that this rebate was 
exempt as we’ve made other rebates exempt in the past. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I have instructed, as we have in the past, to exempt the 
SGI rebate cheques from being considered as income. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some time ago now the 
Minister of Government Relations committed to table, to 
present, to make public the study that this government has 
commissioned on the potential impact of Saskatchewan joining 
with BC [British Columbia] and Alberta in their trade 
agreement. We’ve still yet to see it. They’ve turned down a 
written request we made by the rules of this Assembly for such 
a report the taxpayers have funded. 
 
The question to the Premier is, will he now release that to the 
public of the province today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I look forward in the next few days to release a public 
consultation strategy with respect to the Trade, Investment, 
Labour Mobility Agreement. At that time we will be releasing 
various reports that we have commissioned so that these can be 
made available to the public. 
 
The question I have is, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that the 
Saskatchewan Party has consistently said we should be signing 
on to this agreement, would they release to the news media after 
question period their study that suggests that Saskatchewan 
should be signing on? Would they do that without delay, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Taxpayers have funded 
this Conference Board of Canada study. It’s been in the 
government’s possession now perhaps for longer than a month; 
perhaps it’s been in the government’s possession since early in 
the new year. Mr. Speaker, last fall that minister said he would 
present this report. The government would actually make a 
decision by January. They continue to miss deadlines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers have paid for this study. What’s he 

afraid of? Why won’t he table it? Why won’t he release it? And 
with respect to the consultation process, will he assure this 
Assembly today that that consultation process will be done by 
an all-party committee of this Legislative Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — . . . same taxpayers that are 
funding the Saskatchewan Party caucus, the opposition research 
caucus to a greater extent than we’ve ever seen in history. They 
too are funded by taxpayers. Where is their study? Why don’t 
they release it? They’ve made a definitive statement as to where 
we should go with this, Mr. Speaker. Why don’t they release 
those studies right after question period? Don’t equivocate on 
that. Provide the information to the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note with great interest, I note with great interest, 
Mr. Speaker, that the president and CEO [chief executive 
officer] of the Calgary Chamber of Commerce says that TILMA 
[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] will be of 
great benefit to her and other employers in Calgary because it 
means our greater access to employees from jurisdictions such 
as Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is to the Leader of the Opposition: has he studied 
that, or is he simply shilling for interest in Alberta, or is he 
standing up for Saskatchewan? Which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice for a ministerial statement. 
 
Provincial Strategy on Preventing Child Sexual Exploitation 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to announce that Saskatchewan children will be 
safer from sexual predators thanks to new government funding 
that will help the RCMP investigate crimes such as Internet 
luring and the distribution of child pornography. 
 
The Department of Justice is providing $250,000 to expand 
existing RCMP tech-crimes capabilities by providing for two 
new RCMP investigators and the purchase of specialized 
software and equipment. 
 
The safety and security of Saskatchewan children is paramount 
to this government. This new funding will strengthen our 
capacity to protect children from those that would do them 
harm. This funding is part of a $1.3 million expansion to the 
provincial strategy on child sexual exploitation that will provide 
five new municipal police officers that deal with street-level 
child sexual exploitation. It establishes a team of prosecutors to 
strengthen the use of the national filing system that identifies 
long-term or dangerous offenders and develop a public 
education campaign aimed at preventing child sexual 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

exploitation. These initiatives were announced last fall and will 
be fully implemented this year. 
 
The best news of all, Mr. Speaker, is that front-line service 
providers are telling us that this strategy is working. Police are 
reporting traffic reductions in the stroll areas. Intervention 
committees have improved networking among service 
providers. Training has been incorporated into regular staff 
training for service providers and police. And there are more 
safe places for sexually exploited children and youth. 
 
In addition to this recent strategy, there have been a number of 
other initiatives that this NDP government has undertaken in the 
past few years to help fight child sexual exploitation in this 
province. 
 
Amendments to The Highway Traffic Act were proclaimed in 
2002 which have contributed to a marked reduction in traffic in 
stroll areas and enhanced the safety of the people living in those 
areas. Since November 2004, The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act has improved community safety by 
targeting and if necessary shutting down residential and 
commercial buildings that are used for unlawful activities such 
as prostitution. 
 
Since 1997 public prosecutions has directed prosecutors to 
divert prostitution charges laid against children and youth 
whenever appropriate, and to seek meaningful penalties when 
persons are convicted of sexually exploiting children. Since 
1999, the Saskatchewan Police Commission has directed police 
to view sexually exploited children and youth as victims and to 
work with child protection staff to ensure their safety. It also 
strives to ensure that those who offend against these children 
and youth are charged. 
 
In closing, I thank all of the partners involved in this strategy 
for their hard work and dedication in keeping our children safe 
and making Saskatchewan communities better and safer places 
to live, work, and raise a family. Thanks to our combined 
efforts, crime rates are declining in our province. And through 
initiatives like this one I am announcing today, they will 
continue to fall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
supportive of any initiative that will make our province safe and 
will provide better protection for our children. The 
Saskatchewan Party, through former Sask Party MLA Arlene 
Julé who — I might add, Mr. Speaker, will be the next MLA for 
Saskatoon Nutana — pressed the tired NDP government until it 
created an all-party committee to deal with the child sex trade, 
that committee, the child exploitation task force, was effective 
in bringing about legislation and funding for this very serious 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party, through its members 
from Kelvington-Wadena and Saskatoon Northwest, pressed the 
government to do something about crystal meth. The member 
from Regina South, who is now the Finance minister, 

pooh-poohed the concerns of the Saskatchewan Party and called 
crystal meth nothing more than the flavour of the week. The 
Saskatchewan Party continued its pressure until the same tired 
and worn-out NDP appointed the member from Sutherland to 
do a review. And surprise, surprise, Mr. Speaker, he came to the 
same conclusion: that crystal meth was dangerous and highly 
addictive. Now the NDP is playing catch-up to develop 
facilities and treatment for young crystal meth addicts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know child luring on the Internet and child 
pornography are rapidly growing, serious threats. We have 
pressed the NDP before to commit resources for these 
problems. While we respect today’s initiative, we have grave 
concerns that it is too little, too late. The Saskatchewan Party 
will always be there for the children of this province. 
 
While today’s announcement is a start, it is only that. We want 
to see a serious, comprehensive plan to deal with sexual 
predators dealing with the Internet and using the Internet to lure 
Saskatchewan children and to deal with child pornography. The 
province regularly receives police tips from out of province and 
needs to be able to act on them promptly and with appropriate 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children are our most precious resource. We 
owe it to them to provide safety and security. The NDP should 
do better. The Saskatchewan Party will do better. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 64, An Act respecting a Graduate Tax Exemption and 
repealing The Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 64, The 
Graduate Tax Exemption Act be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 65, 
The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 65, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 1,117 through 
1,122 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,117 through to 1,122 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before proceeding to my remarks related to Bill No. 63, I would 
ask leave of the House to make introductions of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted for introductions to the 
minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the legislature. I’m pleased to introduce some 
guests who are in the gallery here today who have come to the 
Assembly, to their Assembly this afternoon, particularly to be 

here to observe the second reading of The Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum Act. And I’d like to introduce them to you. I’d ask that 
if they would just simply give a wave as I introduce them so 
that you can see who they are, and then we’ll welcome them all 
together at the end. 
 
First of all, I would like to introduce to you Elder Velma 
Goodfeather, and Elder Goodfeather has been involved in 
working together with a number of other First Nation elders 
with the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in the process of 
developing policy regarding the access to and the care and 
handling and the repatriation of sacred and culturally sensitive 
artifacts. And that is a significant subject in the legislation that 
we’ll be talking about today. 
 
Elder Goodfeather is joined by the director of the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, Dave Baron, as well as Harold Bryant 
who is the curator of earth sciences at the RSM [Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum] and Margaret Hanna who is the curator 
of Aboriginal history at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. 
 
And they are joined by an enthusiastic band of supporting 
actors who also are employed at the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum and take great interest in the legislation. I believe from 
left to right — if I’ve got these in the correct order — are 
Lee-Ann Irvin, Alyssa Becker, Evelyn Siegfried, Michele 
Kraetzig, Paula Hill, Jan Brace, and Mike Benoit. 
 
I would ask all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to show welcome 
to these folks in their gallery of the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today 
to move second reading, at the conclusion of my remarks, of 
Bill No. 63, The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum is an important 
asset and institution for the Government of Saskatchewan. It 
contributes to the province’s heritage, education, scientific 
knowledge as well as our tourism industry. The government is 
tabling this new statute to set out in law the mandate and 
purpose of the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and to establish in 
law some important principles related to the museum’s 
operations. 
 
The Royal Saskatchewan Museum already serves the people of 
Saskatchewan as the steward of the provincial collection of 
artifacts and life sciences, earth sciences, and ethnology. These 
artifacts have significant scientific, educational, and interpretive 
value. This statute that we’re talking about today lays out that 
stewardship role and clarifies how that role will be realized. 
 
However the scope of the museum goes well beyond housing 
artifacts. Although not widely known, a major focus of the 
museum is primary research. The Royal Saskatchewan Museum 
for example discovered one of the most complete and largest 
T.Rex [Tyrannosaurus rex] fossils in the world that we’ve 
lovingly come to know as Scottie in the Frenchman River 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

Valley near Eastend. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The museum has also conducted archaeological research at the 
original site of Stanley Mission. This research has contributed 
to our understanding of early European settlement in Canada 
and the relationship, the very important relationship of 
European settlers with First Nations peoples of this land that we 
have come to know and love and we now call Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important aspects of this new Act 
for me personally and for the Government of Saskatchewan is 
that the Royal Saskatchewan Museum will establish a policy 
regarding the access to and the care, use, and repatriation of 
sacred and culturally sensitive artifacts. The museum and the 
province has and will continue to work with First Nations elders 
and members of First Nations cultural community to ensure that 
this policy responds to concerns raised by First Nations people 
that culturally sensitive artifacts are held in museum collections. 
The Royal Saskatchewan Museum currently has more than 100 
objects in its collection that would be considered sacred or 
culturally sensitive. 
 
These items are not used in the museum’s research, in their 
exhibition, or educational programs because of their sacred 
nature. This new Act will ensure that the sensitivity of these 
artifacts is protected and that they are managed respecting the 
concerns and the wishes of Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal peoples. 
The Royal Saskatchewan Museum has already agreed that if the 
communities from which these artifacts originated would wish, 
the artifacts will be returned. Conversely, if it is the wish of 
First Nations people, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum can be a 
keeper of artifacts. 
 
This agreement opens the door for the museum to play a role, a 
very important role. And while I predict it will be increasingly 
important as the decades march past in Saskatchewan history, 
the agreement opens the door for the museum to play a role to 
work with First Nations to facilitate the repatriation of artifacts 
from outside the province as well. 
 
In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to point out that the 
Royal Saskatchewan Museum has been serving the people of 
Saskatchewan proudly for over 100 years and celebrated its 
centennial in 2006. I would suggest that it’s time to have its 
own Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second 
reading of Bill No. 63, The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act, 
2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 63, The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum Act be now read a second time. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 63, An Act respecting 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. And in rising to speak to the 
motion, I would like to join with the minister in welcoming the 
guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and particularly note our 
vote of appreciation to the First Nations people and elders who 

are here and have been working with the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum on this very important project over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum is a very 
integral and important part of the fabric of Saskatchewan. For 
100 years this organization has undertaken to make sure that the 
natural history of Saskatchewan and in particular of its First 
Nations Aboriginal people have been properly safeguarded and 
have been a focus of a great deal of respect and attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, countless numbers of young people over the years 
can mark with a great deal of pride a trip to the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum as an important learning experience that 
they’ve had in their class projects. And I think it is very 
appropriate as the minister outlined that it is time that the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum indeed had its own piece of legislation, 
and embedded in that legislation is the absolute necessity to 
properly respect and understand the culturally sensitive objects 
and traditions of our First Nations people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note in the mandate section 4(1) it says and I 
quote, that: 
 

. . . the museum is responsible for undertaking any 
measures that the museum considers advisable to increase 
interest in, knowledge and understanding of, and 
appreciation and respect for Saskatchewan’s natural 
history and Aboriginal cultures. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that says it all. I think that is a very 
important mandate. We very much are supportive of this 
legislation. We think it is important. We are looking forward to 
the discussion that is going to occur. We look forward in a very 
timely fashion of indeed speaking to individuals from the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum and the First Nations elders to make 
sure that this legislation meets all of the needs of making sure 
that the safeguards that are undertaken in this are going to be 
appropriately undertaken. We count on this happening in a very 
timely manner and in order to allow that discussion and 
consultation to occur, at this time I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 63 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to rise and enter the debate on Bill No. 17, miscellaneous 
statutes referring to municipal taxation. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
introduces new requirements of municipalities and the 
possibility of new penalties for municipalities that decide to not 
to pass property tax revenue on to school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a reaction to the tax revolt that had 
actually happened in the past. And the government come forth 
with this Bill, but in typical fashion the consultation process 
was very much ignored. It was a reaction to the tax revolt and 
how they could respond to ensure that money would be 
forwarded if something like a tax revolt was coming again. But 
what this does, what this Bill has done now, municipalities now 
face the prospect of having to pay interest on any tax funds that 
are withheld from school boards or any other taxation authority. 
 
Since the NDP actually failed to adequately address the 
education portion of property tax, many RMs felt that the only 
way that they could get the attention of the NDP government 
was to revolt. And that was their only choice to bring this to the 
front lines. With the NDP unable to provide anything more 
substantial than band-aid solutions, they now feel their best 
option is to legislate these RMs into ending their revolt or fear 
financial penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’re changes to this Act that are slightly more 
benign, there’s no doubt about that. Municipal hail insurance 
premiums will no longer be collected in the same manner as 
municipal taxes. 
 
Through this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the government would also be 
able to take further action toward municipal governments that 
withhold property tax monies from school boards. The minister 
would be able to reduce or withhold revenue-sharing grants to 
an offending municipality. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s kind of the nuts and bolts of the Bill. 
But when I mention the consultation process or lack thereof of 
the consultation process, we can understand from the school 
boards that this Bill, they would like this Bill in place because 
that would ensure that the monies would not be withheld from 
the school boards. But what does it mean to other 
municipalities? And this is the part that was totally ignored in 
the preparation of this Bill. 
 
And I know there’s been some correspondence with the 
minister, whether he in fact has responded to the literature that’s 
been sent or the letters that have been sent him. But it’s 
interesting — for the record, I’d like to put some of the 
comments on record that is coming from municipalities. It was 
indicated that the changes being considered in this Bill are 
considered in order to halt the inappropriate and illegal actions 
taken by some municipalities. 
 
Now the question that came from some municipalities, if the 
minister has already stated that these actions are already illegal, 
why are there changes required? Because this Bill is stating that 
they’re illegal, but the minister’s already said what they did 
before was illegal. So it doesn’t really make much sense. 
 
Now if the intent of these changes is to allow for taxes collected 
on behalf of school divisions to be provided to respective 

school divisions sooner, municipalities fail to see how such 
changes will accommodate this. Under the structure of some of 
the municipalities or most of the municipalities now, taxes are 
collected, 30 per cent of the property taxes are collected in 
January and discounts for early tax payments are granted by 
municipalities. A January of a 4 per cent in some — I won’t say 
all of them — but in some municipalities a 4 per cent discount 
in January. And it goes down 3, 2, and 1 per cent discounts up 
until April. Now if you take that into consideration, this gives 
the municipalities some operating cash flow. 
 
Now if this Bill is enacted the way it is, what’s going to happen 
to the municipalities is they’re going to have trouble generating 
significant cash flow early in the year. And rather than pay 
interest to a financial institution for the privilege of borrowing 
money to operate the taxes for this period of January until the 
levy date of 1 July, by allowing the discount it allows the 
municipalities to pass on the savings along to the taxpayers. It 
makes sense. 
 
So with this Bill, the way it’s structured, this discount would 
not be allowed, therefore why would one want to pay taxes 
early in January if you’re not going to get a discount? So you 
would actually delay paying your taxes until the tax date, and 
now you’ve left this void of a five- to six-month period without 
a cash flow, with a cash flow problem for the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote from one of the letters 
that I have received, and I’ve received calls and letters from 
municipalities on this particular issue. And I’d just like to quote 
one paragraph here: 
 

The property tax concerns that have provoked a few RMs 
to choose to withhold education property taxes are unique 
to RMs. That being given, if the problem does not affect 
all municipalities, why has the government’s so-called 
solution targeted all municipalities, including those that 
were never engaged in any “inappropriate and illegal” 
activity? Furthermore, the proposed amendments will do 
nothing to address the root of the problem — an 
excessively high proportion of the education tax burden 
being shouldered by owners of agricultural land — but 
will instead serve only to perpetuate the city/rural 
divisions that are so evident in this province and to further 
alienate the rurally based population. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the sentiment that’s being raised to us by a 
number of municipalities. 
 
I would also like to, I’d like to, again from a municipality, just 
to highlight a couple of points. And again it deals with the 
discounts for the prompt payment of property taxes after the tax 
notices have been sent out. And again, the 5, 4, 3 and some of 
them are different. There’s a minimum of 5 and a max 7. 
There’s various discount rates that would be in there. And in 
this letter, it quotes that: 
 

The government is planning other changes that are equally 
distressing. Whereas the proposed changes will allow for a 
Council to choose whether or not to provide discounts for 
the prepayment of taxes, if a municipality does choose to 
provide such a discount, the proposed regulations will 
prescribe discounts that are “equal to not less than 5% 



April 18, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

plus 1% for each month prior to September that the taxes 
are paid and not more than 7% plus 1% for each month 
prior to September that the taxes are paid”. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this whole issue of the discounts is quite 
disturbing to some of the people in the RMs. They also state 
that since these discounts must also be applied to the collection 
of school taxes, school divisions will also have no choice but to 
raise their mill rates to recover lost revenue. And that again 
goes to the cash flow issues of the six-month period that is in 
question here. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is just a number of questions that need to be 
answered in this Bill. And these questions have been raised, 
raised to us. And again it goes to the point that there was no 
consultation done on this Bill with the municipalities. 
 
And a few of these questions about the amendments I would 
like to put into the record. That is: 
 

What will such changes cost . . . [municipalities]? Given 
that the changes will only make things more difficult for 
affected municipalities, what other purpose will they 
serve? Who is going to benefit? Why have rural and small 
urban municipalities been singled out? Why haven’t 
municipalities been consulted about how changes that will 
so dramatically impact the way they conduct their 
operations? [That’s what I mentioned.] How can the 
government feel that it is appropriate to so quickly take 
away the very autonomy that we were promised in order to 
sell us on the new act in the first place? 
 

Those are very, very good questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when we look at, we look at these changes doing, again 
from a municipal point of view, and what a concerned citizen 
has said is: 
 

At best, these changes are ill-conceived and lacking the 
appropriate consideration of their impact on 
Saskatchewan’s rural residents. At worst, they are a 
punitive measure designed to penalize rural municipalities 
who have been acting against the level of school tax that 
they are forced to bear. If that is the case, why are the 
small urban municipalities who never withheld a dime 
from their respective school divisions being targeted by 
these measures? 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that I’ve posed in 
my statements. And I understand, I understand that the minister 
is now considering an amendment to this Bill because I’m sure 
he has received some of the same correspondence that I have 
received, and I’m sure he understands that the lack of 
consultation resulted in an ill-conceived Bill. 
 
And so if he has read and understood the concerns addressed by 
the municipalities, that I’m sure he will agree that an 
amendment is necessary to this Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also am aware that amendments can only 
be introduced once the Bill is in committee, so I would at this 

time like to move Bill 17 to committee so we can have the 
amendment brought forward. If the minister will bring an 
amendment to this Bill forward and then we will have time, we 
will have time to go out to the municipalities and to the 
stakeholders to have their input on what the amendment might 
be or will be. And at that time it would be discussed whether we 
are going to require public hearings on this Bill or not. 
 
So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move 
this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion proposed by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill No. 17, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection 
of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
17, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 17 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 17 stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House to 
introduce a motion related to the sitting of the House on 
Tuesday of next week. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2007 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, all members of the Assembly 
will be aware of the passing of the late Jack Wiebe, our 
lieutenant governor, and the fact that there is a state funeral 
being held on Tuesday of next week. And therefore I move, 
seconded by the House Leader of the opposition, by leave of the 
Assembly that: 
 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, the Assembly 
shall not meet on Tuesday, April 24, 2007 in respect of the 
state funeral service of the Hon. John (Jack) Wiebe, 
former lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, the Government House Leader, seconded by the 
member for Melfort, the Opposition House Leader that: 
 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, the Assembly 
shall not meet on Tuesday, April 24, 2007 in respect of the 
state funeral service of the Hon. John (Jack) Wiebe, 
former lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate the good 
work of the Human Services Committee as well as the Standing 
Committee on the Economy, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:52.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1313 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1314 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1314 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1314 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Golf & Country Club 100th Anniversary 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
 Colorectal Cancer Awareness 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
 Honorary Consul for the Federal Republic of Germany 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
 Martensville Residents Receive A&W Gold Award for Excellence 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
 Writer Disappointed with Federal Government 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1316 
 Public Response 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1317 
 Employer and Employee Relationships 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Flooding Conditions 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 Blackstrap Ski Hill 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Rebates 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
 Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1322 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Provincial Strategy on Preventing Child Sexual Exploitation 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 64 — The Graduate Tax Exemption Act 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
 



 

 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Royal Saskatchewan Museum Act 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................1327 
MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


