






















































Hansard: March 22, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 35A  THURSDAY, MARCH 22, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 937 
 March 22, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege this morning to present a petition on behalf of the 
residents of Saskatchewan. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
the community of Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These eight pages of 
petitions represent just a few of the signatures of more than 600 
individuals who signed similar petitions in the community of 
Shaunavon. They’re concerned about the potential closure or 
the imminent closure, I should say, of the SaskPower office in 
that community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by individuals from 
the community of Shaunavon and other surrounding 
communities. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the Broadview Hospital and the lack of a renal 
dialysis unit there. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to implement a strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in the 
Broadview, Whitewood, and the Cowessess area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about the state 
of Highway 310 in my area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Margo, Hazel Dell, Wadena, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another one of the dozens of petitions with hundreds of 
signatures of people who are concerned about the decision by 
SaskPower to close the customer service office in Rosetown. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Sovereign, Herschel, Zealandia. I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
to present a petition on behalf of the residents of the areas of 
Turtleford, Turtle Lake, Livelong, Glaslyn, and Fairholme. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 

 
I’m pleased to present this this morning, Mr. Speaker, and the 
signatories are from Livelong and Turtle Lake. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
who are very upset with this government’s action in turning a 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

portion of Highway 22 back to gravel. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey and area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Bulyea, Earl Grey, and Southey. And I’m very 
pleased to be able to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again it will 
come as no surprise today that I have several pages of a petition 
of citizens that are concerned about the safety when driving on 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Quill Lake, 
Saskatoon, Humboldt, Prince Albert, Cudworth, Bruno, Sturgis, 
Viscount, Meacham, and Dundurn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very upset with the condition of Highway 18. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18, so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Beaubier and Lake 
Alma. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present another 
petition opposed to possible reductions of health care services 
in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at the current level of services. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Ruthilda and Biggar and district. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very concerned about 
the hardships it would cause residents, particularly seniors, if 
the lab facility at the Lafleche and District Health Centre would 
close. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 
continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Lafleche, 
Aneroid, Meyronne, and my hometown of Fir Mountain. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the condition 
of our provincial roads. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road to 
No. 795. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Livelong and 
Turtle Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on cellular coverage. The cellular coverage 
provided by SaskTel in a lot of areas is unreliable and/or in a lot 
of cases nonexistent. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in regions 
encompassing the constituency of Batoche. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Lanigan, 
Carmel, Humboldt, St. Brieux, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan 
Highways’ employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from the 
town of Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present a petition regarding sexual harassment in the workplace. 
I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to create legislation to require 
employers in the province to implement a sexual 
harassment policy that incorporates zero tolerance for 
harassers; open investigations being conducted by trained, 
capable, and unbiased investigators; disclosure of findings 
to the victim and harasser; accountability by investigators; 
and zero tolerance for employers that target complainants. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed with many pages of 
signatures from good citizens of Saskatoon and area. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to present a petition for petitioners that believe the 
future economic proposals are in jeopardy due to the status of 
Highway 20 and that there is an urgent need to upgrade that 
part of the highway prior to weight status. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 

By the good people from Nokomis and Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today and present a petition regarding a dialysis 
unit in the Broadview Union Hospital. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Broadview. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 40 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 
and Immigration: how many harassment-related 
complaints were filed in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have a similar question, Mr. Speaker, for the fiscal year 
2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005, 2005-2006, 
2006-2007. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 
and Immigration: of the harassment complaints filed in the 
2000-2001 fiscal year, how many were verified? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for subsequent years right 
through to 2006-2007. 
 
While I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 
and Immigration: how many department employees were 
charged with harassment for the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar questions for subsequent years through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 40 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

and Immigration: how many department employee 
harassment cases resulted in convictions, disciplinary 
action, or firings in the fiscal year 2000-2001? 

 
I have the same question repeated for all years through to 
2006-2007. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, while I have the floor, I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 
and Immigration: how much money was paid out as a 
result of firings related to department employee 
harassment in the fiscal year 2000-2001 through to 
2006-2007? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many long-term care beds 
will the new Olive Lodge long-term care facility in 
Saskatoon accommodate? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to welcome a large number of people who have joined us 
here today to hear the provincial budget that I’ll bring down 
shortly. I know people have travelled from all across this 
province. Many represent different communities, different 
interest groups, different stakeholders. And I’ve welcomed very 
much, as have my cabinet colleagues and caucus colleagues, the 
advice that they provided us in preparing the budget. I welcome 
them here today. 
 
I want to tell members I’ll be on my best behaviour today 
because my mother is joining me. So if I’m not as animated as 
usual, you’ll understand why. So again, please join me in 
welcoming . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Commitment to Reducing Property Tax 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to set the record 
straight when it comes to the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] 
commitment on reducing property tax. Over the last two days, 
we have heard the NDP government can’t keep its promise on 
long-term property tax relief because the federal government 
broke its promise on equalization. 
 
However, let’s set the record straight. The promise the Premier 

and the NDP government made was clear, unequivocal, and did 
not include any mention tying property tax relief to federal 
equalization payments. In 2003 the Premier told the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, and I quote: 
 

“Our priority in tax reform for government over the next 
several years must be the matter of . . . education 
[funding]. 
 

And quote: “The status quo is not on.” 
 
On the day he released an NDP 2003 election platform the 
Premier said, and I quote: 
 

“It is a platform that provides the room to receive the 
recommendations of the Boughen Commission on the 
funding of education.” 

 
Then on November 12, 2004, a news release on school division 
amalgamation. The then Learning minister who is now Finance 
minister said, and I quote: 
 

“These changes are necessary as we move forward to 
provide long-term, sustainable property tax relief.” 

 
I think it is disingenuous at best for the Premier to now say that 
he cannot keep this promise without federal equalization money 
when that was never a condition of his original promise. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Retaining and Recruiting Health Care Providers 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Retaining and 
recruiting valuable health care providers is a priority for our 
government. Today health professionals from all across 
Saskatchewan are gathering at 22 Telehealth sites to learn more 
about the $6 million retention initiative that we announced in 
January to help reduce employee workload and burnout, and to 
promote professional development opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the best retention innovations very 
often come from health providers themselves, and this program 
capitalizes on that valuable source of knowledge. This 
workshop will ensure that health workers and employers are 
aware of the program and can start working together to apply 
for these retention grants. Funding for the program flows from 
our $25 million retention and recruitment plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have recently announced a number of new 
initiatives aimed at recruiting health providers. Since 
introducing these programs, we’ve seen more health care 
workers choose Saskatchewan. For instance, 35 per cent of new 
recruitment grant applicants are health professionals coming 
from Alberta to Saskatchewan. Thirty-eight per cent are new 
Saskatchewan graduates choosing to stay and take a job in our 
province. 
 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

Mr. Speaker, this is exciting news for Saskatchewan’s health 
system. With the health workforce action plan as our guide, our 
government will continue to follow through on our commitment 
to ensure the province has the right number of health workers to 
meet the needs of our members. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Voice of a Victim 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleague, the member for Martensville, asked the Minister of 
the Public Service Commission some questions on the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal that arose from a statement by one of the 
victims. Mr. Speaker, I would like to share the full statement 
with the House today to get it on record. And I quote: 
 

I am one of the nine women who were part of a settlement 
relating to the sexual harassment that eventually led to the 
dismissal of Murdoch Carriere. 
 
I worked in the Environment Department with Murdoch 
Carriere. 
 
When I complained to him about his behaviour, Carriere 
would respond with several points. He would say I was 
lucky to have my job. He would say he had friends in high 
places, while pointing to a picture of the Environment 
Minister, Buckley Belanger. That picture was always in 
Carriere’s office. I felt threatened and frightened for my 
job. 
 
Some people tried to do the right thing but were shut 
down. Most people in high places just turned a blind eye to 
Murdoch Carriere’s behaviour. 
 
Murdoch Carriere should not have been rewarded for his 
repeated harassment of women in the workplace. It is 
wrong. 
 

And I end the quote. Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s very 
important that these women’s voices are heard after being so 
ignored for so long by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

The Reality of Equalization 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 12 federal 
Conservative members of parliament have betrayed the trust of 
the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Betrayal — there’s no other way to put it. 
Saskatchewan’s Conservative members of parliament and the 
Prime Minister are on the record promising that 100 per cent of 

resource revenues would be excluded from equalization. Some 
went so far as to provide numbers, Mr. Speaker. Eight hundred 
million dollars a year said one. Over a billion for Saskatchewan 
said another. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality falls far short of that — some 
$800 million short. Mr. Speaker, $800 million a year is enough 
to eliminate the provincial sales tax. It could mean the 
elimination of the education portion of property tax. Eight 
hundred million dollars is enough to cover the cost of tuition for 
each and every Saskatchewan post-secondary education student 
four times over. 
 
And where are the members opposite on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker? Firmly under the thumb of their political masters in 
Ottawa. It’s true. The Leader of the Opposition has bleated a 
couple of times in token protest of Harper’s broken promise, but 
the Saskatchewan Party’s unfailing support of the federal 
Conservatives on this issue is illustrated clearly by their refusal 
to debate our motion calling on Saskatchewan’s Conservative 
members of parliament to vote against the federal budget. 
 
And it’s proof positive that the Saskatchewan Party’s loyalties 
are with the federal Conservatives and not the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Coverage of the Carriere Scandal 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the 
member from Riversdale became the Premier in 2001, there has 
been only one issue that comes to mind that has received as 
much coverage as the Murdoch Carriere scandal, and that would 
be the fact that the NDP misled the people of Saskatchewan for 
six years about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]. 
 
At times like these, editorials and commentaries are plentiful, 
and I’d like to share a commentary from John Gormley of 
Rawlco Radio from March 12 of this year. I quote: 
 

So, Saskatchewan’s tired and desperately campaigning 
NDP government started last week deflecting and dodging 
the indefensible, a 275,000 dollar payout to an ex-high 
ranking civil servant they’d fired for cause, [and] for 
allegedly harassing women employees. 

 
In fact nine women who said that they had been harassed 
were paid $130,000. 
 
And Murdoch Carriere has been convicted of two counts 
of common assault, but to pay him out is inexcusable. 

 
[And] So, the week went on. The same tired and desperate 
NDP government ends up losing a byelection with the 
lowest popular vote in nearly 70 years. [And] The day 
after, the tired and now emphasize, really desperately 
campaigning government rolls out for the first time . . . a 
ten-year highways plan and after fifteen years in 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

government actually . . . [spends] more money than they 
take in from roads from me and you . . . [to] road taxes. 
 
Yet the week . . . [at the end of the week] the same 
government dogged by the same scandal. Lesson . . . 
important matters of principle that count just don’t go 
away . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Friendship and Close Ties 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of 
friendship W. Somerset Maugham once said, “We know our 
friends by their defects rather than by their merits.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, by that measure it’s clear that the Leader of the 
Opposition knows who his friends are. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition was recently in Calgary to raise 
money to further his right wing agenda here in Saskatchewan. 
Attending the dinner were a number of his old friends and 
colleagues from his days working in the Devine government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Emsley was there. For those who may not 
remember, Doug Emsley was Grant Devine’s assistant principal 
secretary. Gordon Dirks was there, Mr. Speaker. Gordon Dirks 
was Grant Devine’s minister of Social Services. And Paul 
Schoenhals was there. He was Grant Devine’s minister of 
Energy and Mines. And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, Grant 
Devine himself attended the Leader of the Opposition’s 
fundraising dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Somerset Maugham once said, that’s definitely 
a group of friends who would know each other “. . . by their 
defects rather than by their merits.” After all, they were all 
members of the most inept and most corrupt administration in 
the history of Canada — one that left this province close to 
bankruptcy and teetering on the edge of ruin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party likes to deny their close 
ties to that misguided administration, but I’m sure that the 
Leader of the Opposition and the other Sask Party members 
didn’t deny their affiliation with the Devine government at the 
dinner that night. How could they, Mr. Speaker? That would 
just be too much to swallow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Connections and Relationships 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last few days the Saskatchewan Party and the 
media have been asking various NDP cabinet ministers about 
their connections with Murdoch Carriere, the former 
government manager who was fired for harassment and 
convicted of assault, who the NDP happened to pay $275,000 
to. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the opposition and the media who 
have questions. It’s government employees as well. Last week a 
government employee emailed a radio talk show host about 
their concerns, and I wish to quote it: 
 

I’ve noticed every time I see this news clip of Carriere in 
his old Prince Albert office on the local TV news, a picture 
of whom I believe is Eldon Lautermilch hanging on his 
office wall beside some stuffed geese. The picture is at 
least the size of your common Saskatchewan map, and we 
were discussing this at work last week. 
 
We all work for the province and this was the coffee 
discussion. When asked around the table who in their right 
mind would ever hang a huge picture of the minister in the 
office, not one person said they would ever do that. It’s 
100 per cent inappropriate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with the government refusing to provide answers 
on this case, it’s no wonder that people, including government 
employees, are left to speculate about the true relationships 
between NDP cabinet ministers and Murdoch Carriere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, for two weeks the official 
opposition has asked the Minister of Public Service 
Commission how many complaints were brought forward by 
women prior to the nine women that we know of involved in 
the Murdoch Carriere scandal. First the minister said she could 
not answer the question with any precision. Then she said she 
couldn’t divulge personal details, but she did promise the media 
that she would give them the number of complaints. 
 
My question is simple. What is the number? How many 
complaints prior to 2002? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan we have the freedom of information and personal 
protection privacy Act which, as all members of the legislature 
will know, covers private and personal information including 
people’s personnel files. I’ve indicated this in the past. I can say 
this to the members opposite, that I’m not at liberty to reveal 
any information that’s contained in people’s personnel files. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, since it took the NDP 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

government four years to even apologize to Murdoch Carriere’s 
victims, it’s not surprising that they have no answers for us 
today. The victims of harassment and the people of this 
province deserve answers today, not four years from now. 
 
So I’ll ask again — and I’m not asking for personal 
information; I just want a number — how many women 
launched complaints against Murdoch Carriere prior to 2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to speak to the credibility of the members of the 
opposition who are desperately seeking to become the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And the credibility goes like 
this. 
 
At first, Mr. Speaker, they accused the Government of 
Saskatchewan of erasing Mr. Carriere’s hard drive, and that was 
simply inaccurate. Secondly, they accused the Government of 
Saskatchewan of having a gag order on the women, and that 
was simply inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. Then they portrayed the 
comments of Justice Laing and tabled a document in the 
legislature where those comments are nowhere to be found. 
And that speaks to their credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I think the worst offence of all is to 
have ads running on Rawlco Radio stations saying that Mr. 
Carriere was compensated for harassment using taxpayers’ 
money, when that is clearly inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, one of the victims said in a 
letter the minister was given yesterday, and I quote: 
 

Some people tried to do the right thing but were shut 
down. Most people in high places just turned a blind eye to 
Murdoch Carriere’s behaviour. 

 
Clearly the harassment was going on for quite some time and no 
one in this NDP government listened to any of these victims. 
I’ll give the minister another chance to answer my very simple 
question. How many people complained about Murdoch 
Carriere prior to 2002? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when the NDP 
government came to office in 1991, as part of our overhaul of 
the occupational health and safety legislation in this province 
we included harassment as a occupational health and safety 
offence. What did some members that were in this legislature in 
that time period do? They not only voted against the 
amendment to the occupational health and safety legislation, but 
they tried to delete harassment as an occupational health and 

safety issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan we have legislation that 
protects workers from harassment in the workplace, whether 
they work in the private sector or the public sector. We expect 
that our workplaces will be safe and free of harassment, which 
those members voted against in the early 1990s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, talking about zero tolerance 
does not make it so; practising it would. And these women have 
not experienced that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — We’ve seen lately that members on the 
opposite side seem to have a hard time hearing us from time to 
time. It’s relatively quiet in here and I don’t know how much 
louder I can speak but I will ask one more time. How many 
complaints were lodged against Murdoch Carriere prior to 
2002? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I will once again confirm 
that that is private, personal information, Mr. Speaker. But what 
I will say to the members opposite, what I will say to the 
members opposite, on April 1, 2003 when we all woke up to the 
front page of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix and saw the content of 
the Gillies report, the members opposite not once, not twice, not 
three times, but four times called for the firing of Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have another piece of legislation called 
The Public Service Act, which clearly distinguishes between the 
hiring and firing which is done by a professional public service 
and the role and function of the elected, the politicians. We do 
not hire and fire, but nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we did — with 
their concurrence, at their urging, Mr. Carriere was fired. And 
we have now compensated him for a number of issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the victims of Murdoch 
Carriere’s harassment have stated that the abuse went on for a 
very long time. They have told us that people tried to do the 
right thing and bring forward complaints. When was the very 
first complaint about Murdoch Carriere brought forward, and 
why didn’t the NDP listen to the victims then? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, under the harassment 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

policy people lodge a formal complaint against an alleged 
harasser. The harassment was lodged in September 2002. A 
person was appointed to investigate the harassment. Mr. 
Carriere was demoted by three levels. He was suspended 
without pay for three months. And he was moved to Regina and 
he had no staff, Mr. Speaker. But I can say to the members 
opposite that the deputy minister of the day disciplined Mr. 
Carriere and the rest, Mr. Speaker, is history. 
 
Now I know why the members opposite want to continue to 
discuss this issue. It’s because they don’t want to talk about a 
booming economy where we have thousands and thousands and 
thousands of new jobs being created. They don’t want to talk 
about hope that people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Ministers’ Relationships with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that 
the minister opposite doesn’t want to talk about her 
government’s allowance of harassment in the workplace of nine 
women in the Department of the Environment in 2002 and 
before that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago the 
former Environment minister denied having a personal 
relationship with Murdoch Carriere despite the fact that Carriere 
called him in December 2002 for help once an investigation 
was taking place. The minister denied such a relationship 
despite the fact that he had known Carriere for more than two 
decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the former minister of the Environment tell us 
today whether or not he has ever visited Murdoch Carriere’s 
Niska Camp in the Cumberland delta? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite 
will know, I am the person responsible for the Public Service 
Commission and I answer questions on this file. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about the members 
opposite, and it’s because I don’t think any of them have ever 
been in government, when you are a minister you become 
acquainted with people that work in your government 
department. You become acquainted with them. You develop a 
professional relationship with them, Mr. Speaker. That is not 
unusual. And if you were to ask any minister in this country, 
they have a professional relationship with the people that work 
in their department. This is not unusual. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is unusual is for the members opposite 
to portray that professional relationship as one of friendship and 

a personal relationship. Now let’s talk about what friendship 
and a personal relationship means. It means they come to your 
house for supper. You might golf together. You might go on 
holidays together. You might have dinner in Calgary, which 
those . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
the minister is responsible for the public service, but I didn’t 
realize she was also responsible for the former minister of the 
Environment. Surely, Mr. Speaker, visiting camp Murdoch 
would be a personal thing, not a ministerial responsibility. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have been told that the former minister of 
the Environment visited Murdoch Carriere’s Niska Camp on 
several occasions. We have also been informed that the member 
for Athabasca is not the only member of the NDP cabinet to 
have spent time at camp Murdoch. Can the Premier tell us how 
many members of his cabinet, including himself, have visited 
camp Murdoch? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what I didn’t say to the 
last question is it was that very member that amended to take 
out the harassment clause in the occupational health and safety 
legislation and voted against it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. The former minister of the 
Environment advises me today that he has never visited that 
camp. 
 
Now what I also want to say to the member opposite is that 
those people will say and do anything to besmirch people’s 
private and public reputations. They have done it to civil 
servants in this legislature; they have done it to citizens, and 
they have done it to members of the legislature. And I would 
say to the members opposite, that is unacceptable behaviour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, misdirection is not what 
the people of this province want and need, especially after this 
NDP Premier and his government rewarded Murdoch Carriere 
with a huge settlement of 275,000 and increasing, Mr. Speaker. 
People want answers and so do the victims. My question is 
again for the Premier and he needs to think very carefully about 
his answer, especially given his do-over news conference last 
Thursday evening. Has the Premier ever golfed with Murdoch 
Carriere, keeping in mind that many people golf at Elk Ridge 
and Waskesiu? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the 
opposition . . . And this is where they stoop to. They stoop to a 
level where they will fling mud and hope some of it sticks. But 
that takes away from the issues that this province has to deal 
with. We have record employment. We have record economic 
growth. We have thousands of people moving here under the 
immigrant nominee program. And we have people coming back 
from all over the province and, yes, all over the country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And guess what, Mr. Speaker? We are 
taking our advertising campaign into the heartland of Ontario 
and into Calgary, Alberta, and people are coming here. And 
they don’t like it, Mr. Speaker, because what they want is a 
dreary old province so they can be elected. Well we are on the 
move, Mr. Speaker. There is a buzz about this province. And 
we’ll have more to say about that at approximately 11 o’clock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This issue is 
about harassment and disregard of women in this government 
run by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I address my 
question to the Premier. Has the Premier ever golfed with 
Murdoch Carriere? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I’ve been listening to the 
questions that are being asked and I would ask members, when 
they’re asking a question, that the question be related to the 
responsibilities of the minister. And it should be clearly related 
to the responsibilities rather than something of a personal 
nature. 
 
Next question. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has said that it can’t 
comment and provide answers to the questions that the people 
of the province have on the Murdoch Carriere scandal because 
it’s bound by confidentiality agreements. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
today that doesn’t appear to be the case. When asked in a 
written question by the Saskatchewan Party whether it was 
Murdoch Carriere or the NDP government that asked for a 
non-disclosure in the settlement, here’s the response that we 
received from the government, and I quote: 
 

The government’s position throughout negotiations was 
that it would not agree to a non-disclosure provision and 
none is contained [none is contained] in the settlement 
with Mr. Carriere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why then will he not table this 
agreement? Why won’t he answer questions about this? What is 
he hiding on this scandal, Mr. Speaker? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for . . . 
Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that Leader of 
the Opposition has obviously have what I call the dirt brothers. 
And they’re not very good at it. You know, if you throw enough 
dirt, it’s going to stick, Mr. Speaker. They’re not very good at 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s really curious, the members of the 
opposition, particularly the Leader of the Opposition, has 
demanded to know about people’s personnel files. Well I’ll say 
this. He had a private, quote, “conversation” with some 
Member of Parliament in Ottawa the day of the budget. And 
what did he say in the paper when the journalist asked him what 
was the conversation about and who did he talk to? He said it 
was confidential. That’s what he said. He said it was 
confidential. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say this. Those members opposite 
have an opportunity to have federal members of parliament vote 
against the federal budget and get $800 million for our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that government and the 
federal government have a lot in common. The federal 
government believes, though it’s not true, that they kept their 
promise to Saskatchewan in equalization. And that Premier 
believes that he kept his promise on property tax and he has not, 
Mr. Speaker. That Premier and the Prime Minister have a lot in 
common on that file. 
 
Here’s the question again to the minister, if the Premier won’t 
stand in his place and answer it. The quote from the written 
question that the government provided is this: 
 

The government’s position throughout negotiations was 
that it would not agree to a non-disclosure provision and 
none is contained in the settlement with Mr. Carriere. 

 
Why then will this Premier not direct his minister to table that 
agreement so the people of the province can find out why they 
gave $275,000 to someone who was convicted of assault and 
fired for harassment? What is he hiding, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about promises made and promises 
kept. Let me talk about promises made and promises kept. We 
promised to build a green and prosperous economy. We 
promised to reduce the tax load on Saskatchewan people. Mr. 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

Speaker, in this term of government this government has 
reduced the tax load on the average citizen in Saskatchewan by 
1,000, $1,200. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we promised to make 
change to property tax. You bet I said the status quo is not on. 
This government has reversed the ratio in rural Saskatchewan 
where it’s now 40 per cent of personal taxes on property as 
opposed to government support of 60 per cent with the farm 
land of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this year alone, Mr. Speaker, we have 
cut taxes by $500 million on the businesses and the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s a promise made and that’s promise kept. 
And this Leader of the Opposition will not stand in this 
legislature to defend the people of Saskatchewan against the 
broken promise of his cousins in Ottawa. He won’t do it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re very grateful that the 
Premier has finally decided to take to his feet and answer a 
question. Here’s another one for him. In April 2003, the then 
Justice minister, Mr. Speaker, the current Minister of Industry 
said this in Hansard in this Assembly. Here’s what the then 
NDP Justice minister said: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the government 
of Saskatchewan, [and he was referring to the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal] it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was 
justified. We will defend that position vigorously in the 
courts. 
 

In the intervening time period though, Mr. Speaker, that 
Premier for some reason — he won’t tell us why — decided to 
pay him $275,000 just to make it go away — an insult to the 
women, a victimization of them again. I ask the Premier again: 
what has changed between 2003, the minister of Justice’s 
comments and his current position? What is he hiding, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 
believes in the process of law. It believes in keeping the law, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, why is it that we’re now three 
weeks into the session, when these questions have been asked 
on almost a daily basis, when every question has been 
answered, Mr. Speaker, why is it the Leader of the Opposition 
wants not to talk about other issues in this province? Why does 
he not want to talk about front page stories from the 
Leader-Post — stories, headlines — “Pleased to be coming 

home”? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The House will come to order. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, why is it the Leader of the 
Opposition does not want to talk about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, why does the Leader of the 
Opposition not want to talk about what’s right on the front 
pages of the newspapers as of yesterday? Headlines, “Pleased to 
be coming home.” The story of Cam and Crystal Hamilton, who 
in 2000, Mr. Speaker, Cam Hamilton could not find a job in this 
province. 
 
They decided to look again, Mr. Speaker, and here’s the quote 
from Cam and Crystal Hamilton. “There’s so many jobs 
available now. He had four interviews in November and was 
offered all four jobs.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the record of a New Democratic Party 
government — building for the Saskatchewan family, building 
for the future of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I received an email 
from a grade 11 student at Balfour Collegiate. He’s been paying 
very close attention to question period, watching the legislative 
proceedings, and perhaps could he himself provide some 
answers to the Premier’s question to me. 
 
The Premier’s saying, why are you asking questions continually 
about the Murdoch Carriere scandal? The answer is, because 
they won’t answer the questions, Mr. Speaker. The answer is 
they will not tell the province what they’re hiding. 
 
Here’s what this young grade 11 student had to say after he 
watched the Assembly. He said: 
 

I was thoroughly disgusted with the NDP when . . . [they] 
answered [and I’m quoting] Nancy Heppner’s questions 
with that sob story about “Murdoch Carriere.” 

 
He goes on to write about his disgust as a grade 11 student 
watching this Premier and this government in action . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I’ll table it. Absolutely. 
 

In four months [he says] I will be a voter, I can rightly say: 
I know who won’t get it. 

 
This is an issue that is important to the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s important to the women for the reasons of 
victimization. It’s important for the province of Saskatchewan 
because it goes to the point of whether you can believe anything 
this government says. 
 
I ask the Premier again. That Justice minister said that the 
government would fight it in the courts. You’ve changed your 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

position. What has changed? What are you hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is a government that 
acted decisively when we discovered what was happening in the 
Department of the Environment and terminated Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere. We terminated against the process. Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere launched a civil action. 
 
The best legal advice tells us that if we want to escape greater 
costs to the people of Saskatchewan and not put these citizens, 
these women through the process, the public process again, it 
was to settle against claims of defamation and inappropriate 
firing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question is, did that Leader of the Opposition in his 
conversations or email with this young person did what he did 
with that other young person? Remember when he got an email 
once before? What did he do? He sent an email back and said, 
this is a terrible province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you this province is 
opening its doors to the young people at Balfour Collegiate, to 
the young people from every community in this province, to 
First Nations and Métis young people, and to young people 
from across Canada, and you’re going to see the evidence of 
that in just a few moments when the Minister of Finance takes 
his place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Premier that he 
should table that particular email that he just referred to, and 
what we will find out again is that the Premier is being a little 
bit fast and loose with the facts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, well 
he should, well they’re all yelling from their chairs. They ought 
to table it then. They ought to be prepared to back up what they 
say in this Assembly. The fact of the matter is they can’t. The 
fact . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes . . . 
Order please. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The fact of the matter is, is that a week ago the 
Premier had to call a press conference at 20 after 5 because 
what he had told this Assembly, he realized, wasn’t close 
enough to reality. 
 
I ask him again. In light of his government’s own answer to a 
question we asked — that they fought against any kind of a 
non-disclosure provision, that there is no non-disclosure 
provision in the agreement with Carriere to pay him $275,000 
— in light of that fact, will he not do the right thing for once on 
this file? Will he do the right thing and table that agreement and 
answer questions that the people of this province have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan these days are turning on their radios to find 
advertisement, Mr. Speaker, paid for by those very same 
taxpayers, which is at very best misleading. And it’s put on 
those radio stations and paid for by the taxpayers by the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition this question: will he do the 
right thing for once? Here is a New Democratic Party 
government that has taken this province from bankruptcy to 
boom times, Mr. Speaker. Here is a New Democratic Party 
government whose focus is making lives better for 
Saskatchewan people, building for the future of young people in 
this province. Their focus, Mr. Speaker, is the future of the 
Saskatchewan Party. Our focus is the future of Saskatchewan 
families, Saskatchewan people, and the great province of 
Saskatchewan. Will he do the right thing later in this debate 
around the budget and vote for a budget that is bold, Mr. 
Speaker, and broad and will build for the future of 
Saskatchewan families? Will he do the right thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. For written 
questions the Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling responses to written questions no. 638 and 639. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 638 and 639 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES 
AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my distinct pleasure to submit the estimates accompanied by 
a message from His Honour . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Would the member 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I may not have been able 
to be heard, but I am very pleased today to be able to submit the 
estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 
follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2008 and recommends the same 
to the Legislative Assembly. [Signed] Gordon L. Barnhart, 
Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It is indeed my pleasure to rise today in the Assembly 
to present a fiscal plan that is going to make life better for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
In the past year alone, since I stood in the Assembly to present 
the 2006-2007 budget, something very significant has changed 
in this province. Today, in part because of the measures 
undertaken by our NDP government, the measures we’ve 
introduced in the past year, there is a growing sense of 
confidence and pride about our province. Our economy is 
stronger and is in a period of sustained growth. Our families are 
enjoying the benefit of living in a have province that continues 
to provide the lowest cost utilities because of our Crown 
corporations. Our communities remain strong, and our 
infrastructure continues to support the growth of new industries 
and new jobs throughout this province. A record number of 
people have jobs and are working in Saskatchewan today. And 
our province is increasingly recognized as the best place in 
Canada to live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a great time to live 
in this great province of Saskatchewan. The plan I present today 
is a plan that will make life even better for Saskatchewan 
families. It’s built upon the confidence we’re seeing in our 
communities today. It’s built upon the values of Saskatchewan 
people. And it will build upon the strength of a growing 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to table our 14th consecutive 
balanced budget. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite will have a lot to howl about as the day goes on I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Would the 
Minister continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, today’s budget is our 
largest ever at $8.3 billion and commits about 7.8 billion to the 
programs that support Saskatchewan families. This is about a 9 
per cent increase over last year’s budget, a 1.4 per cent increase 
over last year’s forecasted expenditures. 
 
This budget includes a $75 million surplus in the GRF [general 
revenue fund]. This budget saves Saskatchewan people half a 
billion dollars in taxes through the first full-year reduction of 
the PST [provincial sales tax]. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is the second year that we’ve been 
able to reduce business taxes. We’ve got included in this budget 
the indexation of the income tax benefits and continued 
property tax relief. 
 
And this budget funds our largest ever capital program of $535 
million. A program that supports our improvement to roads and 
highways, schools, and other infrastructure. This budget makes 
significant investments in new tax cuts for middle-income 
families to protect their buying power. It’ll make significant 
new investments in our communities, our shared infrastructure, 
and it will lay a foundation for this province to grow. By 
making these investments, we’ll help maintain the quality of 
life that Saskatchewan families value. 
 
This budget will also make significant new investments in our 
medicare program to help ensure that health care not only 
remains accessible but affordable. It makes significant new 
investments in the young people of this country who seek a 
bright future right here in Saskatchewan. This budget is going 
to do this in a way that’s affordable and sustainable. 
 
And it’s worth noting, Mr. Speaker, it is worth noting that today 
Saskatchewan has the third lowest debt-to-GDP [gross domestic 
product] ratio in this country at 16.1 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The estimates that I have tabled today, 
Mr. Speaker, show that we project our debt-to-GDP ratio to 
drop again to 15.6 per cent. This is the lowest that it has been in 
decades, and it is a result of making the right investments to 
stimulate growth while at the same time paying down the debt 
built up by previous administrations. 
 
It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker, it is worth noting that in the 
past four years we have paid off $820 million worth of debt. We 
have seen our interest costs drop from 14 cents on the dollar to 
7. We’ve seen our credit ratings increase and in the past year we 
have added three additional credit rating upgrades — our 14th, 
15th, and 16th consecutive upgrades under this NDP 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As a result, Mr. Speaker, today we 
have a credit worthiness equal to that of Ontario. We have 
worked hard also to increase the transparency of our finances 
through measures like The Fuel Tax Accountability Act, the 
creation of the Saskatchewan infrastructure fund, and the cash 
funding of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
As I indicated at mid-year, we expect this year to draw down 
the Stabilization Fund to protect our social programs from the 
variation in tax revenue resulting from the unprecedented and 
sweeping tax cuts we made last year. Even so, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget will maintain over $370 million in cash reserves to 
guard against revenue fluctuations that are dependent upon 
commodity prices. 
 
It should be no secret to anyone in this Assembly, let alone in 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

the province, that the strength of Saskatchewan’s commodities 
today are really the secret to our continued wealth. 
Saskatchewan, like the rest of Western Canada, continues to 
experience strong economic growth as a result of increased 
demand for our non-renewable natural resources. Market 
analysts are telling us they expect to see positive trends for 
Saskatchewan’s oil, gas, uranium, potash, precious metals, and 
agricultural sectors both in terms of production and price in the 
coming year. This provides a degree of confidence that our 
economic growth will continue. In fact we are predicting that 
GDP will grow by 2.9 per cent this year. This is a full half point 
higher than the national average. 
 
This growth and prosperity is going to mean that Saskatchewan 
will continue to be a have province for years to come. Mr. 
Speaker, we welcome what that prosperity means for 
Saskatchewan people although we do remain disappointed that 
Ottawa will continue to claw back the resource wealth that 
belongs to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, during the last federal 
election Prime Minister Harper promised to allow 
Saskatchewan to retain the full benefit of the non-renewable 
resource wealth to encourage growth and diversification of our 
economy. On Monday he broke that promise. As a result, 
Saskatchewan people will be denied the full benefit of its 
natural resource wealth. However we have been advised that we 
will receive a one-year, one-time payment of approximately 226 
million through the equalization program this year. That money 
will be reduced to zero next year. These monies are contingent 
upon the federal budget passing. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, although Stephen Harper and 
the Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] broke their 
promise to Saskatchewan people, we will keep ours and we will 
commit 30 per cent of the one-time equalization money to 
reducing property taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this will allow us to 
extend the 8 per cent property tax cut to cover the next two 
years. Furthermore, we will deepen the tax cut from 8 per cent 
to 10 per cent on the assumption the federal budget passes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have also decided the remaining 
70 per cent of the money will go directly to debt reduction. This 
will mean, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This will mean that, since this NDP 
government was re-elected in the year 2003, that we have paid 
down nearly $1 billion in debt on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We believe fiscal prudence is an 

important value of Saskatchewan people. And although the 
broken promise by the Prime Minister will take away our ability 
to reduce taxes or increase services, we believe that the 
one-time money should be used to better Saskatchewan’s 
balance sheet. Our balance sheet is indeed strong, Mr. Speaker 
— and strong in part because of the growing economy our fiscal 
and economic policies have supported. 
 
Since this Premier took office, we’ve undertaken a series of 
changes to strengthen our economy and to encourage the 
creation of jobs and growth throughout our province. We 
started with the personal income tax reform. With the election 
of the new Premier in 2001, we undertook oil and gas royalty 
reform to encourage production. We restructured the potash 
royalties, we worked with the uranium companies to restructure 
their royalties, and we worked together to look for ways to 
increase jobs and attract new investment and build on our 
production in our key sectors. 
 
These changes that were undertaken by this administration have 
helped create an economy that today allows us to be a have 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Last year, Mr. Speaker, we built on 
these changes by making sweeping cuts to the business taxes of 
the province to encourage investment, job growth, and 
economic growth. These changes included eliminating the 
general corporate capital tax, reducing the general corporate 
income tax rate, reducing small business taxes, and improving 
tax incentives for manufacturing and processing. 
 
In October we went further and we cut the provincial sales tax 
from 7 per cent to 5 per cent, achieving the lowest rate in a 
generation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In the past year alone we’ve cut capital 
taxes, corporate taxes, small business taxes, property taxes, 
income taxes, and sales taxes. I don’t think there’s a tax that we 
missed. 
 
Since the current Premier took office, our NDP government has 
cut over $650 million in taxes to help create jobs and 
opportunities and to share the benefits of a growing economy 
with Saskatchewan people. Our tax cuts have been sustainable, 
affordable, and have helped make life better for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Today taxes for an average family are $1,200 a year lower than 
when this Premier took office. In this budget we are going to act 
to protect these Saskatchewan families. Today I am pleased to 
announce that we will legislate the indexation of income tax 
benefits to protect these benefits from being eroded by inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to announce today that, starting this year, we will 
permit income splitting for seniors to assist them in dealing 
with the financial situations that they are facing and to provide a 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

fairer tax system for them. These two measures combined will 
provide nearly $40 million in annual tax cuts for Saskatchewan 
families in addition to the $350 million we’ve undertaken since 
mid-year alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As promised, we continue to work 
towards reducing education property taxes for Saskatchewan 
residents through meaningful tax relief. This budget commits 
more than $107 million in education property tax relief through 
the continuation of the 8 per cent credit and the deepening of it 
to 10 per cent for the next two years. 
 
We have also continued the 38 per cent credit for agricultural 
land owners. Additionally, this budget provides over $100 
million in support for crop insurance and an additional $118 
million to fully fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget recognizes the importance of the rural 
economy as an engine of growth in our province as a whole. We 
know it’s important to make sure we’ve got a modern 
infrastructure and transportation network that’s available to 
move goods to market and allow people to access services in 
larger communities. We know our highways and transportation 
need to be upgraded and improved. As such, this budget 
provides record support for highways and other infrastructure 
because we recognize the need for a strong transportation 
network to support the continued growth of the province as a 
whole. 
 
This past fall, I introduced The Fuel Tax Accountability Act to 
ensure that money that was raised from the on-road gas tax was 
spent on transportation and highways. That Act, the first of its 
kind in Saskatchewan, ensures that over $300 million will be 
allocated to highways infrastructure this year. We believe the 
legislation will provide an important foundation for establishing 
a long-term plan for upgrading our highways and transportation 
networks but we also know that these plans need money to 
succeed. That is why we have committed to investing $5 billion 
over the next decade to support an innovative new highways 
and transportation strategy. 
 
This budget includes a record $433 million to help realign and 
rebuild our highways and transportation network. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This funding is going to help us 
complete the twinning of Highway No. 1, the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to help complete the twinning of No. 16 West, the 
Yellowhead. And it’s going to continue work on twinning No. 
11 North, the Louis Riel Trail. 
 
It’s also going to support further work on allowing greater 
access for our northern communities through our northern 
infrastructure program. It’s going to continue the work on the 
First Nations road access that is helping erase the boundary 
between on-reserve and off-reserve funding, and it is going to 
continue to commit money to the Prairie Grain Roads Program. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve committed an additional $10 

million this year to help RMs [rural municipality] improve 
roads under their authority. This includes $5 million to help 
move forward the very innovative program that SARM has 
called Clearing the Path. We have also committed $5 million to 
help select RMs deal with the heavy oil road maintenance that 
they are feeling up in the northwest corner of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This money, this $10 million, will 
double to $20 million next year. We also recognize that our 
urban, rural, and northern municipalities have an important role 
to play in fostering a strong and safe set of communities that are 
welcoming to our families and encouraging for small business 
growth. That’s why I’m pleased to announce today that we will 
provide a record $30 million increase in ongoing, unconditional 
revenue sharing for our municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this brings our 
revenue-sharing commitment on an annual basis now to a 
record $127 million. This $30 million is the largest single 
increase in the history of the revenue-sharing program and far 
exceeds our election commitment to provide 85 million in 
revenue sharing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m also very pleased to announce 
today, Mr. Speaker, that municipalities will receive $58 million 
this year for specific infrastructure support. In addition to the 
traditional support for municipalities, we also recognize that 
sport, culture, and recreation play an important role in 
Saskatchewan when it comes to the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan families. That’s why we established the building 
communities fund. We want to assist communities in 
undertaking new construction and upgrading of facilities that 
provide benefits to the larger regions they serve and indeed the 
province as a whole. 
 
In the past year we’ve provided grants to Swift Current for the 
Centennial Civic Centre, the Common Wealth Centre in 
Lloydminster, the Gallagher Centre in Yorkton, and to 
communities in the North. This year we are providing $40 
million in support through the building communities program to 
support anticipated projects like the expansion of IPSCO Place 
here in Regina, that’s home to the important provincial 
attractions and trade programs like the Royal Red and the 
Western Canada Agribition and the Farm Progress Show. 
 
We expect other communities . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we expect other 
communities like those in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Prince 
Albert to provide additional submissions for projects in their 
regions for the coming year. 
 
Supporting communities in this province is an important part of 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

our plan to make life better for Saskatchewan people. We 
believe that the best way to make sure that we have strong 
communities really is to start by investing in young people. Our 
commitment starts with accessible, affordable, good-quality 
child care which is a priority of our government. It helps 
families participate more fully in the labour market and it 
allows, I believe, for a much more fulsome role for children in 
terms of establishing early learning and development. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to announce today that we will create 500 
new licensed child care spaces this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This brings our total number of spaces, 
Mr. Speaker, to 9,300 which is almost one space for every four 
children under the age of four in this province. And I’m very 
pleased that we have been able to commit that. 
 
I am also pleased to announce that for the first time we’ll 
provide funding for ongoing capital construction for new spaces 
and renovation costs for existing child care facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as children grow and gain new skills, we have an 
important opportunity to invest in their futures and to make sure 
that they can get the most of the education system that our 
schools will provide. Research shows that early intervention 
programs such as pre-kindergarten and our innovative KidsFirst 
initiative help children succeed in school and in life. That’s why 
I’m very pleased today to announce that we will fund 15 new 
pre-kindergarten programs in our community schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This brings our total number of 
programs — pre-kindergarten programs — to 134 throughout 
this province and increases the number of pre-kindergarten 
spaces to over 2,000 in our urban, rural, and northern 
communities. 
 
This budget also deepens our commitment to help assist in the 
building of literacy skills so that all people in this province are 
able to take full advantage of the opportunities that a strong 
economy is providing. Today’s budget includes more than $3 
million for adult and family literacy programs. These funds will 
assist the newly established Literacy Commission and a 
network of provincial training institutions and 
community-based organizations to undertake literacy programs. 
 
Literacy, numeracy, and a strong sense of citizenship, Mr. 
Speaker, begin with ensuring that young people have access to 
the highest quality education possible. This budget is making 
Saskatchewan an even better place for young people, starting 
with our provincial K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system. 
 
In 2007-2008 we are providing over $600 million in operating 
and capital funding to our schools and pre-kindergarten system 
in our 28 school divisions. This funding provides a $646 
increase to the basic per pupil rate which represents an 11 per 
cent increase over last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This significant investment of funds in 

education for our over 163,000 school-aged children in more 
than our 750 schools throughout the province is a strong 
support and shows the support of this NDP government that has 
increased education funding by more than 50 per cent in the 
past decade. 
 
Education is an important investment we make not only in 
young people but can make in ourselves and in the future of 
Saskatchewan. We want to help young people start their careers 
here in Saskatchewan and to ensure we’re in a position to meet 
the needs of a growing workforce that can fill the jobs of a 
growing economy. 
 
We’re committed to making it easier for young people to 
remain in Saskatchewan and study for their careers. That’s why 
this budget includes nearly $200 million for the training sector. 
This investment includes nearly $24 million to create over 
2,100 new training opportunities. This includes opportunities 
targeted to fields like health care and the skilled trades. 
 
I am very pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this increase will 
bring us to a total of over 31,000 seats which is a 24 per cent 
increase since this NDP government was re-elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education 
and training are vital parts of building a successful future. And 
we believe education must not only be accessible, but 
affordable. That’s why, in addition to the more than $110 
million that we’re providing to student support in the forms of 
scholarships, bursaries, and loans for 14,000 students, this 
budget also includes $41 million in income support for 2,800 
very low-income students to access the basic skills training and 
employment programs. 
 
This budget also provides $21.6 million in new money to keep 
undergraduate tuition rates frozen at 2004 levels. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is the third year in a row now, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’ve been able to freeze tuition. And tuition will 
stay frozen at 2004 levels until 2008. Students are saving 
$1,500 this year because of our tuition freeze. And since we 
implemented this fully funded freeze, we’ve committed about 
$92 million to help keep education both accessible and 
affordable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is an important part of what we can do 
to help build the skills it takes to participate fully in community 
life and to start a career. For young people, the opportunity of 
choosing a career is an exciting one. For those of us who live in 
and love this province, we know the benefits of building our 
future here at home. 
 
We want to help make Saskatchewan even more attractive place 
for young people to build their careers and start their families. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why I am particularly pleased today to 
announce that this year recent graduates will not pay provincial 
income tax on the first 20,000 of the income they earn in each 
of the five years following graduation. 
 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is going to be accomplished by 
establishing a special $10,000 graduate tax exemption and by 
permitting the unused portion to be carried forward for up to 
five years. This gives a 10-year window of opportunity for 
recent graduates to take advantage of this program. This 
exemption applies to graduates in our universities, our technical 
schools, our trade schools, and other qualifying programs not 
just here in Saskatchewan but all across this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this exemption gives 
young people one more reason to build their future right here at 
home in Saskatchewan, and it gives businesses a valuable tool 
to help attract more employees from across Canada. 
 
You know, for those of us who grew up here and those of us 
who have chosen to move here, we know that Saskatchewan 
really is the best place in Canada to live, to work, and to raise a 
family. And it is so because we believe in working together, in 
sharing in the opportunities our province provides, and in 
making sure we put people first. This has long been a value 
shared between the New Democratic Party and Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
It’s in part why Saskatchewan was able to pioneer medicare and 
why we made medicare a priority long before there was a 
federal support for the program. This budget provides a number 
of measures to increase access to medicare for Saskatchewan 
families. This year we are going to provide a record $3.45 
billion to deliver health care services to Saskatchewan people. 
This funding will provide comprehensive, universal, publicly 
accessible, publicly funded access to more than 5.6 million 
visits to doctors and specialists, nearly 73,000 surgeries, and 
almost 140,000 advanced diagnostic procedures. 
 
Furthermore it’s going to allow us to employ the services of 
some 37,000 doctors, specialists, nurses, and health care 
professionals, and support workers. Mr. Speaker, the regional 
health authorities this year will receive $90 million more to 
enhance wages and benefits for unionized health care workers 
and over $22 million more for physicians and other health care 
professionals. 
 
This budget provides $78.5 million for our cancer agency and a 
17 per cent increase for cancer drugs and medical supplies. 
 
This budget also does more to support children’s health, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to announce today that we are targeting a 
dental sealant program for children in grades 1 and 7 in our 
community schools. We’re doing this because we believe dental 
sealant provides effective protection against tooth decay, and 
that in turn helps provide better overall dental health and 
physical health of children as they grow older. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This program is going to help ensure 
that children that might not typically have access to dental care, 
that they can get the benefit of this preventive measure. 
 

This budget also provides 2.25 million in new funding for 
access to children’s mental health services. 
 
We’re implementing coverage in this budget for insulin pumps 
for children under the age of 18 who require this item to 
regulate insulin levels. 
 
And for the first time we are going to implement respite 
benefits for parents of children with complex medical needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased also to 
announce today that we will provide $3 million in this budget to 
develop an intensive autism treatment program for children 
moderately to severely affected by autism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This package of funding is going to 
help improve access to services and significantly reduce 
wait-lists and wait times for people in Saskatchewan. Access 
for many of us begins with a simple visit to the doctor’s office, 
and sometimes it progresses to the need for access to 
specialized diagnostic imaging to detect specific conditions. 
This year we expect to fund about 117,000 CT [computerized 
tomography] scans and 24,000 MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging] scans. This budget provides funding to extend the 
shifts and hours of operation to help reduce wait times for these 
procedures. 
 
Our $3.45 billion commitment to medicare this year will also 
provide for an additional 3,100 MRI scans. This, by the way, 
has more than doubled the capacity of MRI scans since our 
election in 2003. And we will provide an additional 5,400 bone 
mineral density tests. We’re also going to provide $3 million in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, to allow doctors in local communities 
to get greater access to the testing results that these scans . . . by 
improving their access to electronic health records. This will 
help patients, particularly those in rural Saskatchewan, get 
better quality and more convenient access to test results. 
 
This health care budget also includes funding for up to 2,000 
more surgeries, 160 more hip and knee surgeries, for a total of 
3,275 procedures there. 
 
We’re going to increase our renal dialysis capacity to 
accommodate 20 per cent more patients, and we expect to 
establish our eighth satellite unit for renal dialysis in Estevan 
this year. 
 
Supplementary eye care and enhanced drug coverage for over 
30,000 low-income workers will be enhanced. There will be 12 
per cent increase in the base budget for the drug plan. And 
there’ll be planning in this budget for the children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, health care is important 
to all of us, but probably no more so than to those of us as we 
grow older. Life expectancies are growing in this province, and 
the health of our older citizens is improving. It’s improving in 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

part because of the role of pharmaceuticals and drug therapies 
are playing in managing chronic conditions. While these 
therapies can extend our life expectancy, they are also growing 
in cost and often put real pressures on Saskatchewan seniors. 
That’s why I’m very pleased to announce today that we are 
introducing an enhanced seniors’ drug plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this plan will mean that 
no senior over the age of 65 will pay more than $15 in 
prescription drug costs for drugs covered in the formulary plan 
effective July 1 of this year. And that will provide an average 
annual saving of $400 to the 115,000 seniors we expect to 
access this program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in 2003 Saskatchewan 
people elected our NDP government to help insure 
Saskatchewan would remain the best place in Canada to live, to 
work, and to raise a family. 
 
Today Saskatchewan families are paying on average $1,200 less 
in taxes than they were when this Premier took office. Today 
there are record number of people working — people who have 
jobs as a result of the changes we’ve made to encourage a 
stronger economy. Today young people are saving about $1,500 
a year because of the NDP tuition freeze program. Today 
businesses are able to grow and expand because of the tax 
reforms we’ve begun. Today because of this budget, seniors are 
going to save on average $400 a year in prescription drug costs. 
 
Young people graduating from across Canada will be able to 
earn up to $20,000 tax-free in each of the next five years after 
graduation just for starting their careers and their families here 
at home. Families are going to get better access to health care 
because of incentives and increases in support for surgeries, 
diagnostics, and therapies. Children are going to have increased 
access to quality child care so their parents can participate in the 
growing economy. And parents throughout the province are 
going to be able to know that specialized health care services 
for their children can be provided right here at home. 
 
This budget continues to build a better future for young people, 
for seniors, and for families. This budget, Mr. Speaker, makes 
life better for Saskatchewan families, and it deserves the 
support of Saskatchewan people. As such, I am pleased today to 
move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly support in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It has been moved by the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Regina South, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Riversdale.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 
honour today to rise in this Assembly on behalf of the official 
opposition Saskatchewan Party to respond to this year’s budget. 
 
I’d like to take a moment to welcome all our guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you for taking time from your 
busy schedules to come to this important Assembly to watch a 
very important part of our democratic process today. Welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a special thank you to the 
people who allow us to do our job. To my family — to my wife, 
Trish, who works hard balancing a television career and a life as 
a mom, making sure that the kids are able to attend every 
hockey game, every gymnastic lesson, every piano lesson, you 
name it. Our son, Carter, is in grade four and is nine years old. 
Our daughter, Paige, is seven and in grade one. Both children 
attend Cardinal Leger School and are in the French immersion 
program. A special hello today to my mother, Lucy 
Cheveldayoff, who is watching in Blaine Lake. And a thank 
you goes out to my constituency assistant, Beth Epp, who 
works very hard in my constituency office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to send 
some get well wishes to my friend Jim Rhode who is recovering 
in a hospital in Las Vegas after a serious motorcycle accident. 
Jim, best wishes to you and your family. Mr. Speaker, a thank 
you to the men, women, and children of the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency who sent me to this Assembly to be their 
voice. Thank you for that privilege. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my official 
response to today’s budget by setting the record straight, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — On a summary basis, the way the 
Provincial Auditor, the only way the Provincial Auditor advises 
budgets should be judged, this budget, what we heard delivered 
this morning, is a $701 million deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget is clearly not sustainable. It is clearly not 
responsible, and it is clearly not supportable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, for the last few months this 
NDP government has been on a desperate, reckless spending 
spree with the taxpayers’ credit card. Every time the polls have 
dropped, their response has been to spend more money. Last 
June when the voters of Weyburn-Big Muddy decisively 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

rejected the NDP, this desperate government reacted by cutting 
the PST, a $321 million annual commitment. That was followed 
by a $1.5 million exclamation mark advertising campaign. 
 
What were the results of that, Mr. Speaker? Then after the NDP 
suffered their worst electoral defeat since 1944 in the 
Martensville by-election, it announced the $5 billion for 
highways over 10 years. And now, with the NDP embroiled in 
the Murdoch Carriere scandal, we have seen millions of dollars 
shovelled out from government coffers — anything and 
everything possible to distract the people of Saskatchewan from 
the record of this tired NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, today taxpayers got 
the bill. The Visa bill came in. The Visa bill came in and it’s 
huge, Mr. Speaker. Frankly it’s worse than we could have 
imagined. This NDP government has now saddled the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people that are watching today, with a $700 
million deficit. 
 
Revenues of the province have shrunk by a half a billion 
dollars, but the NDP have increased operating spending by 
some 9 per cent. And over $500 million from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is gone — that rainy day election slush fund 
— $500 million gone, true to form, Mr. Speaker. And the Auto 
Fund, the Auto Fund is plunged into a deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government has done some good in the past, Mr. Speaker, I 
will admit that. But that all changed today — a $926 million 
increase in the province’s net debt and 19 million more in 
debt-servicing costs. Mr. Speaker, not only is the cupboard 
bare, they have ripped out the kitchen cabinets. If you watch 
HGTV [Home & Garden Television], an extreme makeover is 
necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it begs the question, it begs the question, it 
begs the question, what do Saskatchewan people have to show 
for it? Well precious little, Mr. Speaker, precious little: 52 
schools closing, no new schools, our highways are still 
crumbling, surgical waiting lists continue to grow, and property 
taxes are still rising. 
 
Worst of all, Mr. Speaker, this government has presented no 
plan to grow Saskatchewan’s population which has shrunk to its 
lowest level since 1976, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at a time 
when our province desperately needs a growth agenda and a 
focused, accountable approach to public spending, the Minister 
of Finance has presented a budget that is drowning in red ink, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way to characterize this budget is 
reckless and irresponsible — the worst budget, Mr. Speaker, the 
worst budget in 25 years; a desperate government, a desperate 
attempt by a desperate government to buy votes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a budget that grows the number of people working in 
government at a time when the population is shrinking. It’s a 
budget that once again increases the budget for the Premier’s 
office, for Executive Council, and does precious little for 
ordinary families across Saskatchewan. It’s a budget that 
increases government spending and yet forecasts only 4,000 

new jobs in the province this year — 10,000 graduates; only 
4,000 new jobs. It’s a budget that increases the net debt — the 
net debt — for every man, woman, and child in this province by 
almost $1,000 per person. 
 
Since the Premier took office, Mr. Speaker, government 
spending has gone up by 32 per cent — $2 billion, Mr. Speaker 
— and the size of government has grown. All the time when 
Saskatchewan’s population has shrank by more than 10,000 
people since this Premier took office. Some legacy, Mr. 
Speaker. Some legacy. What we now have in NDP 
Saskatchewan is fewer people paying for more government. 
There is something very wrong with this picture, Mr. Speaker. 
There is something very wrong with this picture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we’re hearing a lot from 
former Finance ministers today. It’s no wonder that people like 
former Finance minister Janice MacKinnon are sounding the 
alarm bells and calling this budget unsustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier and the Finance minister 
today to answer the question that everybody will be asking — 
how is this budget sustainable? How can the Finance minister 
possibly bring forward a budget with spending increases and 
new programs at a time when by his own admission he has no 
idea how they’re going to be paid for? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Finance minister owe the 
people of Saskatchewan an explanation. Where is the plan for 
sustainability? Where is the accountability in spending? And 
where, Mr. Speaker, where are the results? 
 
It’s hard to imagine how this NDP government could spend so 
much money and have so little to show for it, Mr. Speaker. For 
the hard-working men and women who pay their taxes and 
expect this government to act responsibly, this budget is a 
betrayal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It is unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. It is the 
last gasp, the last gasp of a tired NDP government that knows 
that it has lost the trust and confidence of Saskatchewan people. 
It has lost the trust and confidence of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Over the past few months the Saskatchewan Party has talked 
about creating a sustainable growth agenda for the province. 
The foundation of a growth agenda is a government that lives 
within its means. The foundation of a growth agenda is fiscal 
responsibility — and I hope they’re listening; I hope they can 
hear this — balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today the Finance minister took a jackhammer to that 
foundation, Mr. Speaker. And what about the future, Mr. 
Speaker? What about the future? 
 
There is little money for technological developments and 
innovation. There’s next to no money for new spaces to train 



March 22, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

doctors and nurses. Mr. Speaker, in fact, in fact if members will 
look at the very budget in front of them, if they will look at the 
numbers on page 88 you will find that this NDP government is 
creating 18 seats for nursing education programs — 18 seats, 
Mr. Speaker. At that rate it will take 18 years to fulfill the 
commitment to nurses that we need today — shame, Mr. 
Speaker, shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how will rural hospitals stay open? Will seniors 
get the treatments that they need in hospitals if there’s no health 
care professionals to assist them, Mr. Speaker? Instead of a 
complete growth agenda for Saskatchewan and a real plan to fix 
health care, we have an NDP budget today that grows the size 
of government. 
 
And it’s not the first time, Mr. Speaker, that this NDP 
government has come before this Assembly to present a budget 
that just doesn’t add up. Four years ago during his budget 
address the NDP Finance minister of the time rose in this 
Assembly to say that and I quote, “Our government has a 
proven track record of funding and maintaining key priorities.” 
This of course was before the last election. After the election, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people found out that the NDP 
hadn’t been telling them the whole story and in fact the 
cupboard was bare. 
 
So what did the NDP government do to pay for the promises it 
couldn’t keep, Mr. Speaker? They raised the PST. And why did 
they do that, Mr. Speaker? They did it because they couldn’t 
deliver on their promises. They’re the architect of broken 
promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s four years later, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people 
again find themselves at the mercy of a tired and desperate NDP 
government clinging to power by its fingernails, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has blown the boom, 
spent the mountain of money, and put the province’s finances in 
a downward spiral, Mr. Speaker. They will say and do anything 
to try to hold on to power. And yet with all this unsustainable 
spending in this budget, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
haven’t seen a long-term plan for education property tax relief, 
the first promise that they made, the promise that they continue 
to break, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For years we have heard promise after promise from this NDP 
government that property tax was a priority. In 2003 Premier 
Calvert told the SARM convention, and I quote, “Our priority 
in tax reform [for government] over the next several years must 
be the matter of the funding of education.” He also stated that 
the status quo was not on, Mr. Speaker. And yet in this last 
budget before an election, this . . . 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. All 
members will certainly have the opportunity to state their 
remarks in due time. And I ask members and I ask order of the 
Assembly so that we can hear the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs who has the floor. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in this last budget, this last 
— hopefully last — budget of this NDP government, the 
Premier and his government has failed to deliver on a plan, a 

long-term plan for property tax relief just as it’s failed to deliver 
on a plan to keep young people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people have had enough. 
They’re tired of broken promises by this NDP government. 
They’re tired of crumbling highways. They’re tired of waiting 
for better health care. And most of all, Mr. Speaker, voters in 
Saskatchewan are tired of this government spending more and 
more of their hard-earned tax dollars to deflect away from their 
record of scandals and broken promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — There indeed is one piece of good news, 
Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan today have witnessed 
this last budget from this NDP government and this tired NDP 
government. The bad news, Mr. Speaker, as everyone now 
knows, the NDP government has plunged the province back 
into a deficit and grown the debt. They have, Mr. Speaker, they 
have blown the boom. They have turned the boom into a 
boomerang, Mr. Speaker. Make no mistake about it, Mr. 
Speaker, make no mistake about it, the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve better. Only an election will bring around the change 
that is needed, Mr. Speaker. Only elections will bring around 
the change that is needed. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve better and for that reason 
this official opposition will not be supporting the budget. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I move that this debate do now be adjourned. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order please. 
Order. The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs has moved 
adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Deputy Government House Leader, the hon. member for 
Regina Dewdney: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policies of the government be 
resumed on Monday, March 26, 2007. 

 
So moved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government be 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2007 

resumed on Monday, March 26, 2007. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:46.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................937 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................938 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................939 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................939 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................939 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................940 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................940 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Commitment to Reducing Property Tax 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Retaining and Recruiting Health Care Providers 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................940 
 Voice of a Victim 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................941 
 The Reality of Equalization 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................941 
 Coverage of the Carriere Scandal 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................941 
 Friendship and Close Ties 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................942 
 Connections and Relationships 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................942 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Disclosure of Information Regarding Murdoch Carriere 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................942 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................942 
 Ministers’ Relationships with Murdoch Carriere 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................944 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................944 
 Government’s Settlement with Murdoch Carriere 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................945 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................947 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................947 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................947 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................947 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................953 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................955 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


