


















































Hansard: March 19, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 32A  MONDAY, MARCH 19, 2007, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 881 
 March 19, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
colleagues and I will not be presenting petitions today in order 
to facilitate the Premier’s attendance at question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rawlco Radio’s 
morning crew found a great cause 20 years ago and have 
provided a fun event every year since. The Regina General 
Hospital neonatal unit has 342,600 more reasons to smile today 
than they had before the Z99 radiothon. 
 
The listeners responded . . . in fact, Mr. Speaker, responded 
hardly describes the actions of Z99 listeners. They showed their 
world-class caring and generous spirit March 15 and 16. 
Because we take up the opportunity to participate through the 
Z99 radiothon, newborn babies and their families can be 
confident the neonatal intensive care unit is there for us all in 
every way. 
 
What a tremendous gift the morning crew give us. CC, Lorie, 
and Buzz are very modest and properly credit the generous 
spirit of their listeners. We listeners and everyone involved with 
the neonatal unit at the Regina General simply love CC, Lorie, 
and Buzz and we respond with cheerful hearts and generous 
chequebooks. Thank you to everyone who made this 20th Z99 
radiothon the most successful in every way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Canadian Social Work Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
March 18 to 24 of this year marks Social Work Week across 

Canada. Social Work Week provides us with an important 
opportunity to thank the many social workers throughout the 
province for their efforts to help individuals and families in this 
great province of Saskatchewan. The theme of this year’s week 
is Social Workers Make a Difference in Children’s Lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social workers can be found in every corner of our 
province — working in family services agencies, children’s aid 
agencies, hospitals, school boards, correctional institutions, 
welfare administration agencies, as well as federal and 
provincial departments. We have social workers to thank for the 
sometimes difficult work they do with families and individuals 
that help make our communities a better place to live. 
 
On a daily basis social workers see a side of life and deal with 
situations that many of us would prefer not to. They often deal 
with situations involving poverty, domestic violence, abuse, 
unemployment, and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 
to join with me in thanking all of the social workers in 
Saskatchewan for the important work they do and the positive 
impact they have on children and families across this great 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Regina District Labour Council Awards Dinner 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, Friday night I had the pleasure 
of attending the second annual Regina District Labour Council 
awards dinner. Guest speaker, John Cartwright, president of the 
Toronto-York labour council, spoke about Brian Mulroney 
breaking the social contract between business and labour to 
share the wealth that we commonly create. He stressed the 
importance of educating people. There was no free secondary 
education until people fought for it with support of organized 
labour. 
 
Friday night, two people were recognized for their contributions 
through the labour movement to our quality of life. Susan 
Budson of RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and Department Store 
Union] Local 454 was named Labour Activist of the Year for 
her leadership she demonstrated as chief steward during the 
450-day Sobeys strike. Janice Bernier received the Community 
Service Award. 
 
Janice has a background with the United Way, is active in film 
and music, the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] and 
helped put in place a representative workforce agreement with 
SaskTel and CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 
Union of Canada] and as well established a food security fund. 
Her roots are rural, and most recently she was nominated as the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] candidate in the federal riding of 
Regina-Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who wonder how we’ve achieved the 
quality of workplace wages, benefits, and occupational safety 
that we have today, it’s people like these two women who have 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

led the way. I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in acknowledging their awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Motorcycle Trek Raises Awareness About Autism 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to applaud the efforts of a Regina father who has 
packed up his motorcycle and is heading to the Arctic Circle in 
an effort to raise awareness about autism. 
 
Dan Powaschuk, whose four-year-old son Eric was diagnosed 
with autism spectrum disorder in 2005, has embarked on the 
9,000-kilometre trip from Regina to Tuktoyaktuk to ensure the 
public knows exactly what autism is about. 
 
Mr. Powaschuk says in the February 6, 2007 edition of the 
Leader-Post, quote: 
 

“With autism you can’t take time.” . . . “This drive’s not 
going to help my son because he’s four now. The message, 
I say, is early intervention because you have to get them 
out of themselves into the real world.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, as a fellow motorcycle rider, I have heard many 
tales about the route that Mr. Powaschuk is taking. This road is 
known as one of the most gruelling stretches in all of North 
America. It involves long stretches of gravel. It’s hard on the 
tires, and the weather is often very unpredictable. 
 
I would like all members of this Assembly to join me in 
wishing Mr. Powaschuk the best of luck on his punishing 
9,000-kilometre journey to the Arctic Circle and to thank him 
for raising awareness about autism. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Saskatoon Woman Recognized for Achievements 
Related to Environment 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
global climate change experts have been looking to honour 
brilliant women involved in environmental projects, and 
they’ve been looking in Saskatoon Nutana. Denise Kouri and 
Don Kossick have their home in my constituency and are the 
parents of 23-year-old Rosa Kouri. Rosa has recently been 
selected as one of only 23 women in the world to be recognized 
for achievements in the fight against climate change by the 
largest conservation organization on earth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Switzerland-based World Conservation Union 
chose Rosa from a distinguished list of scientists, activists, and 
academics to be honoured on International Women’s Day. 
Though she’s only 23 years old, Rosa has already been an 
active steward of environmental issues for over 10 years. She 
graduated from Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon with a 

97 per cent average before attending McGill University in 
Montreal. 
 
While in Montreal, Rosa founded the sustainable McGill 
project, a project now implemented in 65 different universities, 
before accepting a job as the national director of the Sierra 
Youth Coalition in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all 
members to join me in congratulating Rosa Kouri and her 
parents, Denise and Don, for her most recent distinction. Rosa 
is a remarkable young woman and an excellent ambassador for 
our province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Columnists’ Comments on Murdoch Carriere Case 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
weekend we heard from two provincial columnists on the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal and I would like to share a few 
selections from each of them in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murray Wood of Rawlco Radio tells us and I 
quote: 
 

A well-timed budget leak intended to distract attention 
from Carriere. Anyone who doubts that it wasn’t an 
approved leak should bear in mind there was a time when 
such a leak would prompt calls for a police investigation. 
Instead, the government coyly offers a, “no comment” and 
“wait and see”. 
 

And he goes on, to quote: 
 

Will it be enough or will it be seen as a desperate 
government buying votes? Well, the point is the NDP is 
showing there are still buttons it can push. Will it distract 
attention from Carriere? Perhaps, but not for long. 
 

And then there’s Bob Hughes in the Leader-Post this weekend 
and I quote: 
 

I wish . . . [someone] would take the premier of the 
province, Lorne Calvert, and shake him by the shoulders 
and sit him down on their knee and explain what a mess he 
is allowing . . . [this] government to create over the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal. That is what it has become. A 
scandal of epic proportions . . . Every day this thing is 
allowed to go on without a serious government 
explanation is one more day that nine innocent women are 
humiliated even more . . . The party of the people? Who 
are they . . . [kidding]? 
 

I couldn’t have said it better myself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Work-Family Balance and Labour Force Shortages 
Conference 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Balancing Work and Family Alliance of 



March 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

Saskatchewan’s labour, work, and family unit sponsored the 
Work-Family Balance and Labour Force Shortages Conference. 
Mr. Speaker, given that responsibility for child care still very 
much falls to women and that 80 per cent of single-parent 
families are headed by women, this is an issue of utmost 
importance to women in the workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference featured presenters from the 
universities of McGill, Guelph, Quebec, and Saskatchewan. 
And keynote speaker, Dr. Suzan Lewis from Middlesex 
University Business School in London, England, spoke about 
how employers can help manage labour shortages by helping 
their employees better balance work and family responsibilities. 
The conference underlined the fact that workplaces are able to 
accommodate employees’ families’ needs, attract better 
workers, have less turnover, and enjoy a healthier bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago Saskatchewan established itself as a 
national leader on balancing work and family when we became 
the first jurisdiction in Canada to appoint a public task force on 
this subject, and this NDP government is continuing that 
leadership role. Our support and sponsorship of this conference 
speaks directly to our recognition of the importance of this issue 
and our commitment to making life better for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to thank the organizers and 
participants in the Work-Family Balance and Labour Force 
Shortages Conference for their good work on this issue and for 
carrying on a very worthy Saskatchewan tradition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Before oral questions, members, I’d like to 
revert back to introduction of guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — It is my pleasure at this time to introduce a 
special guest who is seated in the front row of the Speaker’s 
gallery today. Mr. Thembekile Msantsi is the Sergeant-at-Arms 
and head of safety and security for the Eastern Cape provincial 
legislature in South Africa. Later today Mr. Msantsi will be 
meeting with Mr. Hasani Ngobeni, the Sergeant-at-Arms from 
Limpopo province, South Africa, who is here on his second 
visit to Saskatchewan. These two Sergeant-at-Arms from South 
Africa are the special guests of our Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick 
Shaw. 
 
This delegation has come to our legislature on an attachment to 
learn more about what we do here and to look at the security 
hardware and security policies we have in place in 
Saskatchewan. Their visit also provides us with an opportunity 
to compare security policies. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Mr. Msantsi and Mr. Ngobeni to 
our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, just on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan I’d like to join with you to say 
welcome to our guests. Saskatchewan is very, very proud of our 
relationship with South Africa, in particular our formal 
relationship with Free State province. And we look forward to 
what has been a continuing working relationship of mutual 
benefit and one that will long endure. 
 
And we welcome the Sergeants-at-Arms from South Africa 
here to Saskatchewan. We hope that their stay will be fruitful 
and friendly and that they’ll return and come back and see us 
again. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that the 
Premier’s conscience started to bother him a little bit late 
Thursday afternoon. Apparently his answers earlier that day in 
this Assembly weren’t quite close enough to reality, so at a 
hastily called news conference after 5 p.m. on Thursday he 
performed a dramatic about-face, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
contradicted what he has been saying for the last several years, 
admitting that he was aware of the sexual harassment 
allegations made against Murdoch Carriere prior to them being 
made public in the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps someone over there can tell us why then 
the Premier has not been truthful with this Assembly. And more 
specifically, to the Premier, to the Premier: will he apologize 
for not telling the truth to this Assembly and the people of the 
province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The member has 
made reflections upon another member in the House. And I 
think before we do proceed, the member ought to withdraw the 
remark regarding the reflection on another member in the 
House. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member for 
Cannington to just be patient and not interfere while the ruling 
is being held. And I apologize to the member for Swift Current 
who was about to make a remark. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask all members to not comment 
on any ruling or comments that have been made by the Speaker, 
not to reflect. The question has been asked. We are now 
proceeding with question period. 
 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

The Chair recognizes the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well one of the things I would like to say to the member 
opposite is that I have had an opportunity to review an ad that 
the Sask Party is running on Rawlco radio station . And what’s 
interesting is that the Leader of the Opposition continues to try 
and exploit the women that work, still work in the provincial 
government for their own political purposes, Mr. Speaker, I 
might add. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s so amazing about their advertisement 
is that they are saying that the Government of Saskatchewan 
compensated Mr. Murdoch Carriere for harassment and that is 
patently untrue, Mr. Speaker. It’s patently untrue. The 
Government of Saskatchewan compensated Mr. Carriere 
because we were advised by legal counsel we were going to 
lose the case. And since the members are always looking for 
statements of claim, they can find on May 13, 2003, Mr. 
Carriere’s statement of claim where he outlines his cause of 
action against the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. When taking into account 
language used in the legislature, the Speaker takes into account, 
not only the language but also the reaction that the language 
may evoke. And I would ask the member from Nutana to 
withdraw her remark because obviously provoking and causing 
uproar, uproar in the debate here in the legislature. The member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in their ad they say 
that rewarding harassment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — And simply . . . Order please. Just ask the 
member to withdraw the statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the patently 
untrue comment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, everything that the NDP says about 
this Carriere scandal is hard for the people of the province to 
believe. They find it hard to believe the Premier didn’t hear the 
question last week posed by the member for Canora-Pelly, and 
that’s what he said. He said he couldn’t hear the member for 
Canora-Pelly. When the member for Canora-Pelly asked a 
question in Regina and I’m in Swift Current, I can hear the 
member. We’ve reviewed the tape. It’s completely audible. Mr. 
Speaker, people of the province find it hard to believe that after 
receiving a letter from one of Mr. Carriere’s victims, the 
Premier chose to do nothing. They find it hard to believe that 
until 5 o’clock Thursday, the Premier had conveniently 
forgotten about the letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he couldn’t hear the member for 
Canora-Pelly. The problem is, is he hasn’t heard the plight of 
these nine women, Mr. Speaker. That’s the problem. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So I ask the Premier again, who had to clarify his 
remarks at 20 after 5 on Thursday: why did he not have the 
complete, the accurate, the truthful answer earlier that day in 
question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the member needs 
to know is that the Premier is presently listening to the federal 
government budget, Mr. Speaker, and he’s preparing, he’s 
preparing for the budget. That’s point number one. Point 
number two, when you are sitting in this Assembly on this side 
of the House and there’s a lot of noise, you don’t always hear 
the question. Now you do hear it on TV, but you don’t 
necessarily hear it on the floor of the legislature. And if you ask 
people sitting in the galleries, there are many times when they 
can’t hear either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to say this. I do want to say this to the opposition. 
On April 1, 2003 — and I’ve reviewed Hansard — they not 
only called for the firing of Mr. Carriere not once, not twice, not 
three times, but four times they wanted Mr. Carriere fired. That 
is point and fact number one. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
complied on April 2, and Mr. Carriere was terminated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you bet members on this side of the 
House called for the firing of Mr. Carriere. What we did not call 
for, what the people of this province didn’t call for, what isn’t 
called for is for him to receive a quarter of a million taxpayers’ 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, while the women who were harassed get 
$9,000 each. Let’s be very clear. Let’s have the whole truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth of this government is this. They’re not 
prepared to come forward with clarifications, with the actual 
truth until it looks like they’re going to get caught, Mr. Speaker. 
That was the case in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]. That was the case with the Oyate Safe 
House scandal. And now, Mr. Speaker, it’s the case with this 
very serious scandal surrounding the Carriere situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier. The budget 
federally hasn’t even started yet, will he not stand up and 
answer as to why he did not correctly answer the member for 
Canora-Pelly’s question? Why did he have to scramble and call 
a press conference and clarify what he really meant, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Fact number three — because I’ve 



March 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

given the first two facts — is the leader of the opposition of the 
day who is now Rosetown MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] what did he call for, what did he say? He said that 
the government, no doubt, would have a costly legal action. 
That’s what the member from Rosetown, who was the leader of 
the Sask Party, had to say. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s so fascinating, what’s so fascinating 
about the present leader of the Sask Party, he’s referred 
constantly, he’s referred constantly to Murdoch Carriere’s 
discipline as a promotion, his firing as a promotion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I can just say this, that member every day goes outside of 
this House and, Mr. Speaker, he misleads the public. His ads are 
misleading the public, and I think it’s time . . . and why do they 
do this? Because they want a showcase trial. They want a 
scandal of the century, and what for? Is it about the women? 
No, it’s about their own . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House and the people of this province, they don’t want a 
scandal; they don’t want that at all. What they would like 
though is a government that’s going to answer some questions 
on the scandal that they have caused. Better yet, they’d like a 
government in place that wouldn’t provide compensation to 
someone fired for harassment, convicted of assault when the 
women who are the victims in this case, Mr. Speaker, received 
one-tenth of what they’re prepared to pay for the one that did 
the harassing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question again is to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, 
on Thursday the Premier answered a question in this Assembly. 
He had to take the unprecedented step of scrambling to call a 
press conference after 5 o’clock on Thursday because he knew 
what he said here wasn’t the truth. When are we going to get 
the facts, Mr. Speaker? When are we going to get the disclosure 
of the document, the settlement document with Carriere? When 
will we get these questions answered by this government intent 
on hiding something, on covering up the Carriere scandal, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 
Premier is preparing to respond to the federal budget and isn’t 
in the Assembly. But I will say this. You know what the Sask 
Party really wants? What they want is a showcase trial of the 
century. That’s really what they want. They want a Conrad 
Black trial. Do they care about the women? Do they care about 
putting women through this? 
 
In fact I listened very carefully to a woman on Gormley on 

Friday, and what did she say? She really wants this to sort of 
settle down, Mr. Speaker. She wants to get back to her life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a horrible thing that happened to the women 
in the Department of the Environment. It was a horrible thing. 
They called for his firing. The minister of the Public Service 
Commission of the day responded. The man was fired, Mr. 
Speaker. We knew at the time that this was a cause of action. 
The action was launched, and we settled. He was not, he was 
not compensated for harassment like they continue to say. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Ministers’ Knowledge of Disciplinary Action 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan Party 
wants and what the victims of Murdoch Carriere want is justice, 
and they want answers from this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, last week just outside the 
Assembly the Minister for PCS was asked when the former 
minister of the Environment knew about the decision to suspend 
and then promote Murdoch Carriere. The minister replied, and I 
quote from a tape of that interview, “You need to ask Ms. 
Crofford and you need to ask every other member of the cabinet 
of the day.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s begin with the former minister of the 
Environment. Was he aware of the decision to promote instead 
of fire Murdoch Carriere prior to this information being made 
public in the media? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on this matter I answer 
for the members in the Assembly. And what I can say is that the 
former minister of the Public Service Commission in this 
Assembly said that the minister of the Environment and herself 
were briefed on approximately February 12, 2003, and that has 
already been reported in the Assembly if you review Hansard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are 
going to have a hard time believing anything that this NDP 
government has to say. First of all, the entire cabinet claimed to 
know nothing about the Murdoch Carriere scandal until the 
Gillies report was leaked to the newspapers. 
 
[14:00] 
 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

A few days later, the minister for PCS said that they didn’t 
understand the significance of this harassment. Last Thursday, 
the Premier said he was never briefed on the issue and then held 
a news conference to say that, oh yes, by the way, he knew 
about it. And the former minister responsible for PCS said that 
both she and the former minister of the Environment knew at 
least two months before Murdoch Carriere was fired for this 
harassment. 
 
My question is for the former minister of the Environment: 
when was the very first time that the former minister heard of 
the Carriere scandal happening in his own department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, do you notice how the 
opposition keeps moving this? They keep moving this. It is now 
a scandal. Do you notice that? They sort of keep trying to frame 
the language — a scandal, Mr. Speaker. It’s a scandal, a scandal 
of the century . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 
scandal of the century. And that was when former members of 
the Conservative Party were hauled into court in the 1990s, and 
they were charged and convicted with taking money from the 
public. And the Leader of the Opposition, where did he work? 
He worked in one John Gerich’s office, and he was one of the 
people that went to jail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The minister has 10 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And Mr. Speaker, he said, the Leader 
of the Opposition said, I didn’t know. Well I say he didn’t want 
to know, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I say. The opposition 
members — and there’s plenty of them over there — they know 
about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this is a scandal. It is a scandal 
that nine women were harassed under this government’s watch. 
It is a scandal that these nine women were forced to all sign a 
settlement agreement or threatened to get nothing by this 
government. It is a scandal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it absolutely defies all logic that the former 
Environment minister did not know about Murdoch Carriere’s 
harassment earlier than February 2003. The minister has had a 
long-time personal relationship with Murdoch Carriere. In fact 
The StarPhoenix reports in April 2003 when writing about 
Murdoch Carriere, and I quote, “What’s more, he has known 

Environment Minister Buckley Belanger for 20 years and even 
phoned him for help last December.” The same article states, 
quote: 
 

If Belanger knew about Carriere’s misdeeds, he could 
have taken action himself sooner. If he didn’t know, he’s 
hopelessly out of touch with his own department. 

 
The fact that the minister was out of touch with own department 
is easy to believe, Mr. Speaker. But it’s even easier to believe 
that he doesn’t want to admit what he knew and when. Will the 
former minister admit what he knew and when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister of the Public 
Service Commission on April 2, 2003, indicated that both she 
and the minister of the Environment on approximately February 
12 were provided with information regarding Mr. Carriere. But 
she also indicates that they were told disciplinary action was 
taking place, but they were not given details, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I will say to the member opposite is that they want to 
keep this going for their own political purposes. They call . . . 
it’s all about politics. It’s not about the women that still work in 
the Department of the Environment. It’s all about them, Mr. 
Speaker. And I find that, Mr. Speaker, callous and very 
insensitive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the former minister of the 
Environment has an obligation to these nine women who were 
harassed and to the people of this province to tell us what he 
knew. We were talking about a man the former Environment 
minister has known for over 20 years, a man who has was being 
moved from his high-profile job in the former minister’s own 
department, a man who spoke to the minister and met with the 
minister often. 
 
To the member for Athabasca: will he admit today to this 
Assembly that he knew about the Murdoch Carriere harassment 
of women long before the Gillies report but did nothing to stop 
the harassment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are members over there that 
actually worked in the very office of cabinet ministers that were 
charged and convicted. I think the member from Silver Springs, 
I think the Leader of the Opposition — they were actually in the 
office of the minister that was later charged and convicted. And 
I say, what do you know? When did you know it? Why didn’t 
go to the public? That’s what I say to them, Mr. Speaker. You 



March 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

know what this is all about . . . Or why didn’t they go to the 
police, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]? They 
must have known what was going on in those offices, Mr. 
Speaker. They knew but they didn’t come forward. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister of the Environment has 
indicated that Mr. Carriere called him in December. He told 
him he could not speak about the case to Mr. Carriere, end of 
story. He was advised in February that disciplinary action was 
going to take place, and he was not given the full detail which 
we all read about on April 1, 2003, on the front page of the 
newspaper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Budget Presentation 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP is so desperate to deflect attention away from the 
Murdoch Carriere scandal that they are now leaking their own 
budget. There was a time when this type of thing would get a 
Finance minister fired. But in this NDP government, not telling 
the truth about SPUDCO doesn’t get you fired. Not telling the 
truth about putting children at risk in a so-called safe house 
doesn’t get you fired. And now, even the Premier has been 
caught, Mr. Speaker. So I guess the Finance minister leaking his 
own budget is no big deal to members over there, to this tired 
and increasingly desperate NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this NDP government now leaking its own 
budget to deflect attention away from the Murdoch Carriere 
scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting 
to see the response that the Sask Party has to the stories in the 
weekend paper. I find it interesting that they say that there 
should not be money to support seniors and their drug costs. I 
find it interesting for them to say that we should not be 
providing incentives to help young people stay in this province. 
I find it very interesting the Sask Party has no money for this 
but has lots of other demands for us to spend money on 
business tax cuts and on property tax cuts for some of the 
richest landowners in the province. 
 
Shame on that opposition if that’s where their priorities are. We 
will see on Thursday in this House where this NDP 
government’s priorities are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1988 when specific details in the 1988 budget were 
leaked to the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], the 

NDP called for the minister of Finance’s resignation. Here 
exactly is what NDP MLA Murray Koskie asked then Finance 
minister Gary Lane. He said and I quote, quote: 
 

. . . if it comes to pass, [referring to the leaked budget 
measures] I ask you whether you are in fact prepared to do 
the honourable thing and to submit your resignation as 
Minister of Finance? 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is the question that the NDP asked after the 
budget leak in 1988. Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Finance 
the same question today; is he going to do the honourable thing 
and resign today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the quick answer is, it’s not on 
my list of things to do today, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you 
this, as I’m preparing for the budget on Thursday, what this 
NDP government is going to make sure is that there are 
initiatives that benefit Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
families, that benefit our seniors, that help make this a more 
attractive place for young people to live, to start their careers, to 
raise their families. They’ll be money in this budget that’ll help 
working class . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ll ask members to come to order so 
that the person who is on his feet can be heard. Order please. 
Minister of Finance may complete his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government on 
Thursday will present a budget that will speak to the values of 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan people. It will 
support our seniors in dealing with health care costs. It will help 
make this a more attractive place for young people to start their 
careers and raise their families. It’ll focus on the question of 
how we fund our education system. This budget will make life 
better for Saskatchewan people. I hope the Saskatchewan Party 
sees it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, if there’s any more leaks or 
many more details, we won’t need a budget on Thursday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1988, the NDP also called for an 
investigation into the budget leak. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
minister today: has he ordered an investigation inside his 
department? Outside his department? With his staff? With his 
colleagues? And if not, Mr. Speaker, is it because he 
orchestrated the budget leak himself to deflect away attention 
from the Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in fact we have asked for 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

a review to be undertaken to find out the circumstances of the 
report that was in Saturday’s paper. But I can see why people 
would be so eager to find out the good news that was reported 
in the Saturday paper. 
 
I can see why people would be excited to learn that this NDP 
government is thinking about capping drug costs for our 
seniors. I can see why people would be excited to see the type 
of bold initiative that’s being promoted to help young people 
stay in this province. And I can see why people would be 
concerned about a Sask Party opposition that cares only about 
its own politics and not about the interests of Saskatchewan 
people. This will all be revealed on Thursday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The only good news we’ve seen so far, 
Mr. Speaker, is that it might lead to this minister’s resignation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few months this desperate NDP 
government has gone on a pre-election spending spree, 
desperately trying to buy votes. Many people are questioning 
whether the NDP spending spree is sustainable in the long run, 
including former NDP Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon. 
Janice MacKinnon calls the NDP’s spending plans, and I quote, 
“unsustainable.” And she says that this NDP government may 
be driving the province back into a deficit. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP’s own former Finance minister — the one who did 
balance the budget — says that this government’s plans are 
unsustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Finance minister: why is he driving 
Saskatchewan back into deficit financing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I find it interesting that this morning 
the Sask Party leader puts out a press release that says that our 
priorities are wrong, that there’s not enough money in this 
province to pay for a drug plan to support our seniors, but 
there’s enough money to cut more business taxes. He says 
there’s not enough money in this province for us to be able to 
find a new way to help young people get their careers started 
here, but there’s money for property tax cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget that comes down on Thursday will be 
a budget that will present a set of choices to Saskatchewan 
people. Do we spend the money in this province to support our 
seniors and our young people and to build our economy and 
build our communities? Or do we spend it on those kind of 
things that the Sask Party’s calling for? That is a choice 
Saskatchewan people are going to make. 
 
The budget I table in this House on Thursday, Mr. Speaker, will 
ask people to support a budget that makes life better for 
Saskatchewan families, regardless of what the Sask Party’s 
politics are. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 

Transportation Strategy for Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago the 
Premier and the Highways minister unveiled an ambitious and 
innovative transportation strategy for Saskatchewan called 
transportation for economic advantage, a 10-year, $5 billion 
strategy to realign our transportation system to meet the needs 
of our thriving, 21st century economy. 
 
In addition, an announcement was made by the Premier at the 
recent convention of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities indicating that rural municipalities will receive 
$10 million in new money for transportation infrastructure in 
the upcoming provincial budget — $5 million for the roads to 
resources program funded by the Department of Highways and 
Transportation which will provide assistance to rural 
municipalities in the heavy oil area of the province that face . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order. I would invite the minister . . . Order please, members. 
Order. I would invite the Minister of Government Relations to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, $5 million for the 
roads to resources program funded by the Department of 
Highways and Transportation which will provide assistance to 
rural municipalities in the heavy oil area of the province that 
face large road maintenance costs due to high volumes of 
heavy-truck traffic. Five million dollars will also be provided 
for a new municipal primary weight corridor program funded 
by the Department of Government Relations, increasing to $10 
million in 2008-09. 
 
I want to commend SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] for their work on Clearing the Path and the 
recommendations for development of RM [rural municipality] 
primary weight corridors. SARM and the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, along with Government Relations 
and the Department of Highways and Transportation, have 
worked together over the past three years to identify these 
corridors. 
 
The corridors will provide access to remote communities and 
industry where primary weight highways will not be developed. 
They will provide interconnecting links to the primary weight 
highways system and redirect traffic from TMS [thin membrane 
surface] highways to parallel RM roads. 
 
With these two funding announcements, the potential exists to 
achieve a true integration of the municipal road network and the 
provincial transportation system for the first time in the 
province’s history. We remain committed, Mr. Speaker, to 
continue working with leaders at all levels of government to 
build a foundation for excellence in economic growth and social 



March 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

progress for all municipalities and to ensure Saskatchewan 
remains the best place to live, work, and raise a family. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
respond to the minister’s ministerial statement. Well again we 
see more evidence of a deathbed conversion on the part of the 
NDP concerning highways and roads in this province. After 16 
years of neglect by the NDP, they start to make some 
announcements. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, as we see in the previous 
announcements, it’s announcement about . . . They claim to be 
new spending even though when you take a look at the amounts 
that they are talking about, given inflation and the need and the 
so-called six pillars, it’s very little money for the highways and 
roads of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to thank SARM for all the hard 
work that they’ve done in Clearing the Path initiative, but, Mr. 
Speaker, this old and tired NDP government has piggybacked 
this SARM initiative, now is taking credit for their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we saw in the previous announcement of the $5 
billion over 10 years, it came down to on the average of $500 
million per year. And when you take into account the $404 
million that’s in the present budget in Highways, Mr. Speaker, 
that leaves very little for new money in the budget for future 
years. 
 
And really, Mr. Speaker, all we see here is another 
announcement to try to deflect the problems that the 
government have had in the last 16 years of underfunding 
highways and roads in this province. And it’s going to take 
many, many years of sustained budgets, sustained money 
putting into roads and highways in order to bring them up to a 
world-class standard that this province so desperately needs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has not had a plan for highways for 16 
years. This province has had eight different Highways ministers 
spending millions of dollars without a plan. And the Premier 
said it himself: now with an election on the horizon, the NDP 
finally came up with a plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s announcements are neither plans 
nor historic, Mr. Speaker. As the Premier admitted previously, 
that it has a tradition of just making ad hoc announcements. 
There’s no plan in place. And as we see again, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is making an announcement today with no plan in 
place. We don’t know where it’s going to go, and basically it’s 
another leak from the budget that’s coming up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have suffered long 
enough under this desperate, old, tired government, and the next 
announcement they should make, it should be is to call an 
election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 381 through 
484. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 381 to 484 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
rising today to present to the House second reading of 
legislative amendments to The Crown Minerals Amendment 
Act, 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments, along with those of The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, will allow 
Crown-acquired crude oil and natural gas production to be 
treated as if the production is Crown production for royalty and 
tax purposes. As well, they will eliminate the need for having 
the separate Crown-acquired mineral ownership category for 
royalty tax purposes and significantly simplify regulations and 
future administrative systems related to determining the 
royalties and taxes. 
 
The Crown-acquired mineral ownership category within 
Saskatchewan’s royalty tax fiscal structures has existed since 
January 1974. Crude oil and natural gas production associated 
with the mineral rights acquired by the province under The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Stabilization and Development Act, 1973 
became known as Crown-acquired production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1973, three separate mineral ownership 
categories, namely Crown, freehold, and Crown-acquired, 
needed to be considered within the fiscal regimes applicable for 
oil and gas production in the province. Crown-acquired 
production was subject to both the production tax and a royalty 
in accordance with the freehold lease that existed in December 
1973. 
 
On March 1, 1998 the freehold royalty liability was eliminated 
and the production tax was increased to equate to the Crown 
royalty that would otherwise be payable if the production was 
pursuant to a Crown lease issued under The Crown Minerals 
Act. The extra administration associated with levying a tax on 
the Crown-acquired production, instead of a standard Crown 
royalty, was not addressed at that time because of the difference 
in treatment of Crown-acquired production and Crown 
production within the corporation income tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1974 the federal government eliminated the 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

deduction of provincial royalties and production taxes within 
the federal corporate income tax system and introduced a 
deduction called the resource allowance in lieu of the royalties 
and production taxes. Then in 2003 the federal government 
implemented a phase-out of the resource allowance and the 
phase-in of full provincial resource royalty tax deductibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, starting this year provincial royalties and taxes are 
now fully deductible for corporate income tax purposes. This 
being the case, full consideration can now be given to 
eliminating the Crown-acquired mineral ownership category 
within the royalty tax systems, and treating this production as if 
it were produced pursuant to a Crown lease issued under The 
Crown Minerals Act. 
 
The changes we are proposing have no revenue or netback 
implications to the province or oil and gas companies, but have 
the benefit of significantly simplifying The Crown Oil and Gas 
Royalty Regulations, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Regulations, 1995, and the associated industry and government 
administration systems. 
 
The recommended amendments to The Crown Minerals Act, in 
conjunction with the recommended amendments to The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, would effectively 
treat Crown-acquired production as if it were Crown production 
for royalty tax purposes. In addition, companies looking to 
make oil and gas investments for the first time in Saskatchewan 
would no longer have to learn about or be concerned with the 
Crown-acquired mineral ownership category. The changes will 
make it easier for these companies to understand the royalty tax 
systems applicable to crude oil and natural gas produced in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we make these changes I want to remind the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the oil and gas and mining industries contribute a 
great deal to the Saskatchewan economy. These industries 
create jobs, build capital investment, and create opportunities 
for business and communities and families across our province. 
They are the key economic drivers for prosperity in 
Saskatchewan, ranking above agriculture in provincial GDP 
[gross domestic product]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation only affects certain companies 
producing crude oil and natural gas classified as 
Crown-acquired production in Saskatchewan. The two major oil 
and gas producing associations — namely the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers and the small explorers and 
producers of Canada — have reviewed these legislative 
amendments and agree with these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now present the legislative amendments to The 
Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007. I move second reading. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 46, The Crown Minerals 
Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak on Bill No. 46, An Act to amend The 
Crown Minerals Act. Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, the 
oil and gas production company and the oil and gas production 
department are very, very important to Saskatchewan’s 
economy both now and into the future. Saskatchewan is in a 
very enviable position about having a great number of assets in 
the oil and gas sector and I think that any streamlining of the 
regulatory framework under which these companies operate is 
an improvement upon which we would certainly look very 
favourably. 
 
The minister outlines rather technical considerations that are 
embedded in this Act. And I know that we will want to speak as 
well to the various representatives of these oil and gas acquired 
companies that this legislation and legislation under, I believe, 
Bill No. 48 are going to affect. And in order for that 
consultation to happen between our critics and these companies, 
I would at this time move to adjourn debate. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 46, The Crown 
Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 
2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Fatal Accidents Act allows family members 
of deceased persons to recover damages for the death with the 
result of another person’s wrongdoing. The wrongdoing must 
be such that the deceased would have been entitled to maintain 
an action and recover damages if he or she had lived. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, the Act allows the recovery of 
non-monetary damages for grief and loss of guidance, care, and 
companionship. The Act allows spouses, parents, and minor 
children to recover these non-monetary damages in the amounts 
specified in the Act. The Act also allows minor children of the 
deceased to recover $30,000. 
 
Presently however, there is no ability for adult children to 
recover any damages for grief and the loss of guidance, care, 
and companionship on the death of a parent. The proposed 
amendment will allow children of all ages, not just children 
who are under the age of 18, to recover damages for grief and 
loss of guidance, care, and companionship when a parent dies 
as the result of a wrongful act. 
 
In 2004 the Alberta Court of Appeal struck down an Alberta 
provision that restricted the recovery of non-monetary damages 
to minor children. The court found that such provision 



March 19, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

contravenes the equality rights in the Charter. The court 
considered that the grief a child feels on the death of a parent is 
not dependent upon the age of the child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will allow children of all ages to 
recover damages for the loss of guidance, care, and 
companionship in the circumstances of a wrongful death of a 
parent. This amendment will ensure that the Act meets the 
requirements of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 47, The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise to speak to Bill No. 47, an Act to amend The 
Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, certainly in the times of a 
tragic accident involving children that this legislature and this 
province needs to do everything that it possibly can to alleviate 
the stress and anxiety and grief of these individuals. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, it certainly would seem that the legislation that’s 
proposed in this Act is indeed something that is worthy of very 
positive consideration. I know that we’re going to want to speak 
to members of the legal profession to make sure there are no 
unintended consequences of this legislation. And in order to 
facilitate that discussion at this time I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 47 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Amendment Act, 2007 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Freehold Oil and 
Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007. Mr. Speaker, these 
amendments, along with The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 
are designed to allow Crown-acquired crude oil and natural gas 
production to be treated as if the production is Crown 
production, royalty tax purposes, to eliminate the need for 
having the separate Crown-acquired mineral ownership 
category for royalty tax purposes, and significantly simplify 
regulations and future administrative systems related to 
determining the royalties and taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just spoke to the companion piece of legislation 
a few moments ago. And in fact the reasons for the two pieces 

of legislation are really the same so I’m not going to repeat 
everything that has already been said. But I do want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that these changes will result in greater simplicity for 
both government and industry. And while I’m on my feet, I’d 
just like to say that they are part of several changes the 
government has been making with respect to oil and gas and its 
treatment by the Government of Saskatchewan in an effort to 
encourage that kind of activity. 
 
And as I said in my previous remarks, Mr. Speaker, these 
industries — mining and oil and gas, but we’re talking about oil 
and gas right now — are a very important driver for the 
Saskatchewan economy. And over the last several years we’ve 
been trying to simplify regulations, make royalties and taxes 
more competitive, and generally grow these industries. 
 
And I’d like to report to the House, and through you, Mr. 
Speaker, in relation to these two pieces of legislation which add 
more simplification, that what we are hearing on a constant 
basis from the oil and gas sector is that they like doing business 
in Saskatchewan. Many companies have told me that they 
prefer doing business in the province of Saskatchewan to 
Alberta in terms of the regulatory structure and dealing with our 
department personnel. And we have a very good relationship 
with the industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that last year drilling in 
Saskatchewan increased quite considerably while it decreased 
in the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia. So we’re 
definitely headed in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. And on a 
final note, I’d like to tell the House, through you, Mr. Speaker, 
that I just reviewed the most current numbers I have for drilling 
in Saskatchewan this year, so far this year. And it is 
approximately 35 per cent higher than it was last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that the oil 
and gas sector, which is producing twice as much in 
Saskatchewan as 10 years ago, is really doing well. That 
benefits them, but it also benefits all the people of the province. 
These amendments help us simplify the regulatory framework, 
and so I’m very pleased to move second reading. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 48, The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second 
time. The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak to the Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act as well The Crown 
Minerals Amendment Act that was presented earlier this 
afternoon by the minister, because as he indicates both 
circumstances, and these are companion pieces of legislation 
and probably should move together in consideration as they 
proceed in the normal process of consideration in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed true that over the last number of years 
the oil and gas sector has become an increasing component of 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2007 

the GDP of the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s indeed 
good news for the province of Saskatchewan. I just hope that 
they’re going to be able to continue to explore and develop 
wells and production of oil and gas that will keep up with the 
pace of the leaks that are happening in the budget travelling out 
on the other side so that what they are doing is something that’ll 
contribute to the sustainable future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that our critic for this segment of our 
economy is going to want to speak to the affected industries and 
make sure that nothing has been overlooked in the development 
of these two companion pieces of legislation. And in order to 
allow that to happen properly, at this time I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 48 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the Government 
House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of the 
House to introduce a motion related to the time of adjournment 
on Tuesday, April 3. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Time of Adjournment on April 3, 2007 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
on Tuesday, April 3, 2007 the time of the daily 
adjournment shall be at 5 p.m. in order to facilitate the 
participation of members of the Legislative Assembly in 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by leave by the member 
for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
on Tuesday, April 3, 2007 the time of the daily 
adjournment shall be at 5 p.m. in order to facilitate the 
participation of members of the Legislative Assembly in 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the time and the 
schedule of work to be done, in order to accommodate the work 
of the Standing Committee on Human Services, the Standing 
Committee on House Services, and the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................881 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ..................................................................................................................................881 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................881 
 Canadian Social Work Week 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................881 
 Regina District Labour Council Awards Dinner 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................881 
 Motorcycle Trek Raises Awareness About Autism 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................882 
 Saskatoon Woman Recognized for Achievements Related to Environment 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................882 
 Columnists’ Comments on Murdoch Carriere Case 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................882 
 Work-Family Balance and Labour Force Shortages Conference 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................882 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................883 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................884 
 Ministers’ Knowledge of Disciplinary Action 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................885 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................885 
 Budget Presentation 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................887 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................887 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Transportation Strategy for Saskatchewan 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................888 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................889 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................889 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................889 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................890 
 Bill No. 47 — The Fatal Accidents Amendment Act, 2007 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................890 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................891 
 Bill No. 48 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 2007 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................891 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................891 
MOTIONS 
 Time of Adjournment on April 3, 2007 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................892 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


