




















































Hansard: December 10, 2007


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 1B  MONDAY, DECEMBER 10, 2007, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serje SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Subject of recount  Meadow Lake 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3 

 December 10, 2007 

 

The Assembly met at 14:00. 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the 

Vice Regal party. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:04.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 

 

The Legislative Assembly has elected me to the office of 

Speaker. 

 

If, in the performance of my duties, I should at any time fall 

into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 

the Assembly, whose servant I am. On behalf of the Assembly 

and its members, it is my duty to claim all their traditional 

rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 

speech in their debates, access to your person at all reasonable 

times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most 

favourable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he freely 

confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her 

Majesty’s person and government. His Honour is confident that 

the Assembly’s proceedings will be conducted with wisdom 

and prudence and grants the Assembly’s claim to its traditional 

rights and privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 

have ready access to His Honour upon all reasonable occasions 

and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, 

will constantly receive from him the most favourable 

construction. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech as tabled.] 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislature, Honoured Guests, 

People of Saskatchewan: 

 

It’s time to get to work. 

 

It is my pleasure to welcome you to the opening session of the 

Twenty-Sixth Legislature of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On November 7, the people of Saskatchewan chose a new 

direction for our great province; a direction that reflects 

Saskatchewan values. 

 

Growth and opportunity. 

 

Security and compassion. 

 

Keeping your word. 

 

This is what my new government will stand for. This is what 

the session will be about. 

 

This Speech from the Throne will be shorter than most. This is 

not because there is any shortage of work to do. It will be 

shorter because my government believes actions speak louder 

than words. 

 

This afternoon, I will outline the actions that my government 

will take during this session and its vision for securing 

Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

However, before I go on to articulate this new vision, it is only 

appropriate to pause now and recognize the service of the 

previous administration. 

 

Members of the previous Government of Saskatchewan worked 

hard to serve the public. While this chamber often rang with 

debates and disagreements over policies and priorities, there 

was never any doubt that members of the previous government 

were motivated by their desire to make our province a better 

place for all. 

 

On behalf of my government and the people of Saskatchewan, I 

sincerely thank them for their service. 

 

Securing the Future 

 

Within the borders of Saskatchewan, one can find natural 

resources and economic potential that would be the envy of any 

sovereign state on our planet. 

 

Saskatchewan is also blessed with amazing human resources, 

hard working people and a history of innovation and excellence. 

 

Given this, Saskatchewan should be a leader – not only in the 

New West that is emerging around us – but in the world. This 

brings me to the crux of my government’s new approach. 

 

My government will have a growth agenda. 

 

Despite our tremendous wealth in both natural and human 

resources, our province has never truly achieved its full 

potential. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, there is a clear sense this is about to 

change. There is a clear sense that our time is now. 

 

A growing population and a growing economy are the keys to 

securing our future. 

 

This will mean more opportunities for everyone. This will mean 

more young people choosing to stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

It also means more revenue to pay for essential public services 

– health care for those who are sick, education for those who 

wish to improve their opportunities in life, safer highways, safer 

communities, and a helping hand to those who struggle with 

problems like addictions. 

 

Growth is not an end in itself. The end we truly desire is a safer, 

better and more secure life for the people of Saskatchewan. 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2007 

That’s why growth and security will be the watchwords for my 

government in the months and years ahead. 

 

They will be the twin paths for our journey – a journey which 

will never truly be completed, because we must always seek to 

grow, and we must always seek to provide a better, more secure 

life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Growth 

 

Accountability 
My government and its growth agenda will be built on a 

foundation of sound financial management. That is why my 

government will introduce The Saskatchewan Growth and 

Financial Security Act. 

 

This Act will require that the budget of this province be 

balanced each and every year, instead of every four years as 

current legislation dictates. This new act will also set out a 

formula for allocating budgetary surpluses – half to securing the 

future by paying down debt, and half to investing in the future 

through economic growth initiatives. The Saskatchewan Growth 

and Financial Security Act will also ensure the size of the 

public service will not grow at a rate faster than the population 

it serves. 

 

Retaining Our Young People 
Accelerating growth will require a long-term commitment to 

keep our young people in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the last seven years, our province has lost more than 35,000 

people through out-migration. Most were young and 

well-trained. Instead of building careers and starting families 

right here at home, they decided to move elsewhere. We need to 

keep more of our young people in Saskatchewan. 

 

To that end, my government will introduce the nation’s most 

aggressive youth retention plan. This plan calls for tuition 

rebates of up to $20,000 over seven years for those students 

who stay in the province after graduation to start their careers. 

 

My government will also help young people start a business in 

Saskatchewan by allowing young entrepreneurs under 30 to 

earn $10,000 per year tax free for five years. 

 

A New Vision for the Economy: Enterprise Saskatchewan 
Key to my government’s plans for creating lasting and 

permanent growth is the establishment of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. For too long in this province, governments of all 

political stripes have attempted to dominate the economy at the 

expense of the private and cooperative sectors. This has 

inevitably led to important investment decisions being viewed 

through the lens of political expediency. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will be a unique and innovative 

public-private partnership designed to replace the top-down, 

government-driven economic schemes of the past. It will return 

direction of the economy to the hands of people who create the 

jobs, invest the dollars and build the labour force of the future. 

It will be tasked with the ongoing development of – and 

reporting on – economic goals and targets. Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will ensure we remain a competitive and 

attractive home for investment and job creation. 

Supporting Municipalities 
The people of Saskatchewan voted in favour of a government 

committed to restoring a relationship of trust among the 

province, cities and municipalities. 

 

During a period of fiscal strain, grants to various municipal 

governments were cut and expenses down-loaded. Now that 

times have improved, little has been done to restore the 

previous balance. 

 

My government is committed to negotiating a new revenue 

sharing agreement with municipalities that will include a 

percentage of the province’s own-source revenue. My 

government will also pursue innovative new partnerships with 

municipalities to assist them in meeting the demand for 

commercial and residential lots as part of our plan to secure the 

current economic momentum. While new agreements are being 

negotiated, my government will increase revenue sharing to 

provide immediate assistance to municipalities. 

 

Democratic Labour Laws 
The goal of promoting growth requires my government to focus 

some attention on the current labour legislative environment. 

The rights of workers to bargain collectively and the rights of 

employers must be respected. However, the labour legislative 

environment must also be competitive with other Canadian 

jurisdictions, if the Saskatchewan economy is to realize its 

potential. 

 

My government will introduce legislation that achieves this 

competitive balance in labour laws. 

 

Labour Shortage 

Addressing Saskatchewan’s current labour shortage is key to 

securing the future. Solving this shortage requires much greater 

participation by our First Nations and Métis people, more 

aggressive immigration efforts, and a concerted effort to bring 

our ex-patriots back home. 

 

These areas will form the backbone of my government’s efforts 

to deal with the shortage of trained workers. Enterprise 

Saskatchewan can be a focal point for these efforts, bringing 

together stakeholders in the economy – including 

post-secondary institutions – to focus attention on this 

important priority. 

 

Investing in Knowledge, Innovation and Post-Secondary 

Institutions 
The people of Saskatchewan have voted in favour of a 

government committed to building a knowledge economy in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to the efforts of Enterprise Saskatchewan, this goal 

will be achieved through increased funding to existing 

post-secondary institutions. 

 

My government will increase operating funding to 

post-secondary institutions by $125 million over four years. 

 

A knowledge economy must also look for new ways to 

capitalize on the province’s natural advantages. One example is 

the uranium sector. 

 



December 10, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

For too long in our province, development of the value added 

opportunities flowing from Saskatchewan’s plentiful and high 

grade uranium reserves have not been a sufficient priority. This 

is why my government will now begin systematically exploring 

these opportunities. 

 

Agriculture 
If it is to be successful, any growth agenda in Saskatchewan 

must pay particular attention to agriculture, historically the 

backbone of our economy. 

 

My government is committed to fully funding the province’s 

share of the Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization 

Program (CAIS) and is determined to work with the federal 

government on creating new programs. 

 

There is also a need for the federal government to increase its 

share of funding for income stabilization and disaster relief 

programs. 

 

The Ministry of Agriculture is aware of the difficulties now 

facing the industry as a result of a higher Canadian dollar and is 

already working to develop solutions. 

 

My government will listen to producer groups, and, in 

cooperation with the federal government, find ways to work 

through a difficult transitional period. 

 

Forestry 
Despite problems on a global scale, the forestry sector presents 

this province with significant opportunities for growth. 

Possibilities include developing new markets, examining 

creative uses for wood waste and assisting in the construction of 

new infrastructure, vital to the industry’s future success. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will play a key role in this area. 

However, any new plans will not include direct government 

investment in specific companies, a course of action that has 

proven disastrous in the past, leading to some of the largest 

losses of taxpayers’ money in the province’s history. 

 

Tax Relief 
The people of Saskatchewan have also voted for lower taxes. 

 

My government is committed to reducing the education portion 

of property taxes by doubling rebates over the next four years. 

It is the first step in making good on a commitment to achieve a 

better balance in paying for our education system. 

 

My government’s plan applies to both farmland and urban 

dwellings. Everyone has a stake in the future of our educational 

system. Everyone is entitled to reap the benefits from 

adjustments to that system. 

 

Saskatchewan families purchasing a used car or light truck are 

already benefiting from tax reduction measures introduced by 

my government. The provincial sales tax now applies only once 

to the purchase of a vehicle. 

 

Tourism and Parks 
Saskatchewan is a land of great natural beauty that is a source 

of pride for its people. And that pride encourages us to 

enthusiastically share these remarkable treasures each year with 

visitors from around the world. 

 

Much can be done to improve the services offered to these 

visitors and build even more pride in our province. To that end, 

my government will double tourism funding to promote added 

marketing activities and make important capital investments in 

new tourism facilities. 

 

Our parks have also been a consistent source of pride and 

quality recreational activities for Saskatchewan families. My 

government will invest in new electrified campsites and new 

infrastructure for our parks. 

 

Security 

 

The measures I have cited so far will do much to increase 

growth and economic activity in Saskatchewan. However, as 

previously mentioned, this growth is not an end in itself. The 

end that we all desire is a higher quality of life and a safer, more 

secure environment for everyone in Saskatchewan. 

 

This will require improvements to our health care system, safer 

communities and improvements to the social safety net. My 

government plans to take significant steps in each of these 

areas. 

 

Health Care 

The people of Saskatchewan have voted for better health care. 

 

There is overwhelming support for a publicly funded, publicly 

administered health care system. However, patients are growing 

tired of over-flowing emergency rooms, shortages of doctors 

and nurses, endless temporary rural hospital closures and the 

longest waiting lists in the nation. 

 

Key to overcoming these difficulties is addressing the shortage 

of nurses, doctors and other health care professionals. My 

government will begin working in partnership with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and other nursing stakeholders. 

The goal will be to hire 800 Registered Nurses within the first 

term of government. 

 

My government is also committed to creating more training 

seats and more residency positions for our doctors. 

 

Saskatchewan people believe that not enough of the health care 

budget is getting to the front lines of patient care. Increasingly, 

people wonder if we have the most effective system possible. 

 

My government is committed to conducting a ―patient first‖ 

review of the entire health care system. This review will be 

conducted with the input and support of health care 

professionals across our province. This review will determine 

the most efficient means of reducing surgical wait times, 

creating quality workplaces, reducing shortages of doctors and 

nurses through a comprehensive human resources plan and 

strengthening support for cancer care and prevention. 

 

My government will also honour a promise to establish a 

prescription drug program that covers most seniors and includes 

children under its protective umbrella. This drug plan can be 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2007 

distinguished from others proposed recently, in that it is both 

comprehensive and fiscally responsible. 

 

Healthy, Active Families 
Numerous studies have shown that children who are involved in 

positive activities early in life are more likely to have positive 

outcomes in later life. They are also likely to avoid problems 

like drug addiction and alcohol abuse. 

 

In order to assist families with the cost of cultural, artistic and 

sports activities, my government will introduce a $150 per year 

per child Active Families Benefit. The Active Families Benefit 

will apply to each child aged six to 14 years. 

 

Safer Communities 
The people of Saskatchewan have voted for safer communities. 

 

For the past nine years, Saskatchewan has had the highest crime 

rates in the country. Our people suffer the highest rate of 

substance abuse in the nation, according to the Centre for 

Addiction and Mental Health. 

 

More than ninety percent of our prison inmates have a 

substance abuse problem and more than half of them are 

released from jail, only to end up behind bars again. 

 

What has been tried in the past clearly isn’t working. It is time 

for a new approach. 

 

My government will work with communities on a new 

long-term policing strategy that identifies current and emerging 

needs. It will move to provide another 120 new police officers 

over four years. 

 

We will work to crack down on drugs and gangs in prisons. 

 

The crucial work of funding 100 new long-term addictions 

treatment beds will also begin. To the extent that is possible and 

practical, my government will work towards having these 

treatment beds operated by community based and First Nations 

organizations. 

 

The Social Safety Net 

The people of Saskatchewan voted in favour of helping families 

in need. 

 

My government is deeply committed to reducing child poverty. 

Everyone in this province must have the chance to secure their 

full measure of the coming prosperity. 

 

The Report Card on Child Poverty in Saskatchewan released 

one year ago by the University of Regina, showed that 20 

percent of children lived below the poverty line. That’s more 

than 43,000 children. Over the past few years, this province has 

recorded poverty rates higher than the national average. 

 

This must change. 

 

My government will provide more funds for school lunch and 

anti-hunger programs across Saskatchewan. It will work with 

the thousands of community based organizations in the 

province that are already working effectively on the front lines 

in the drive to provide services to the poor and the hungry. 

My government will also provide an additional $20 million over 

four years to community based organizations that provide 

employment skills training to those individuals who need extra 

assistance to reach their full potential in the workforce. This 

assistance is also an important component in my government’s 

efforts to solve Saskatchewan’s labour shortage. 

 

Improving Quality of Life – The Over-arching Goal 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know their province can perform 

as well as or better than any other jurisdiction in Canada. They 

know Saskatchewan has the opportunity to attract a flood of 

new investment and turn the current boom into a lasting 

prosperity. With that prosperity will come an added measure of 

security for Saskatchewan people. The result will be a higher 

quality of life. 

 

The Environment 
My government is committed to finding solutions to the 

environmental problems facing our province, our country and 

our planet. The recent record has not been good. This province 

has the highest rate of growth in greenhouse gas emissions in 

Canada. For the sake of our children, this must change. 

 

This is why my government is committed to meeting 

Saskatchewan’s existing greenhouse gas emission target of 

reducing levels by 32 percent by 2020. In addition, in 

negotiations with the federal government or other provinces, my 

government will continue to insist that carbon offsets or 

penalties imposed on heavy greenhouse gas emitters will stay in 

this province. This money will be earmarked for research into 

environmental technology. 

 

In addition to emissions targets, help will be provided to 

homeowners, schools, hospitals and businesses wishing to go 

green. Through the Crowns, which will remain publicly owned, 

assistance will be provided for the cost of installing geothermal 

and solar heating. 

 

My government is committed to protecting and conserving our 

natural resources. In addition to clean air, the people of 

Saskatchewan must have access to clean drinking water, 

abundant and diverse wildlife and pristine lakes for recreational 

use. 

 

Governments must also lead by example. This is why my 

government will ensure that new vehicles it purchases are either 

hybrid or high fuel efficiency vehicles. 

 

Through Saskatchewan Government Insurance, my government 

will also help drivers wishing to purchase a hybrid or high 

efficiency vehicle by lowering the cost of registering these 

vehicles. 

 

Education 

Over the next four years, my government will invest in 

childcare, early childhood learning and other development 

initiatives. 

 

Operating funding for K-12 education will be increased by 20 

percent over four years and the foundation operating grant 

provided to school boards will be reviewed to ensure the current 

system is fair to all. 



December 10, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

The strength and continued vibrancy of rural Saskatchewan 

depends on a strong, locally-controlled education system. My 

government will examine revising the Education Act to 

improve the consultation and assessment process before 

significant changes are made to school facilities. The potential 

for future economic growth and the necessity of having schools 

within a reasonable distance of all students must be rigourously 

assessed, prior to any changes. 

 

My government understands that the future of our province 

depends on our education system. It realizes that the solution to 

the long-standing property tax issue can be found in funding 

education from general revenue. 

 

Quality of Life for First Nations and Métis 
The people of Saskatchewan owe a profound debt of gratitude 

to Saskatchewan’s First Peoples for the help they provided our 

pioneers in building this province. 

 

Treaty education is an important part of forging new ties. There 

must be an appreciation in the minds of the general public that 

Treaties are living, breathing documents that continue to bind 

us to promises made generations ago. This is why my 

government is committed to making mandatory instruction in 

history and content of the Treaties in the K-12 curriculum. 

 

My government will work with First Nations and Métis to 

develop a protocol for protecting their rights and interests by 

ensuring that the duty to consult and accommodate is fully 

honoured. First Nations and Métis must also play a vital role in 

Enterprise Saskatchewan since they must be full partners in 

planning for future growth. 

 

Keeping Our Word 
Some may say that this Throne Speech sounds a lot like my 

government’s election platform. 

 

They’re right. 

 

During the election campaign, my government clearly outlined 

what it would do. 

 

Now, the time has come to do what was said. 

 

All of these changes will not happen overnight. But they will 

happen over the course of the next four years. Then, 

Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to judge 

whether my government has kept its word. 

 

The date of that judgement will be November 7, 2011 – exactly 

four years to the day from the last election. 

 

In order to ensure that date and to eliminate any political 

game-playing in the setting of an election date, my government 

will introduce legislation to establish a fixed election date every 

four years in November. 

 

Conclusion 

 

On the night of November 7, my new government received 

many congratulatory messages. One was an email from Mr. 

Kent Heinrich. The message included the following quotation 

from Joseph Addison, an English essayist, poet and politician. 

“If you wish success in life, make perseverance your bosom 

friend, experience your wise counsellor, caution your elder 

brother and hope your guardian genius.” 

 

There was much talk in the recent election about hope. 

 

Today in our province, we truly are on the verge of something 

great. 

 

We can secure for generations to come lasting economic 

growth. 

 

My government’s vision is one where Saskatchewan takes its 

rightful place as a leader in Canada. 

 

There is new determination in the eyes and new confidence in 

the step of people all across our province. 

 

This is not some land of meek and timid souls, peeking 

nervously into an uncertain future with trembling apprehension. 

 

This is Saskatchewan, full of confident, self-assured yet humble 

people – ready to step boldly into a bright future, no longer 

willing to settle for mediocrity. 

 

Our Saskatchewan is truly a land of hope. 

 

May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 

this Assembly in all of its deliberations. 

 

God bless Saskatchewan. 

 

God bless Canada. 

 

God save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — It is my pleasure at this time to present the 

traditional prayer of the Assembly following which I will invite 

Elder Isador Pelletier to come present a prayer. 

 

Would you please rise. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you Elder Isador Pelletier. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, please remain standing for the departure 

of Their Honours. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:36.] 

 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk 

of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 

Electoral Officer lists of the names of such members as have 

been returned to serve in the twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2007 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill 

respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Teagan Bossenberry, Kristy Fyfe, 

Milayna Goruick, Alex Hamilton, Travis McLellan, and Amy 

Stamm. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 11, 2007. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Premier and seconded by 

the Deputy Premier: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 11, 2007. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 

by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, 

seconded by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on adjournment 

motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

I would like to thank all the guests and members of the public 

for joining us today. 

 

I want to thank the Hon. John Klebuc, Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan; the Hon. R.D. Laing, Chief Justice of the Court 

of Queen’s Bench; the Hon. G.T.G. Seniuk, Chief Justice of the 

Provincial Court; and the members of the judiciary for your 

attendance today. 

 

I would like to thank Elder Isador Pelletier for taking part in 

today’s ceremony. 

 

I would like to introduce at this time the school groups that are 

here with us today and I ask that you please stand as I call your 

names. In the east gallery we have Grade 9 students from Scott 

Collegiate in Regina and Grade 9 students from Swift Current 

Comprehensive School. Would you please rise and be 

recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. In the west gallery joining us 

today are Grade 10 students from Craik High School. I would 

like to thank all of you along with your teachers and chaperones 

for attending today’s ceremony. 

 

I also would like to welcome the Swift Current Comprehensive 

Chamber Singers. They are seated in the west gallery. I will be 

calling on them to sing for us in a few moments. 

 

Will these two school groups please rise and be recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. I would like to thank the members 

of the following Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force 

units for providing us with the guard of honour earlier this 

afternoon: HMCS Queen, HMCS Unicorn, Saskatchewan 

Dragoons, Royal Regina Rifles, North Saskatchewan Regiment, 

16 Service Battalion, 16 Field Ambulance, 15 Wing Moose 

Jaw, and 17 Wing Detachment Dundurn, as well as the 10 Field 

Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery for their 15-gun salute. 

 

Special thanks to Captain C.D. Knowles, Acting Detachment 

Commander, JTFW Saskatchewan Domestic Operations, for 



December 10, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

coordinating the Guard of Honour. 

 

I also extend our thanks to Rhonda Kerr-White for playing the 

Royal Salute during today’s ceremonies. 

 

I have a couple of announcements I’d like to make. I would like 

to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the Premier, the 

Leader of the Opposition, and members of the Legislative 

Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 

immediately following this Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the library 

reading room in the east wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I would now like to welcome the Swift Current Comp Chamber 

Singers, under the direction of Ms. Marcia McLean and 

accompanied later by Amy Kehler. The Comp Chamber Singers 

perform extensively with the community and travel to various 

festivals during the school year. 

 

Most recently, in July, they performed at Festival 500, a 

prestigious international choir festival held in St. John’s, 

Newfoundland. Choirs from all over the work auditioned and 

31 were selected to receive invitations. In the last school year, 

the choir also won the Saskatchewan Music Festival’s Regina 

Kiwanis Gallagher Memorial Award. 

 

The choir will sing two selections for us this afternoon — 

―Saskatchewan‖ and ―Didn’t My Lord Deliver Daniel.‖ Ladies 

and gentlemen, the Swift Current Comp Chamber Singers. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — And one wondered if anything good could 

come out of Swift Current. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Swift Current Comprehensive Chamber 

Singers, you’ve really inspired us today. What awesome 

harmony. That was excellent. Thank you very much. It’s 

unfortunate that some of the guests on the west didn’t get to see 

your demonstrative prowess. Thank you again. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, before departure, one final 

announcement — I ask that members and guests observe the 

following order when departing from the Chamber: the 

Speaker’s party, followed by His Honour’s party, Premier and 

Mrs. Wall, the Leader of the Opposition and Mrs. Calvert, 

judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen's Bench, and Provincial 

Court, members of the cabinet and their spouses, other members 

of the Legislative Assembly and their spouses, and our 

honoured guests. 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................3 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 

  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................7 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................8 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................8 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................8 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................8 

 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................8 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  
Technology Office 

 
 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 
 
 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
Provincial Secretary 

 
 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 
 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 
 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 
 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
 
 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 
 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 
Attorney General 

 
 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 
 
 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


