


















































Hansard: April 05, 2007


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLIX NO. 43A  THURSDAY, APRIL 5, 2007, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1201 
 April 5, 2007 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it certainly 
is a pleasure to present a petition on behalf of residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan regarding renal dialysis and its 
services in rural areas. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement the strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present today are signed by the 
folks from the communities of Broadview, Whitewood, 
Cowessess; I notice Coronach and Kipling. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of individuals from both within and outside 
the constituency of Cypress Hills concerned about the recent 
closure of the SaskPower office in Shaunavon. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Shaunavon open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Shaunavon, Claydon, Herbert, from the Bench 
Colony, Eastend, Admiral, Orkney, and other surrounding 
communities. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Maryfield School 
remains open. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the good people in 
Maryfield. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about Highway 
310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Margo, Ottman’s Beach, Fishing Lake, and Foam Lake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. A lot of 
people in the Rosetown area have signed petitions calling on the 
government to maintain full service of the SaskPower office at 
Rosetown. Mr. Speaker, they are concerned that if the office 
closes there will not be immediate receipt of payments for 
customers. The prayer of their petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to keep the SaskPower office in 
Rosetown open to provide full service to the community 
and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Rosetown. I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the dangerous practice of 
transferring patients from one ambulance to another on the 
highway. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to cease the transfer of patients from 
one ambulance to another while en route. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I 
stand with petitions of citizens that are concerned about the 
safety when driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Saskatoon, 
Naicam, Viscount, Quill Lake, Watson, and Calgary, Alberta. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present another petition from citizens of Biggar opposed to 
possible reductions of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition surrounding the truly tragic circumstances of 
the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of acceptance of 
responsibility by this NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family 
for out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from Naicam and northeast 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens that are very concerned that 
the withdrawal of lab services at the Lafleche and District 
Health Centre would cause undue hardships to residents, 
particularly seniors. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that lab services are 

continued at the Lafleche and District Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens from Meyronne, 
Lafleche, and McCord. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly this morning to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan, especially citizens from the 
southwest part of Saskatchewan, and their petition regarding the 
rural school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the Limerick School 
remains opens. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Assiniboia, 
Limerick, and Wood Mountain. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens opposed to possible reductions of services to Davidson 
and Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and 
Imperial health centres be maintained at their current level 
of service at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctor services available as well as lab, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to users from the Davidson and Imperial areas 
and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Imperial, Davidson, Liberty, Holdfast, and Dilke. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the widening of 
Highway No. 5, a highway which is one of the two major 
east-west highways that pass through my constituency of 
Saskatoon Southeast. The prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Saskatoon. I am pleased to present it on their behalf. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 
order the petitions received at the last sitting have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 3 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill No. 3 be read in Committee 
of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 3. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. When shall Bill 3 be read 
a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 3 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 15 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 15 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would again request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole of Bill 15? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 15 
be read a third time? The minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 15 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 14 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 14 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill 14. Is leave 
granted? 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 14 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 
[10:15] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 6, The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 6 be considered in Committee 
of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Healthy Living has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole for Bill 6. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall Bill 6 be 
read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 

 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for Healthy 

Living Services that Bill No. 6 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 39, The Tobacco Damages and Health Care 
Costs Recovery Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 39 be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole of Bill 39. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Healthy Living Services. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care 
Costs Recovery Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 39 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for SaskWater: when is the anticipated 
approval for the Bergheim Estates project in Saskatoon, 
and what is the reason for the delay of the approval and 
installation of necessary infrastructure? 

 
In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: how much will Tom 
Waller be paid for the period of April 1, 2007, to April 15, 
2007, inclusive as CEO of the Forestry Secretariat? 

 
As well: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what was the total 
amount paid to Tom Waller from March 1, 2006, to March 
31, 2007, inclusive as CEO of the Forestry Secretariat? 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat: 
what is the scope of duties that Kent Campbell will 
perform as CEO of the Forestry Secretariat? 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Completely out of order. The member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall 
on day no. 48 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: has the 
province signed on to the federal interprovincial 
regulations on hours of driving and service, and if so what 
industries will be affected? And further, are there any 
industries or departments that have been granted 
exemptions, and if, what departments or industries have 
been granted exemptions? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what role does the department 
perform when a community is considering moving from 
community-operated policing to the RCMP? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to introduce to you and, through you, to all 
members of the Assembly 27 students from St. Marguerite 
Bourgeoys School in my riding, Mr. Speaker. They’re grade 8 
students. They’re here today to see the proceedings in the 
legislature, and I hope that you enjoy what you see here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher Mr. Steve 
Bradley. And I will have the opportunity later to answers 
questions and have a juice with them and take a photo, and we 
welcome you very much to your Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just wanted to point out that I spoke to the House Leader before 
I got up, just indicated I had a couple of groups to introduce, 
and he said, well if you can keep it as short as we can. And I’ll 
try my very best, Mr. Speaker, but we have two great groups, 
and without the blessing of my House Leader I want to go very 
carefully and slowly to introducing these folks. 
 
First of all, we have, Mr. Speaker, some staff members that I 
want to recognize, well not so much my staff member but 
certainly her parents that are here today. As a minister, I’ve 
been blessed with some very, very good staff over the years, 
very, very good staff: Vicky Neiser, Nadine Olson being 
currently with me, and of course Cheryl Wilkie. 
 
But Ms. Olson’s parents are here, and they’re from Rosetown. 
They’re solid New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, and it gives me a 
great pleasure to not only thank Dale and Katherine for their 
wonderful daughter who works very hard for this government, 
is very, very good at what she does, but I’d ask all members of 
the Assembly to please welcome our guests from Rosetown, 
Dale and Katherine Olson and have everybody recognize their 
work. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As well, Mr. Speaker, we also have 
some guests from northern Saskatchewan. It’s quite a haul to 
come a long ways to come see the Assembly. I understood they 
are on a tour of the building. And these are the staff of the 
Canoe Lake School. And I can say that the people of the Canoe 
Lake First Nation have always talked to me about their highway 
into Meadow Lake; it needs a lot of work. So I’ll let people 
know that we often hear that concern. 
 
But we’re very happy to see the staff of the Canoe Lake School 
here today. We have Claire Corrigal, Mary Ann Corrigal, Rene 
Iron, Lorne Iron, and Wayne Opikokew. And very quickly . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So once again, you’re very welcome here. You have nothing to 
fear here. And it’s really good to see you guys from the North 
here. Way to go. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Easter Wishes 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend Christians around the 
world will be gathering together to celebrate the Easter season. 
This Easter weekend also allows families and friends to gather 
together to enjoy a holiday, good food, and each other’s company. 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, people look forward to the Easter season 
as an opportunity for families to return home. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the Easter weekend is more than a family 
holiday. It is a weekend when Christians celebrate the love of the 
heavenly Father through the gift of his son, Jesus Christ. Mr. 
Speaker, tomorrow will see Saskatchewan residents across the 
province gathering at Good Friday services to remember Jesus’s 
death on the Cross. We will be reminded of and ponder how on his 
last words on the Cross as printed in John’s gospel, “It is 
finished.” Then he bowed his head and died. 
 
The story, however, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t end there. As with the 
coming of spring, we observe the springing forth of new life. So 
the Easter morning angelic message rings out, “He is not here. He 
is risen.” It is the message of hope and joy. Mr. Speaker, Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition extend to all members and all 
employees of this Assembly and the residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan our best wishes for a joyous, a safe, and a blessed 
Easter weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Spring and Rebirth 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For thousands of 
years this has been considered a very special time of year to a 
variety of cultures across the globe. It’s spring, a time when 
people are compelled to reflect on themes common to all of us. 
Mr. Speaker, in many regions the snow is gone and the ice 
quickly receding. Soon the fields and trees will be lush and 
green. Soon parks, forests, and lakes will be teeming with life. 
This is a season of regeneration. 
 
Many ancient traditions have long celebrated the theme of 
rebirth. The ancient Norse might have talked about Freyr, a 
common fertility figure, and the Greek, Dionysus, who 
symbolized renewal. Aboriginal cultures across North America 
tell their own tales of the seasons. Mr. Speaker, sundown on 
Monday also marked the commencement of Passover. To 
Judaism this is a week of celebration for the renewal of an 
entire nation. Tomorrow is Good Friday, and in three short 
days, it will be Easter. In the Christian tradition we celebrate 
how the rebirth of a single man can encompass a larger spiritual 
renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no matter what tradition we each call our own, it’s 
important that we recognize those things that are most 
important over the holidays. I’d like to wish all members, staff, 

employees, all of Saskatchewan a safe and happy Easter and a 
weekend filled with the joys of family and friends. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Kenaston Pee Wees Win Northern Finals 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As most of you know, 
I’m a big hockey fan so I’ve very pleased to talk about the 
Kenaston Junior Blizzards hockey team. 
 
The Junior Blizzards have had a very successful year in the D 
level of pee wee hockey league. Earlier this month, they 
competed in the northern finals and were able to score a victory 
against Paradise Hill. After winning the northern finals, they 
went on to provincial finals with a final game being played this 
past Sunday. 
 
The team played an enthusiastic and hard game, but in the end 
were unable to beat their competitors from Hodgeville. Coaches 
Phil Johnson, Scott Anderson, and Tim Haugen are still very 
proud of the effort the team members put into the season and 
the fact that they have retained the title of northern champs. The 
team consists of approximately 16 players from Kenaston, 
Hawarden, Bladworth, Shields, and Thode areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to help me congratulate 
the team members and coaches of the Kenaston Junior 
Blizzards pee wee hockey team on their successful season and 
their title of northern champs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Paragon Awards 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night 
I, along with a number of legislative colleagues, attended the 
eighth annual Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards: 
Celebrating Business Excellence. The awards recognize 
entrepreneurs for their outstanding achievements and 
contributions to their communities, the city of Regina, and our 
growing provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s Paragon Awards winners were, for 
young entrepreneur, Todd Reichel of Best Price Railing Ltd. 
The award for community involvement went to the Phoenix 
Group. The community alliance winner is Rawlco Radio. For 
marketing and promotional achievement, Cowtown. The winner 
for customer service excellence is Canadian Western Bank. The 
New Business Venture Award went to Wintergreene Estates. 
The Diversity Award to Namerind Housing Corporation. And, 
Mr. Speaker, iQmetrix Software Development group was the 
Export Achievement Award winner and was named business of 
the year. Jim Park won the Volunteer Achievement Award, and 
Dr. Xue Dong Yang and Orland Hoeber were named winners of 
the Innovation Award. 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

The winners spoke passionately about the advantages of doing 
business in Regina, Saskatchewan, and their enthusiasm was 
infectious, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the finalists and winners of the 2007 Paragon 
Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
siblings in the family of Crown corporations, SaskTel, will be 
paying for former US [United States] vice-president Al Gore’s 
visit to Saskatchewan to talk about CO2 pollution. But the NDP 
are hiding an inconvenient truth about the ugly cousin, 
SaskPower whose CO2 bad breath is the third worst in Canada. 
 
Under the NDP’s watch, greenhouse gas emissions have risen 
62 per cent — greater than any other province during the 16 
years this government has been in power — while the 
population is dropping. The David Suzuki Foundation has 
lambasted the NDP’s climate change plan because, quote, it’s 
“. . . not [a] plan to do anything.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, while An Inconvenient Truth won Mr. Gore an 
Academy Award, the NDP government’s climate change plan 
should earn them an award for best work of fiction. Before Mr. 
Gore gets here, do you think SaskPower will be getting a new 
facelift and perhaps a new green mint? The NDP have had 16 
years to send the ugly cousin, SaskPower, in for treatment for 
their bad CO2 breath. After all, SaskPower is the third ugliest 
polluter in Canada. 
 
This is not a plan about reducing CO2 emissions because in 
reality the Premier and the NDP’s plan to save themselves . . . 
steadily reducing polling numbers . Typical NDP hot air and 
CO2 pollution. It’s an inconvenient truth — cash from the 
Crowns to try and save the NDP; nothing to save the planet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

March Job Numbers 
 
Mr. Yates: — Saskatchewan’s March job numbers have set 
another record high. That makes 12 straight months of record 
high employment numbers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — There were just over 494,000 people working in 
the province last month, up by over 20,000 for March of last 
year. That’s an increase of 4.3 per cent, the second highest 
year-over-year average across this nation. Mr. Speaker, those 
job numbers are the highest on record for the month of March. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Full-time jobs are up over 12,000 compared to 
March of last year. And employment for youth aged 15 to 24 is 
up by 8,700 from March 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the solid job increases for the past 
year are proof positive Saskatchewan’s economy is booming. 
The strength of the resource sector and the hard work of 
business owners and working men and women are all 
contributing to strong and vibrant Saskatchewan economy. 
There are more benefits to a strong job market for 
Saskatchewan. It also contributes to our population growth, Mr. 
Speaker, as we see our population continuing to grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, these positive numbers are good 
news for Saskatchewan and everyone including the 
Saskatchewan Party. When they’re defeated in the next election, 
Mr. Speaker, there will be plenty of jobs for them to apply for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Carriere Questions Remain Unanswered 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday at 
question period, the member for Nutana had the audacity to 
suggest that she has answered all the questions on the Murdoch 
Carriere scandal. Contrary to what the member for Nutana 
would have us believe, several questions remain unanswered. 
 
Who in the NDP government knew what and when? Why were 
serious allegations of sexual harassment made against Murdoch 
Carriere as early as 1994 simply swept under the carpet? Why 
did the NDP government pay $275,000 plus a full pension to a 
man convicted of harassment and convicted for assault? Why 
won’t the NDP government release its secret legal opinion even 
though precedent to do so already exists? 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province are furious with the 
member from Nutana’s lack of action on this scandal and her 
failure to answer these questions. One opinion writer in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix had this to say in the March 30 edition 
and I quote: 
 

As a woman, I know this stuff happens in many 
unenlightened workplaces. What I can’t figure out is 
Public Service Commission Minister Pat Atkinson’s cold, 
irresponsible statement that suggests to condemn such 
action would get her in trouble. As someone who holds a 
position of great authority in our government, she should 
resign for vocalizing such a dense, void sentiment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Location of Saskatoon Youth Facility 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, parents in my constituency are 
understandably upset. They’re wondering why there was a plan 
to relocate a portion of the Calder Centre to a parcel of land 
directly beside the Saskatoon Christian School in Corman Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one disputes the need for more and better 
treatment beds to help those addicted to drugs and alcohol, but 
they wonder why is this facility being built right next to a 
schoolyard. Mr. Speaker, what other options were considered? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
really glad to be able to correct the misinformation that the 
opposition is spreading. Right now there’s a proposal that the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority is putting before the 
community. There has been meetings with the individuals and 
the groups around that site of land. It’s an 11-acre piece of land. 
Consultations have gone on to provide information to those 
people. It’s a health care facility that provides treatment to 
children the ages of 12 to 17. 
 
It has been at the Calder Centre. There’s been no incidents in 
the last 10 years. It’s right beside a seniors’ home. It’s close to a 
school. There’s been many good connections with those young 
people and the SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals], the Sherbrooke Community Centre. This has been a 
way for Saskatchewan people to stand behind their young 
people as they battle addictions. Now the opposition can 
criticize that, but we’re going to move forward to help our kids. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — This is a 24-bed drug and alcohol 
detoxification centre. Some of the patients will be there after 
being ordered into treatment by a judge. David Soubolsky is a 
member of the board which operates the Saskatoon Christian 
School. Mr. Soubolsky says the detox centre is a good idea, but 
not beside a schoolyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was there any consultation with this board before 
the offer to purchase the land was being made? Were there any 
public meetings held to address the concerns of local residents 
and parents before the offer was made? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Chair . . . Order, 
please. The Chair recognizes the Minister for . . . Order, please. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the parents of the children 
who attend the Christian school I have no doubt are excellent 
parents and they want what’s best for their kids. And the 

opposition can be part of the solution or they can try to have it 
both ways. The best way to protect these kids or all children is 
to ensure that the incidents of drug and alcohol addictions are 
decreased in the entire community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if these young people are not getting the help that 
they need, they will be using drugs; they will be selling drugs. 
When they’re in this treatment centre, they are getting the help 
that they need. 
 
This has been next to a school for many years. There’s been no 
incidents at all. This is an 11-acre piece of property. Thank you, 
Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we support both the need for this 
facility and we also support and recognize the needs of the 
parents. This plan just doesn’t make any sense. To put an 
addictions treatment facility right next to a group of 
schoolchildren just doesn’t make sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to revisiting this 
idea and having discussions with parents and others who have 
expressed concern with this proposed new detox centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I have real difficulty 
accepting the credibility of that member because he obviously 
doesn’t understand the process — or he does and doesn’t want 
to let people know that he understands it. 
 
The offer to purchase the land has been made. There are now 
public hearings. There’s public meetings. They don’t have 
public meetings until the offer of the land is out there. The 
Corman Park has a public meeting this month. They have a 
choice to accept, reject, or more likely continue to discuss this 
issue at a further meeting in May. That’s how the process 
works. 
 
Now the opposition can try to say one thing to those that are 
battling drug and alcohol addictions and then try to be on the 
other side of the issue the next day. They should be consistent 
like this government and this Premier. We’re consistent and 
fighting this issue on substance abuse and we’ll continue to 
fight that issue regardless of whether they want to play petty 
politics with this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Recruitment and Retention of  
Health Care Professionals 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we found out that unit 5E at the Regina General 
Hospital was closing six beds effective April 10 because of, and 
I quote, “ongoing staff vacancies.” Well today we’ve been 
advised that six to eight beds are being closed in the orthopedic 
ward of the Regina Pasqua Hospital. The reasons, I’m told, is 
staff shortage and too much overtime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the longest waiting lists in 
Canada for orthopedic surgery and now, under this government, 
more beds are closing. What is the minister planning to do 
about the chronic understaffing of wards around this province, 
of bed closures, and the increasing waiting lists for orthopedic 
surgery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a 
day when Saskatchewan is celebrating another month of record 
job growth, I’m very happy to be able to stand today and 
answer questions relating to additional jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite conveniently forget that this 
government has been planning to deal with shortages of health 
human resources for quite some time. Mr. Speaker, just recently 
in February, Mr. Speaker, the headlines in the Regina 
Leader-Post, “Health-care help on way.” Mr. Speaker, positive 
reports, positive stories about the actions taken by this 
government to assist in the recruitment, retention, education, 
and financial tax support for recent graduates, Mr. Speaker, in 
the nursing fields, in other health care professionals . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are 7,000 people waiting 
for orthopedic surgery in this province today. The minister has 
the nerve to stand in the House day after day and claim that 
waiting lists are being shortened. Well health care workers 
know that’s not the case, and so do patients around the 
province. Mr. Speaker, waiting lists are increasing and, under 
this government’s watch, beds are closing. That does nothing to 
reduce the waiting lists around the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he claims he has a plan to fix this, but day after 
day we hear from people that are working in the health care 
system and people that are waiting on the longest waiting lists 
in Canada that his plan is not working. When will he look for a 
different plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, again proof positive that the 
member opposite doesn’t understand the severity of the system 
across Canada nor what is being done in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first and foremost on orthopedics, the member 
opposite claims waiting lists are not decreasing. Mr. Speaker, 
we are improving access every single day to orthopedics in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, we are also verified, our 
service is verified through the Canadian health information 
services, Mr. Speaker. We do more knees per capita than any 
other province in Canada, and we are the second highest in 
number of hip surgeries done in Canada, Mr. Speaker. This is 
incredible progress. We recognize we have continued 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, but we will continue to apply 
ourselves to make additional progress, Mr. Speaker, to deal 
with those who are still on the waiting lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
under this NDP government and under this Health minister and 
other Health ministers that we’ve seen the number of training 
seats for nurses and doctors reduced to record lows, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last 16 years. They’re starting to try and 
address it now, but because of record low training and the worst 
retention rate of anywhere in Canada, we are far worse off than 
any other province when it comes to waiting lists across 
whether it’s orthopedic surgery or many other categories, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How can the minister stand in his place on a day like today 
when we’re seeing six to eight orthopedic beds close at the 
Pasqua Hospital and he’s still saying that we’re going to be 
shortening waiting lists? The two don’t add up. His words are 
hollow. When will he start dealing with the real issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again the lack of understanding of the members opposite 
completely astonishes me, Mr. Speaker. The regional health 
authorities will close units or beds or facilities on occasion on a 
temporary basis, Mr. Speaker, to protect the safety of the 
individuals who need to use those facilities, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s what’s being done in these cases. There are continued 
consultations within those wards, with the collective bargaining 
units, within the health regions, Mr. Speaker, before these 
things done. 
 
But let’s put two things on record, Mr. Speaker. Number one, 
since 2003 when this government was elected, we have 55 per 
cent more training seats for nurses in this province and, Mr. 
Speaker, 70 per cent increase in the LPN [licensed practical 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

nurse] seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time the member opposite stands out 
in the foyer of the lobby here, Mr. Speaker, and says, when 
asked about what his plan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps saying we 
don’t understand. What we understand is the health care 
professionals are being run off their feet. They’re being run off 
their feet and they’re not putting up with it any more, and that’s 
why many of them are leaving the province. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, Victoria Hospital 
has been without a radiologist since last summer. Dr. Ian 
Waddell left Prince Albert because he said the workload was far 
too much. He was doing the job of three full-time radiologists. 
So what has the minister done since the summertime to make 
sure there is a radiologist in Prince Albert? The minister’s 
so-called solution to this problem is flying in temporary 
radiologists from South Africa on a rotating basis. I’m sure 
that’s a huge cost to the Prince Albert Parkland Region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: how much is it costing 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers to fly a radiologist from South 
Africa on a rotating basis? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite knows very well that this government is 
committed, absolutely committed to the support of 
Saskatchewan families in enhancing the health care needs in 
this province. And, Mr. Speaker, in a fast-growing regional 
health care authority like that in the Prince Albert Parkland 
area, Mr. Speaker, there are services that we know absolutely 
need to be provided. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes there are 
extraordinary measures that have to be taken to ensure that the 
public safety is protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a plan in place. It has been in place since 
1999 and growing, Mr. Speaker. That plan has been successful. 
When asked in the lobby the other day, Mr. Speaker, about 
what his plan is on nurse recruiting and other things, Mr. 
Speaker, he said, I don’t know; we’ll have to think about it. 
What a plan, Mr. Speaker. What a plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this government has done 
such a terrible job on retaining our health care professionals. 
Dr. Ian Waddell from Prince Albert left this province because 

the work situation was untenable — and those are his words. 
It’s obviously that this Health minister talks about a recruitment 
program since 1999 that has absolutely failed, because now 
we’re flying — can you believe this? — we’re flying in a 
radiologist into Prince Albert from South Africa. And he’s 
standing in his place and saying that the recruitment program 
they put in place in 1999 is a success. It’s been a dismal failure, 
Mr. Speaker, and that minister has to live with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that the solution to all the other health care 
shortages that we have in Saskatchewan? Will we be flying 
more health care professionals in from South Africa because he 
has done such a terrible job in recruitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 
recruitments have indeed been successful and, Mr. Speaker, 
there are more physicians — specialists and general 
practitioners — practising in this province today than there 
were in 2003 when this government was elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of that record. But we also know 
that there are continuing to be challenges in hard-to-recruit 
professions and hard-to-recruit locations. And we are 
continuing, Mr. Speaker, our efforts to deal with that particular 
issue. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, physician satisfaction is important. And 
on this day when members opposite won’t talk about the new 
job numbers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
they should be remembering that they also didn’t talk about a 
report from CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health Information] 
released in the fall. The report that said that Saskatchewan has 
the highest satisfaction rate amongst GPs [general practitioner] 
in the entire country, Mr. Speaker — the highest satisfaction 
rate amongst GPs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Compensation for Forestry Secretariat Executive 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
actually I do want to talk about one new job in Saskatchewan 
because the Premier appointed a new CEO [chief executive 
officer] for the Forestry Secretariat, and he appears to be a very 
qualified individual. He has his M.B.A. [Master of Business 
Administration] and a certified management accountant. And 
his salary is — guess what, Mr. Speaker? — it’s $115,000 a 
year which is within the range of a level 1 deputy minister. 
 
That brings us back to the person that he’s replacing, the NDP 
lawyer, Tom Waller. NDP lawyer Tom Waller was paid 
$410,000 for 13 months to do the exact same job. That’s almost 
four times the amount that they’re paying their new CEO to do 
the exact same job. Mr. Speaker, why was the NDP’s lawyer 
buddy Tom Waller paid $410,000 to do a $115,000-a-year job? 
Why is there one set of rules for the NDP friends and another 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

set of rules for everyone else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair . . . Order please. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister Responsible for the Forestry 
Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as usual when 
members of the Saskatchewan Party rise in this House during 
question period, members on this side will stand up and clarify 
and attempt to bring some facts to this discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a CEO of the Saskatchewan forest 
secretariat hired. He is paid to do that duty. I can tell that 
member as well that Mr. Waller is on contract and acts as a 
chief negotiator for this province. And that’s a role that he will 
continue to play. Mr. Speaker, I will say in this House that I 
believe firmly that we are getting value for our money. 
 
I can tell you this though, Mr. Speaker, the investment that 
members of the Saskatchewan Party have made in the 
Conservative members of parliament in Ottawa is not good 
value for money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to review the 
NDP’s pay scale. If you have an M.B.A. and a CMA [certified 
management accountant] after your name, you get $115,000 a 
year. And if you have NDP behind your name, you get 
$410,000. One set of rules for the NDP and their friends and 
another set of rules for everyone else. And here’s the question: 
what did he accomplish for $410,000? 
 
The P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp mill is still closed. Hundreds of 
people in P.A. are still out of work but at least the NDP buddy 
has a job for $410,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. How in the earth 
does the NDP justify paying $410,000 to their NDP lawyer, 
Tom Waller, when the new CEO is receiving $115,000? And in 
addition, Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us if both are now 
currently employed in the Forestry Secretariat? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, one gets a 
little tired of watching the opposition members drag people 
through this legislature. Mr. Speaker, the attack on Mr. Waller 
was started on May 26, 2004 by the deputy leader, who accused 
him of being involved in a criminal investigation — which was 
patently false. Last week they misrepresented the facts on his 
contract. They had both documents and they knew it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So let me make the record clear. Mr. Waller is paid industry 
standard. He is on a contract working on behalf of the people in 
this province to create jobs in this province as opposed to chase 
them out, which is what members of the opposition have been 
doing ever since they started that operation in the middle of the 

night somewhere around the Legislative Buildings here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, that minister knows perfectly 
well the proper documents were not filed with the Clerk’s office 
within the time frame that they’re supposed to be filed, because 
there’s one set of rules for their NDP buddies and another set of 
rules for everyone else. 
 
So what the minister needs to tell us: is Tom Waller still on the 
NDP payroll? Is he still under contract with the Forestry 
Secretariat, as well as the new CEO? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to again 
have to set the record straight. They’re suggesting that a 
contract has to be filed with the Clerk of the legislature, which 
is totally false. It was filed as a matter of clarity and a matter of 
the fact that Mr. Waller had absolutely — and this government 
— had nothing to hide. He’s a contract employee, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not required to table those documents. He is not an 
employee. Those documents were filed as a matter of public 
interest and clarity and I want to set that member record 
straight. She should at least get her facts straight before she 
comes into this House and misrepresents the facts one more 
time. Shame on her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for . . . 
Order please. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Martensville. 
 

Management of Harassment Complaints 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, later today the official 
opposition will give notice of a motion that it plans to introduce 
into this Assembly. The motion calls for the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to undertake an 
inquiry pursuant to rule 146(3) to consider and report on several 
issues related to the Murdoch Carriere scandal. 
 
These issues include the government’s handling of harassment 
complaints before, during, and after the investigation into the 
complaints of harassment by Murdoch Carriere, the $275,000 
settlement paid to a man fired for harassment and convicted of 
assault, as well as the disciplinary measures that were meted 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Will he support our 
motion so that we can get to the bottom of this serious issue and 
ensure that it never happens again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ve clearly indicated to the House that in September ’02 a 
formal complaint was laid by a number of people in the P.A. 
fire centre regarding Mr. Carriere. Mr. Carriere was suspended 
with pay while an investigation was conducted. On February 12 
the deputy minister at the time, Terry Scott, demoted Mr. 
Carriere, placed him on leave without pay, suspended him with 
leave without pay for three months, Mr. Speaker, and sent him 
to Regina, red circled him, and he had no people under his 
employ. 
 
On April 2 Mr. Carriere was fired on the direction of the 
Premier. As the members will know, this is in contravention of 
The Public Service Act. Only the deputy minister, the 
permanent head, can dismiss an employee in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that have been said 
by the opposition that are simply not true. But these are the 
facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that women started 
being harassed in 1994 and those harassment complaints went 
unchecked by this government. And those are questions that we 
need answers to. 
 
For the last couple of days the Minister of the Public Service 
Commission has asked if the opposition will consider changes 
to The Occupational Health and Safety Act during this session 
of the legislature. It should be noted that we believe that the 
problem is not with existing legislation but with the 
unwillingness of the NDP government to enforce it. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we have given our commitment that we 
will examine the amendments the government brings forward. 
In turn, will the Premier give his commitment to support our 
motion to have the legislature’s Crown and Central Agencies 
conduct an investigation into the Murdoch Carriere scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
will know that under the occupational health and safety 
legislation the prohibited grounds in terms of harassment are 
age, sex, as well as sexual orientation, height, weight, and so 
on. These are the prohibited grounds. 
 
I understand from speaking with a number of people who have 
been involved in harassment cases that there are issues around 
personal harassment where there can be abuse of power, where 
there can be threats made, coercion, and so on. These are not 
considered to be prohibited grounds under the occupational 
health and safety legislation. So personal harassment is an issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess I would ask the members opposite — given that 
there are number of cases that are coming forward that are 

outside of prohibited grounds — would the members opposite 
support a clarity or a strengthening the definition of harassment 
under the occupational health and safety legislation? It sounds 
as though they won’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 

Saskatchewan Records Second Highest Land Sale 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I’m pleased to rise to announce that Saskatchewan has 
just recorded the second highest land sale of all time for 
petroleum and natural gas rights. 
 
Driven by strong interest in the Bakken Formation oil play of 
southeastern Saskatchewan, the April sale of Crown petroleum 
and natural gas rights generated more than $70 million in 
revenue for the province. The all-time record was set in October 
1994 at just under 85 million. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, our government has been working 
hard to promote our province as a great place to live, work, 
invest, and do business. Hard work and diligence has put into 
place a creative strategy to attract investment not just from local 
investors, but also from those outside our borders. 
 
This new investment in Saskatchewan included nine exploration 
licences that sold for over $39 million and 176 lease parcels that 
brought in more than $31 million. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been travelling beyond our borders to tell 
the world about our province in a positive way. We’ve been 
telling the world in a positive way about the excellent products 
made by our companies and the opportunities in our resource 
industries, certainly including oil and gas. 
 
We now have more news to tell the world. We can tell them 
about the Weyburn-Estevan area receiving bonus bid activity 
with total sales of more than $67 million. We can tell them how 
the Lloydminster area had sales of 1.7 million and how the 
Swift Current and Kindersley-Kerrobert area had sales of over 
900,000 and 500,000 respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the highest price for a single parcel was nearly 
$8.1 million. Petrobank Energy and Resources Ltd. bought this 
1,424-hectare exploration licence 29 kilometres east of the city 
of Weyburn. This sale is a positive story for Saskatchewan and 
it should be celebrated for many reasons. 
 
Our oil and gas industry is expressing confidence in our 
province and is doing it with its investment dollars. Despite the 
naysayers, we’re continuing to create a positive business 
climate in Saskatchewan. The news today underscores just how 
strong the oil and gas industry that fuels our province is, Mr. 
Speaker. This industry now provides over 27,000 jobs in 
communities across our province. It supports state-of-the-art 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

research at the Petroleum Technology Research Centre that is 
getting attention from around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people, the businesses, and 
others who helped to make the April sale one of the most 
memorable on record and wish all involved the best in their 
exploration and investment efforts. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to 
take this opportunity to thank the minister for providing me 
with a copy of his statement in good time. This is positive news 
for Saskatchewan, but it happened because of the hard work and 
dedication of both small and large businesses, Saskatchewan 
entrepreneurs, and Saskatchewan people. 
 
In the 2003 provincial election, the NDP party campaigned 
against business tax reform. They campaigned against increased 
competitiveness for Saskatchewan companies. They 
campaigned against economic development. They said that 
greedy businesses would take over the most profitable parts of 
our economy. Just two and a half short years later, this NDP 
government implemented part of the Saskatchewan Party 
business tax reform plan and the economy has taken off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan 
employs thousands of people, and we would like to take the 
time to thank these people and their employers and employees 
for their hard work and for investing in Saskatchewan. 
 
We commit that under the complete growth agenda that will be 
implemented by the next Saskatchewan Party government that 
we will be able as a province to surpass the $85 million record 
sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights that was 
generated 12 years ago, Mr. Speaker, when oil and gas prices 
were no where near the boom levels that we see today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — This is some progress for this NDP 
government, but they have once again set the bar far too low. 
This NDP party and this government seems a little too proud to 
come in second-best again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written question 980 through 1,037 
inclusive. 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 980 through to 1,037 
have been submitted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Murdoch Carriere Case 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it is a sadness that I rise today 
to speak on a very important issue. I find it sad that any woman 
in this province had to go through what Murdoch Carriere’s 
victims faced. I’m saddened that their reports of harassment 
weren’t taken seriously by their superiors or by this NDP 
government. I am saddened also that after weeks of opposition 
asking legitimate questions — questions that these women and 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve answers to — that this 
NDP government has offered nothing more than evasion and 
distraction. 
 
I am proud however to be a member of a party that has been 
able to shed light on this situation on behalf of Murdoch 
Carriere’s victims and to offer a voice to these women — a 
voice that had been silenced by this NDP government. Our 
attempts to find answers to questions on behalf of these women 
is about doing what is right — something that the NDP seems 
to have forgotten about. 
 
The harassment of these women started as early as 1994. And 
even after complaints were brought to superiors’ attention, 
nothing was done. The only answer that was given was, “That’s 
just Murdoch.” I find this shocking, that this would ever be a 
response in the face of such serious allegations. 
 
Let’s review this scandal. In 1994 we know that Murdoch 
Carriere started harassing an employee in his department. The 
woman went to her supervisors to report this horrible situation. 
Her complaints were ignored and nothing happened to Carriere. 
In 1997 the same woman was attacked again by Carriere. She 
again voiced her concerns and was met with “That’s just 
Murdoch.” And again nothing happened to Carriere. 
 
Carriere was free to continue his harassment of other women 
over the next few years because no one bothered to take that 
first woman seriously. The nine women that we know of spoke 
directly to deputy ministers, associate deputy ministers, their 
supervisors, their union, and even to the Premier. The Premier’s 
response was to go back to their deputy minister — someone 
who had already ignored their complaints once. Instead of 
taking any responsibility, the Minister for the Public Service 
Commission has said that these women should have followed 
the procedure in reporting these incidents. The fact is that these 
women did follow the procedures. The problem is that no one 
took them seriously. 
 
After a long overdue internal investigation, the Gillies report 
found that Carriere had harassed his employees. And what was 
done? Was he fired? No. He was transferred to another office in 
Regina. 
 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Not only was he not fired; he was praised for all of his hard 
work. And I quote a memo dated February 12, 2003, from the 
then deputy minister, Terry Scott, “I want to thank Murdoch for 
his valuable contributions to the Fire Program.” That very same 
day, a memo from the very same Terry Scott was sent to 
Carriere’s victims. And I quote, “I want to specifically caution 
you to treat this decision and any information related to this 
matter with strict and absolute confidentiality.” 
 
Murdoch Carriere was allowed to keep his job, and his victims 
were told to keep quiet. This was the government’s answer to 
years of harassment. 
 
The NDP have tried to defend their actions for weeks in this 
Assembly. First the NDP claimed to have a zero tolerance 
policy for sexual harassment. That policy was nowhere to be 
found when these women needed it most. On March 8 in this 
Assembly, the Minister for PSC said, and I quote: 
 

. . . there is zero tolerance for harassment in the workplace, 
whether it’s directed towards men or whether it’s directed 
towards women. Everybody is protected. They have the 
right to come forward if they believe they are being 
harassed . . . That is the harassment policy. 
 

This was not the case for Murdoch Carriere’s victims. When 
they needed their government most to protect them from this 
man, they were abandoned. Then a few days later, the minister 
bragged about the improved harassment provisions that her 
government had made, and I quote: 
 

. . . in 1991, we introduced amendments in this House to 
the occupational health and safety legislation to ensure 
that harassment was a provision of that legislation and that 
workers were protected against harassment, both in the 
private sector and the public sector. 

 
Yet even after numerous reports to supervisors, these women 
were ignored and were forced to continue to work with Carriere 
and face further harassment. This is interesting in light of 
existing policies that state, and I quote, “It is misconduct for 
managers and supervisors who know of workplace harassment 
not to take immediate corrective action.” These women talked 
to many people about the vile work situation that they face — 
including the Premier — yet only one person, Terry Scott, faced 
any repercussions from this government. 
 
Now the NDP claims that more legislation is needed. Tougher 
rules are needed. Better definitions are needed. We don’t need 
more legislation to tell us what Murdoch Carriere did was 
wrong. And the NDP government certainly doesn’t need more 
legislation to do the right thing now. What they need to do is 
respect and enforce the legislation already in place. 
 
And after all this came to light, after years of complaints by 
Carriere’s victims, after the Gillies report that substantiated 
those complaints, what did this NDP government do? They paid 
off their buddy Murdoch Carriere to the tune of $275,000 and 
bumped up his pension so that he could retire well. 
 
And what did the NDP do for these women? They ignored their 
complaints. And when the NDP finally got caught, they herded 
all nine women into a room and forced them to sign an 

agreement with the threat that if they didn’t all sign, none of 
them would get anything. And what was it that they received 
after the NDP gave Carriere $275,000? Each victim received a 
paltry $15,000. 
 
The NDP said that they had to, that they had to settle to avoid a 
court case. They couldn’t be bothered to stand up for these 
women. They caved in and paid Carriere even after the former 
NDP Justice minister said, and I quote: 
 

In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government 
of Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was 
justified. We will defend that position vigorously in the 
courts. And in due course . . . the courts will make . . . 
[that] determination. 

 
But they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. The NDP did not defend 
this in court. They did not defend these women. Instead they 
willingly offered Murdoch Carriere over $275,000 and hoped it 
would all go away. The NDP have apparently washed their 
hands of this whole scandal. They claim that they no longer 
need to answer any questions about this. They say they have 
already answered every question. But this is simply not true. 
My colleagues and I have stood in this Assembly for weeks and 
asked questions, questions that remain unanswered. 
 
And here are a few of them. Why weren’t earlier harassment 
complaints taken seriously? Why did the NDP, despite their 
own anti-harassment legislation stating otherwise, refuse to take 
action against the numerous individuals who ignored the 
harassment complaints? When was the first allegation of 
harassment filed against Murdoch Carriere? When did the 
former Environment minister learn of the complaints against his 
friend Carriere? 
 
How many other women did Murdoch Carriere harass? Why 
wasn’t Murdoch Carriere fired years before 2002 when his 
peers and supervisors all knew of these complaints? How many 
complaints were brought forward prior to 2002? 
 
Why did the PSC minister tell us that these nine women were 
checked with before Carriere was given his $275,000 payoff 
when we all know that they weren’t checked with? Why did the 
NDP keep their settlement with Carriere secret from his 
victims? Why didn’t the NDP fight for these women in court as 
they promised to do in 2003? 
 
Why does the NDP continue to refuse to release their secret 
legal opinions? Why does the NDP refuse to hold an all-party 
legislative committee to look into this scandal to find answers 
to ensure that this doesn’t ever happen again? 
 
Why did the NDP pay Murdoch Carriere $275,000 and bump 
up his pension? How did the NDP reach the pitiful sum of 
$15,000 for his victims? How many NDP cabinet ministers 
have joined Murdoch Carriere at his cabin over the years? 
 
The NDP have refused to answer any of these questions, which 
has left us with one very important question: what is the NDP 
hiding? The NDP has an obligation to these nine women and 
. . . 
 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Could the clock 
be stopped please. Order. I ask members on both sides of the 
House to please keep the noise level down so that the member 
who’s on her feet can be heard by all members. I recognize the 
hon. member for Martensville. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Ms. Heppner: — The NDP has an obligation to these nine 
women and to everyone else in this province to answer these 
questions. As I’ve said before in this Assembly, I had the 
privilege of meeting one of Carriere’s victims. She deserves 
answers. She deserves to have her voice heard. The NDP have 
made every effort to make sure that the voices of these women 
were not heard. And we’re here to make sure that they are. 
 
And we’re not the only ones who are disgusted by this 
government’s treatment of these women. And here are a few 
examples. From a concerned resident in Saskatoon and I quote: 
 

As a woman, I know this stuff happens in many 
unenlightened workplaces. What I can’t figure out is 
Public Service Commission Minister Pat Atkinson’s cold, 
irresponsible statement that suggests to condemn such 
action would get her in trouble. As someone who holds a 
position of great authority in our government, she should 
resign for vocalizing such a dense, void sentiment. 

 
From radio commentator John Gormley and I quote: 
 

Words often cannot adequately describe how this 
government stumbles. Here are a few words: bad 
judgment; terrible optics; incompetence; and a cavalier 
disregard for your money. 

 
From Murray Mandryk and I quote: 
 

. . . this government certainly wasn’t shy about running up 
massive legal costs in its futile defense of its Spudco 
debacle. So why wouldn’t it defend the Carriere firing as a 
matter of principle? Why not test the legal validity of this 
decision in court? 
 
The problem isn’t that we’re not understanding the 
government’s reasons for settling with Carriere. The 
problem is that the government’s reasons don’t make . . . 
sense. 

 
From a concerned voter in Mossbank: 
 

I’m really upset and angry at our government for paying 
Murdoch Carriere an out-of-court settlement of $275,000. 
What have you taught our young people? In my opinion 
you have taught them that females are not worth much. 
What would you have done if these women had been your 
daughters, your sisters, your wives. I really believe the 
outcome would have been totally different. 

 
And a woman in my constituency of Martensville copied me in 
a letter that she sent to the Premier on this issue, and I quote: 
 

I wish to voice my opinion of your disgusting attitude 
towards women in this province. You have rewarded a 

man who has been convicted of a crime and lost his job for 
his behaviour and treatment of women, yet you give him a 
healthy settlement. For what? I hope you will rectify this 
terrible injustice and find a way to solve problems like this 
in the future because you will have this happen again. 
There are no consequences for really bad behaviour, so 
everyone will feel that they can do what they want as long 
as you are in office. I look forward to your retirement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s mishandling of this entire 
situation not only impacts the nine women who were victims of 
Murdoch Carriere. It affects all men and women who are being 
harassed today. Individuals will think twice about coming 
forward having seen that serious allegations are not taken 
seriously by this government. 
 
The Premier has said that his government’s response to this 
scandal has been an act of responsible government and that if he 
had to do it all over again, he would. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
wouldn’t. We would have fought for these women and made 
sure that Murdoch Carriere got what he deserved. He would 
have been fired without the NDP’s golden handshake on his 
way out the door. 
 
And now 13 years after this first complaint was brought 
forward, we know this: the NDP’s zero tolerance of sexual 
harassment failed because of their inaction and lack of will. The 
NDP failed to do anything about Murdoch Carriere until they 
were caught. The NDP failed to protect these women. The NDP 
failed to apologize to these women until it was politically 
expedient for them to do so. The NDP have failed not only the 
women of this province; they have failed all honest, 
law-abiding, decent residents of this province. 
 
And for that reason, today I move the following motion, 
seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena, and I move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 
mishandling of the Carriere scandal by ignoring 
complaints of harassment, by not allowing this Legislative 
Assembly to investigate the matter through a legislative 
committee, for not tabling its secret legal opinions, and for 
rewarding a man who was convicted of assault and fired 
for harassment with $275,000 and a full government 
pension, while at the same time paying the harassment 
victims a paltry sum. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Thank you very much. 
I thank the member for Martensville. Will members take the 
motion as read? I will read it. 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 
mishandling of the Carriere scandal by ignoring 
complaints of harassment, by not allowing this Legislative 
Assembly to investigate the matter through a legislative 
committee, for not tabling its secret legal opinions, and for 
rewarding a man who was convicted of assault and fired 
for harassment with $275,000 and a full government 
pension, while at the same time paying the harassment 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

victims a paltry sum. 
 
That’s moved by the member for Martensville and seconded by 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena. And I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there hasn’t been one 
woman that I spoke to since February 27, the day that the 
Carriere payout scandal hit the news, that wasn’t appalled with 
everything that had anything to do with this case, firstly 
appalled at the way this government handled the case of a man 
who was charged with harassing nine women — and who 
knows how many more — and convicted of assault. Women are 
appalled at the fact that the government paid the man who 
assaulted the women nearly 20 times more than what they, the 
women, got coerced into taking themselves. That man was paid 
. . . $275,000 for the harasser, $15,000 for the victim. 
 
The women are appalled and ask the question, why did a man 
who was charged with harassment and convicted of assault be 
given a full pension? In essence what he got, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was a golden handshake. He was let go three years 
before retirement. He got a full pension plus $275,000 even 
though he was convicted of assault. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, women are appalled at the fact that this 
government has spent every day of this session trying to cover 
up the facts. They are appalled that this government would do 
anything to take the focus away from this scandal — everything 
from leaking a supposedly good-news budget, everything from 
making a fool of themselves or especially one of the minister, 
making a fool of herself on budget day to avoid answering 
questions on this issue. Then yesterday, yesterday the Premier 
of our great province called a news conference in the middle of 
question period to get the media out of the Assembly to talk 
about bringing a speaker into the province. 
 
Now we all know how important it was to call a news 
conference at that minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Goodness 
knows the province couldn’t wait another 20 minutes to hear 
what the government was finally going to say about the 
environment. Two weeks ago the Minister of Finance gave his 
budget and just about forgot about the environment completely, 
but I guess they got a conscience during the night on this issue 
anyway and decided in the middle of question period they 
wanted to talk about it. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, would we question the sincerity of this? 
Except for the fact that the Minister of Youth, Culture and Rec 
as well as the Minister of Finance were beside themselves with 
joy as they watched the media leave the gallery. In fact they 
kept pointing gleefully up in the press gallery saying, they’re 
gone, they’re gone — just like a couple of grade 6 kids who 
finally got away with something. 
 
Who knows what else this government will try to do to divert 
attention from the scandal that has ruined the lives of at least 
nine women in this province and maybe more. I would put 
nothing past this government who has no ethics or morals or 
conscience, and they’re more dedicated to a political philosophy 
than to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, whatever the 
good news that this government on the other side of the House 
comes up with in this session will be solely to defer attention 

from the bungling of this whole issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides the fact that the government paid Mr. 
Carriere an appalling sum of money for assault, beside the fact 
that women are brought together in a room and told to sign the 
agreement at that moment or no one would get any money, 
besides the fact that the women aren’t even allowed to have a 
copy of the agreement in their possession, and beside the fact 
that the women were further harassed by the government when 
they weren’t listened . . . when their harassment complaints 
weren’t listened to in the first place — putting all that aside 
today — even today this government refuses to look into what 
really happened. They refuse to let this case go to an all-party 
committee to talk to the . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Order. I would 
ask government members to please calm down and . . . please 
stop yelling across the floor. I would like all members to be able 
to hear the member for Kelvington-Wadena, and I recognize the 
hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, putting aside all of that, 
today this government refuses to look into what really 
happened. It looks like they’re going to refuse to let this case to 
go to an all-party committee to get witnesses, to get facts, and 
to get background information — maybe even to see if there 
were more victims — and most importantly to find out when 
the harassment really started and who knew about it and when 
they knew about and who had the authority or the audacity to 
sweep it under the rug. 
 
To find out . . . By allowing this issue to be brought to the 
public would finally bring some closure — and I underline 
some closure — to women who were victimized, women who 
were victimized in the workplace, not in the private sector, but 
in the government . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, point of order. During 
the last exchange the minister of . . . Point of order. Leave to . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — What is the hon. 
member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — The Minister of Finance was clearly heard to 
accuse the member from Wadena of lying during the last 
exchange. We’d ask that he withdraw that. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I did not hear 
those comments. I would invite the member in question, the 
Minister of Finance, if he has any comments that he wishes to 
make or any withdrawal of remarks, to please put them on the 
record. And I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would decline the invitation. Thank 
you. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I would like to invite you to review the tape 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

recording of the incident. Several members on this side of the 
House heard the comment, heard the accusation made by that 
member, and would like to call on that member to do the 
honourable thing and apologize and withdraw the remark before 
it has to go to the point where it comes back another day after 
the Deputy Speaker has had to listen to the recording. We’d 
certainly like to give him the chance to do the honourable and 
the right thing today in this Assembly. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I will ensure that the 
Hansard and the recording are reviewed. And I will review the 
Hansard and, if these remarks are recorded on Hansard, I will 
address it on the next sitting. Order. Order. Order. I ask the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley and I ask all members of the 
Assembly to please maintain order. I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today what we are 
trying to find out is if this government will allow this whole 
issue to go to the Crown and Central Agencies so we can talk 
about the issue in an all-party committee, so we can bring 
forward all the issues that women in this province, not just the 
nine victims, but the women in this province and everybody 
else who cares about what this government is doing. Give me a 
chance to see what really happened. People have a right to 
know what’s happening. 
 
And to make fun of this whole issue in this House, to divert 
attention from what’s happening in this debate so the 
government doesn’t have to answer this scandal is totally 
unacceptable. It speaks to the moral conscience of this 
government. And the philosophy of this government is 
sweeping anything they want to under the rug, so they don’t 
have to talk about the issues. It’s hurting them. Mr. Speaker, 
this is they type of thing that makes everybody cynical and 
apathetical about government in general. 
 
People have a right to know what their government stands up 
for. And obviously this government is not standing up for 
women. It’s not standing up for somebody who works in their 
workplace. It isn’t standing up for anybody but their right to 
keep things under lock and key. Mr. Speaker, the people . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I am having . . . 
Order. I am having a great deal of difficulty hearing the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, and I ask members to please 
calm down. I’d ask the Minister of Finance to please not 
continue to make remarks across the floor. And I recognize the 
hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
we’re trying to do through this motion is ask the government to 
bring this issue, this scandal, to an all-party committee. Mr. 
Speaker, maybe if we do that, we’d have an opportunity to 
bring some closure to women who have been hurt, whose lives 
have been ruined because of a workplace incident, a workplace 
— a government workplace — not a private workplace, a 
government workplace. 
 
I want to remind the members opposite, and I’m quoting from 
the Regina Manifesto of 1933, “No C.C.F. government will rest 
. . . until it has eradicated capitalism . . .” That’s the contempt 
they hold for private sector. And yet it was in the public sector 

we have at least nine women who are victimized since at least 
1994, and this government doesn’t want to talk about at all, 
refusing to let this issue go to an all-party committee, the 
government that dealt with the Channel Lake scandal underlines 
for every woman of this province that it is only talk. They’re 
willing to talk the talk but not walk the walk. They took the 
Channel Lake issue to the committee and we talked about 
money. But these guys, who want to believe that they are the 
social conscience of everybody in this province, they’ll take a 
money issue, but they won’t take a social issue to a committee, 
that everybody deserved to hear something about. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that needs to be answered is why. We 
know from speaking directly to women that the government 
knew as far back as 1994 that harassment was taking place in 
the workplace. Their ADMs [assistant deputy minister] knew it. 
The DMs [deputy minister] knew it, and their comments were, 
oh that’s just Murdoch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the timelines that were gone through since 2002, 
December 20, 2002, when the Gillies report submitted their 
report on the investigation, did say that harassment did occur 
“. . . both in terms of abuse of authority and in terms of 
inappropriate sexual behaviour.” And I quote this from the 
Gillies report. 
 
We have the whole timeline from February 12, 2003, April 
2003, November 2003, May 2004. This issue has gone on and 
on and on until February 16, 2006, when Mr. Carriere was 
convicted on two counts of common assault and acquitted on 
two charges of sexual assault. On February 27, 2007, the NDP 
government announced it settled with Murdoch Carriere for the 
sum of $275,000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government just wants this issue to go 
away. Everything they have done since session started has 
proven, whatever it takes, make it go away. It’s a huge issue, 
and it is not going to go away until people of the province 
receive some answers. They want to know why Mr. Carriere 
wasn’t fired with cause years ago, why the NDP won’t release 
their secret legal opinions, why won’t they let the committee 
look into the details. 
 
The last few days, the minister in charge of PSC has decided 
maybe there’s a need for new legislation. Maybe, but more 
likely there’s just a need for somebody to enforce what they 
already have. Mr. Speaker, the only reason, the only reason the 
government refuses to answer questions or to allow this issue to 
be brought to Crown and Central Agencies is to cover up for 
their inaction or to protect friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to second the motion brought 
forward by the new member for Martensville who obviously 
has more social conscience than the whole NDP caucus put 
together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do give 
notice at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving an amendment 
to the motion before the Assembly. 
 
In beginning my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really do want 
to put the debate through the lens of time here. I want to begin 
when I was first putting my name forward as a candidate in 
1982 to run for city council. My children were three and seven. 
I spent most of my campaign time in those days answering the 
question about, doesn’t this become an abusive situation to my 
children and my family, seeking political office? Not the 
important issues of the day to Regina, or at the time that I was 
running, but of being a young person, a young mom, and that I 
belonged at home. 
 
In the ’80s as a member of city council, we formed a task force 
on women’s issues which I chaired. You can’t imagine the 
backlash at that time. The emerging issues? Child care and 
family-friendly cityscapes, equal pay for work of equal value, 
sex education in our schools, harassment issues in the 
workplace — these were all emerging themes. And these topics 
stirred much debate. And I became firmly committed to 
advancing solutions to the issues affecting women. And I 
welcome this as my first opportunity to express my views on 
this unfortunate and harrowing series of events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have served my constituents in this Assembly 
since 1991, and I have heard some incredible statements over 
those years. One of them was captured by a woman, Barb 
Gustafson, in the Prince Albert Herald in 1999 when the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose, during his chat with the 
chamber of commerce executive, was asked about candidate 
nominations and the prospect of women running for the Sask 
Party. His reply? Words to the effect that it’s difficult to get 
women involved in politics since “their concerns are with the 
home” and “they don’t like dealing with conflict.” 
 
Another member, I remember very clearly at the time we were 
discussing the Human Rights Code amendments, was known to 
state, Mr. Speaker, he stated, I truly believe God created woman 
to meet the needs of man. 
 
And the newest member of the Assembly, who’s been her feet 
much during this debate, was an adviser to Minister Oda who 
directed the Status of Women office to remove the word 
equality from its mandate. Clearly this member’s not sincere in 
her concerns for women in the workplace if she’s not prepared 
to fight for equality for women in those workplaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a New Democrat and a women, I have zero 
tolerance for bullying; intolerance; physical, verbal, and sexual 
harassment of individuals anywhere. Clearly stated, I believe 
that we knew — and the opposition knew — that we would pay 
big time for the political knee-jerk mishandling of the firing. 
 
Did they know? Did we know? You bet. Are we happy? No. 
We’re not happy with this settlement but what it does show is 
that as an employer we need to be careful around terminations 
so, no matter what the person is accused of doing, we are 
handling those issues correctly. 
 
Did Mr. Carriere receive compensation for his actions, as the 
opposition tends to portray this? No. To suggest he was 

rewarded for his actions is insensitive, outrageous, and patently 
untrue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Are we happy with this settlement? No. But 
as a government are we above the rules, and do we have to be 
honest and follow the law? Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an interview on Thursday the Leader of the 
Opposition said he wouldn’t have settled this lawsuit. He said 
he would have gone to court. He would have gone to court 
against legal advice and at great fiscal cost — additional fiscal 
cost — to the taxpayer. He knows that. The members opposite 
know that. Not to mention the insensitivity of dragging these 
women through additional court proceedings, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may continue to paint 
themselves as defenders of the rights of women in the 
workplace, but their actions and their words through the years 
say otherwise. The workers of this province see right through 
their smoke-and-mirrors, red-herring approach to this issue. 
 
Will I stand on the NDP record on this issue as opposed to the 
Sask. Party record any day? You bet I’ll stand here on this 
record. 
 
What’s their record, Mr. Speaker? What’s their record? While 
the government was amending The Workers’ Compensation 
Act and humans rights codes and introducing new OH&S 
[occupational health and safety] Act, the opposition was busy 
proposing amendments — amendments to water down and later 
on oppose even putting them forward, Mr. Speaker. What 
would have those amendments done from the members 
opposite? They wanted to amend clause 2(1)(g). Right now it 
says: 
 

“discriminatory action” means any action or threat of 
action . . . 

 
They wanted to get rid of “threat of action.” They wanted 
workers to have no protection from being threatened, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
They wanted to change the same clause to remove the words, 
“reprimand, coercion, intimidation or the imposition of any 
discipline or other penalty . . .” They didn’t want employers 
who use these methods against employees to be held to account. 
That’s their record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — They wanted clause 2(1)(l) removed. That’s 
the harassment clause that they’re opposed to. Let me read it: 
 

“harassment” means any objectionable conduct, 
comment or display by a person that: 
 

(i) is directed at a worker; 
 
(ii) is made on a basis of race, creed, religion, colour, 
sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

disability, physical size or weight, age, nationality, 
ancestry or place of origin; and 
 
(iii) constitutes a threat to the health or safety of a 
worker 

 
Those members opposed and wanted harassment removed from 
the Act. That’s their record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when 
that didn’t work, they wanted to change the definition of 
harassment so it only included conduct by a person made on a 
continuous basis. In other words, workers would have to be 
repeatedly subjected to harassment to receive protection. 
 
They wanted to change occupational health and safety that 
means “the promotion and maintenance of the highest degree of 
physical, mental, and social well-being of workers.” They 
wanted to get rid of “social well-being.” They didn’t want 
workers to enjoy social well-being. That’s downright 
mean-spirited, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They didn’t like the word welfare. “Every employer shall: 
ensure, insofar as is reasonably practical, the health, safety and 
welfare at work . . .” They didn’t want to protect the welfare of 
workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s their record. 
 
I will stand on this side of the House with my colleagues in 
pride for the solutions and actions we take to address issues 
before the House. And because I do accept the position put 
forward by this, I don’t accept the position put forward by the 
Saskatchewan Party. I don’t accept the words that they’re using 
within the Assembly that they won’t use outside those doors, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I move the following amendment, seconded by the member for 
Regina Walsh Acres. I move: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government at an 
appropriate time to propose amendments to occupational 
health and safety legislation and any other relevant 
legislation or policy to ensure that working people in this 
province are protected from harassment so that no 
situations like the Carriere case are ever repeated. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, I’ll just read the amendment. The amendment is: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government at an 
appropriate time to propose amendments to occupational 
health and safety legislation and any other relevant 
legislation and/or policy to ensure that working people in 
this province are protected from harassment so that 
situations like the Carriere case are never repeated. 

 
The debate will continue on both the motion and the 
amendment, and I recognize the hon. member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to speak in support of the amended motion, an 

amendment that was absolutely necessary. The original motion 
was full of inaccuracies but then inaccuracy has become a 
trademark of this opposition. 
 
As I stand here today, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that they are busily 
working to help us develop a third Sask Party ethical 
misconduct document. In fact the Leader of the Opposition 
called the first document, quote, “a nice little book.” It is a nice 
little book, Mr. Speaker, full of details about the Sask Party’s 
violations of its own code of ethics. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
the current Leader of the Opposition I’d like to begin my 
discussion with today. 
 
I would like to talk about the Sask Party’s history as defender of 
women’s rights. The Sask Party, the Sask Party, in typically 
hypocritical fashion, has tried to posture itself as the champion 
of women’s issues only recently in order to make some political 
gains. 
 
I propose to talk about the historical reality of the Sask Party’s 
view of women but in order to do that I’m going to need to go 
back to the beginning. The current leader will simply say 
anything to get his hands on the public purse and he is plagued 
by youthful acts of indiscretion. No, Mr. Speaker, in order to 
talk about the founding and guiding principles of the Sask Party 
we must go back to 1999 and discuss the first leader, the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Now there was a leader, Mr. Speaker. The former leader of the 
opposition may hold some misguided beliefs — in fact, some of 
the most misguided I’ve ever heard — but he was never afraid 
to take a stand, albeit on the wrong side of every issue. 
 
[11:45] 
 
In 1999, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party had a leader that was not 
afraid to threaten the sale of Crown corporations or to privatize 
health care. Now those were the days, Mr. Speaker, and that 
was quite the leader. 
 
On March 6, 1999, a journalist for the Prince Albert Herald 
wrote an article entitled, “Recent remarks prove the point: 
women’s work is never done.” The article is mostly a 
discussion on how conservative politicians are incapable of 
coming to terms with modern issues, specifically as they relate 
to women. In the article the journalist expresses that she 
attended an event with then leader of the opposition, the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Apparently when addressing the local business community in 
P.A., the member was asked a question about the prospect of 
women running for the Sask Party. Now the former leader, 
never to let politics get in the way of exposing the prejudices 
and true beliefs of his party, turned to his questioner and said, 
and I’m quoting from the article, Mr. Speaker, “their concerns 
are with the home . . . they don’t like dealing with conflict.” 
 
Women’s concerns are with the home and they don’t like 
dealing with conflict. Mr. Speaker, I’m not the leader of an 
opposition party, but I don’t understand how such a misguided 
view could possibly serve the best interests of women. How 
would the member’s beliefs have translated into policy had he 
become Premier? I shudder to even think about that. What 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

would his policy on sexual harassment be? Perhaps the member 
from Rosetown-Elrose would simply hope that women would 
stay at home so that he wouldn’t have to deal with harassment 
issues at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the columnist goes on to say this, quote: 
 

Some of the women . . . [who] heard his remarks dealt 
with their immediate conflict — between wanting to wring 
his red neck and the knowledge that such an action would 
be illegal — by walking out of the meeting. 
 
The words are surprising only in their honest expression. 
 
There is little doubt about what the Sask. Party sees as 
women’s proper role; you just don’t hear it articulated that 
clearly very often. 

 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker. That is how a Sask Party leader 
deals with the issues of women. Some of the women who were 
at his meeting might not have agreed with him. In fact they 
were so upset they chose to leave his company, but not 
everyone can recognize a visionary. Mr. Speaker, as many 
members will know, not everyone can stand to be in the 
company of someone with the gravitas of the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose — a real leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amended motion calls on this government to 
amend occupational health and safety legislation to ensure that 
instances of harassment like the Carriere incident are never 
repeated. Many of the members opposite are likely not aware, 
but in Saskatchewan harassment falls under The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act. The Sask Party might hold some 
dubious views of women but, Mr. Speaker, surely they can’t 
object to protecting people in the workplace, at least not again. 
Historically the opposition hasn’t had much interest in 
protecting workers either. In fact, quite the contrary. The 
current Leader of the Opposition, not to be outdone by his 
questionable predecessor, has already declared war on working 
people. On at least this point he is just as willing to make a 
stand as the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has decided to take a stand 
against working people in Saskatchewan. The Leader of the 
Opposition has said that, quote: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto the 
business community by this government, be it through 
Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety or 
various pieces of labour legislation, too often has driven 
businesses and the jobs they create and the taxes they pay 
out of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
The opposition leader is obviously not too concerned about 
working people or working women in this province. One leader 
says that women should be at home and the next says that 
workers shouldn’t be protected in the workplace. Between 
women and workers, the Saskatchewan Party has taken issue 
with 85 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a wonder why the opposition takes any interest in the 
Carriere case at all. Why are they so suddenly — and in 
contradiction of their own past sentiments — so concerned 

about a group of women workers? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is 
politics. That Leader of the Opposition is desperate to get his 
hands on the public purse. And if that means he has to tell the 
public that his party is the champion of women’s rights, though 
they are so clearly not, or that they support workers, though 
they so clearly do not, then that is exactly what they will do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition will have a chance to 
make a positive change to labour legislation in this province. If 
he is as committed to these issues as he is in the theatric of their 
articulation then there is no reason for him not to support the 
amended motion today. And there is absolutely no reason for 
him not to support this government when the time comes to 
effect positive change for the great people of this province. The 
people of Saskatchewan deserve strong legislative protections, 
not to be told to stay at home, not to be told that their safety is 
not a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be proudly supporting the amendment put 
forward by the member for Regina Wascana Plains today and 
urge all the members of the opposition to do the same. But I 
have reservations as to whether or not that would be the case, 
Mr. Speaker, given that we also have the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena saying on November 9, 2006 — which was 
as recent as just a few months ago — that when it comes to 
occupational health and safety legislation, you don’t . . . quote 
she says, quote: 
 

You don’t have to put forward every rule and regulation, 
because employers know [that] if you don’t look after your 
employees, they’re not going to be there. 

 
So on one hand she’s saying we should be looking after our 
workers, but on the other hand she’s saying we don’t have to 
legislate it. Despite the fact that right now we have legislation 
under the current Occupational Health and Safety Act that is not 
as comprehensive as it could be, as it should be, and we as the 
NDP government have recognized that and are making the 
plans right now in terms of making the changes to further 
enshrine our commitment to the working people of this 
province and the working women of this province. 
 
We are not going to back down from our commitment to these 
women and to the workers of this province. We are not going to 
back down because we’re getting a whole bunch of rhetoric 
from the opposite . We are not going to back down just because 
they don’t have any position to put forward for themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They are high on rhetoric and very low on substantive policy, 
Mr. Speaker. They have offered nothing by the way of what 
they would propose. It’s simply an opposition to everything that 
this NDP government is doing in proud defence of the workers 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members, debate 
continues on both the motion put forward by the member for 
Martensville and the amendment put forward by the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains. And I recognize the hon. member for 
Humboldt. 
 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always 
interesting to listen to the member from Regina Walsh Acres 
tell me how I think and how I feel in her perspective with 
whatever they tell her that she is supposed to think and feel 
herself. She isn’t interested quite frankly in how other people 
think or feel and certainly isn’t open-minded enough to get any 
understanding of what the opposition party is even all about. 
But you get desperate. You get nasty. You get downright 
personal when you have something that quite frankly you need 
to be ashamed of and you need to defend it and it’s 
indefensible. This tired, old, NDP government should be 
ashamed of the way that they have dealt with this issue and they 
can sit there and pass judgment. 
 
But one of those victims was working through my office when I 
was the representative for the constituency of Watrous. I spoke 
with one of those victims. I heard what she went through and I 
heard her pain and I felt helpless to be able to help her because 
there was nothing that I could do to help her at that time. And 
obviously there was nothing that this NDP government was 
going to do to help these women as well, because the way they 
have been treated is absolutely disgusting. It’s absolutely 
appalling. 
 
The NDP government do not share the values of the 
Saskatchewan people. They have lost their sense of right and 
wrong. And I cannot believe they sit there day after day and 
defend what has happened in this particular scandal. 
 
There can be no doubt that Murdoch Carriere is a friend of one 
of the ministers that’s sitting, a very good friend of at least one 
of the ministers that’s sitting here in this Assembly today. He 
was a relative of a past minister. And I think that has a lot to 
play in this whole scandal and I think that has a lot to do with 
why there’s such an enormous coverup going on. 
 
But you know what? They couldn’t have ever, this story would 
never, ever, ever have been known if the Gillies report had not 
been made public. They would have kept brushing it under the 
rug, brushing it under the rug, covering it up. Moving Murdoch 
Carriere around was their tactic at the time. Let’s just remove 
him from the office that’s causing the trouble. Let’s move him 
into another office, and let’s just keep covering it up. 
 
And it’s interesting that they did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because in a letter from one of the victims she said, and I quote: 
 

A number of female employees who work in the Regina 
office . . . have also experienced incidents with Mr. 
Carriere . . . We feel as employees that the females of 
3211 Albert Street are being placed into an unsafe 
environment. 

 
That’s how these women felt. That is the message that they 
were . . . [inaudible] . . . to their superiors. And what happened? 
They moved him to the Regina office. They said, that’s how 
we’ll solve the problem. Let’s just take him and move him 
somewhere else and let’s keep him on employment and let’s 
just keep covering it up and covering it up. 
 
How else were the victims treated in this whole situation? Well 
we have nine victims that came forward. I think, I think there is 
more. But we have nine that we know of today, because the 

NDP government refused to answer as to how many actually 
filed complaints. 
 
But we have nine that were assigned one lawyer. They were 
brought together in a room and they were told that the offer was 
$15,000 each and that was the only money that would be 
offered them. They were told that they couldn’t just go and 
discuss it with their friends and come back with a decision at a 
later day. They were told they had to make that decision and 
sign the agreement that very day. 
 
They were told if any one of them did not sign the agreement, 
none of them would get any money. That is so disrespectful. I 
can’t even imagine how it’s possibly legal to have that type of 
negotiation-type setup. Those women had no individual rights 
whatsoever. They were tied to one another without individual 
rights. That’s how this government treats the women. 
 
The bill that the women received for the legal counsel that the 
government arranged for them because . . . I notice that the 
minister from Nutana is beaking away, you know, they had a 
lawyer; they had a lawyer. Well my understanding was that was 
arranged by the government and the bill states that it is for, I 
quote: “services rendered in connection with potential claims 
against Murdoch Carriere and the Government of 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Why was this government protecting Murdoch Carriere? They 
were understandably trying to protect themselves from any 
future lawsuits, but why Murdoch Carriere? Why was it in their 
interest to protect Murdoch Carriere and future lawsuits against 
him? 
 
In the end of the day, Murdoch Carriere gets awarded $275,000. 
What does that tell these women — these women that were put 
in a room and told that if any one of them refused to sign the 
agreement, the agreement was taken off the table? They were 
told that that was the only settlement that was going to be 
offered them. It was that or nothing. And then they find out that 
Murdoch Carriere is awarded $275,000, plus his pension’s 
topped up. We always forget that part, but his pension was 
topped up. And how are they supposed to feel? We’ve just seen 
the harasser rewarded and the victims were further victimized. 
 
The settlement agreement that was signed by Murdoch Carriere 
on January 9 — the cheque was for $275,000 as I mentioned — 
was sent to Murdoch Carriere on January 26 and the women in 
the public weren’t told until seven weeks later, on February 27. 
Why did the government not at the very least give the women 
that much respect? Why didn’t they give them that much 
respect to give them a heads-up that this was going to be hitting 
the headlines in the newspapers? And they didn’t even have that 
much respect for those women. And what does our Premier 
say? Well the Premier says, and I quote, “it’s responsible 
government.” Later he said, and it’s in Hansard on March 8, 
“Would I do it again? You bet I would.” 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do what? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That’s the Premier. That’s the Premier. 
 
The Minister of Finance wants to know, do what? I suggest he 
go to Hansard on March 8, page 760 and read it if he likes. If 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

he likes, he can read it. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Order. Now 
members on both sides of the Assembly . . . Order. Members on 
both sides of the Assembly are not demonstrating respectful 
behaviour and we are not continuing this debate until there is 
silence in the Assembly. Please ensure the clock is stopped so 
that the member who’s speaking does not lose her time in any 
way. And I recognize the hon. member for Humboldt. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
isn’t near enough time to talk to this subject in just 10 minutes. 
We’ll talk about the consulting with the victims. And the 
member from Nutana said, “my understanding from the Justice 
officials is that the complainants were checked with before this 
was given to Mr. Carriere.” That wasn’t what happened, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They were not consulted with. 
 
Later the Premier said . . . And I probably could find the pages. 
The Minister of Finance wants to check this out too. But I 
quote, “It is in my view that subjecting these nine complainants 
again to another civil process, another public exposure, is the 
wrong thing to do.” 
 
Did he ask them? Did he give them enough respect to just ask 
them? But no, no. He didn’t at all. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just goes on and on and on. What are the 
NDP hiding? This is riddled with situation after situation from 
1994 where this has been hidden and covered up again and 
again and again. The ministers have not answered any questions 
in this Assembly. 
 
The NDP refused to table the legal opinion that they supposedly 
obtained, that they defend, that they defended. If it is so 
defensible, table it. If you can defend it, if it indeed says that he 
is entitled, if they are so incompetent and if they screwed up 
that badly in just firing someone, let’s see the legal opinion. 
Because obviously it was a major mismanagement of how they 
fired him in order for him to be entitled to that kind of money. 
 
They refuse to table the copy of the agreement signed by the 
victims which . . . By the way, the victims cannot have a copy 
themselves because, oh, unless all nine agree to it, none of them 
can have a copy of the very agreement that they signed. And I’d 
like to know, does Murdoch Carriere have a copy of the 
agreement he signed? And I bet he does. I have no doubt that he 
has a copy of what he signed. But the women aren’t entitled to 
have a copy of what they signed. 
 
They refuse to release a copy of the agreement with the victims. 
They refuse to tell us how many victims reported harassment 
prior to the nine that came forward. They refuse to tell us who 
knew. Who knew? So we need an investigation. 
 
They talk, okay, let’s correct the loopholes in the legislation. I 
said, bring it on. I would be more than happy to support it. But 
how do we know what we’re going to fix if we don’t know 
everything that went wrong? How do we fix what we don’t 
know went wrong? It’s just crisis management. That is all it is. 
This is crisis management because they got caught. They got 

caught. 
 
And so now they’re going to say, oh the opposition won’t 
support it. I will absolutely support it if it does strengthen and if 
I know what went wrong. So let’s have that investigation. Let’s 
find out what went wrong here. Who knew? Who knew? Who 
knew and why are they still employed? If it’s zero tolerance, is 
it okay with these members that people that covered it up are 
still employed. Is that okay? Is that zero tolerance? And I don’t 
think it is. 
 
Talk to these victims and see how they feel. And they still feel 
that way today — today  . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 
know, the member from Regina Walsh Acres, someone needs to 
take her to the back room and give her the . . . all the whitewash 
that they tell her that she can come up with. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. Order. The 
member’s time has elapsed. The member’s time has elapsed. I 
recognize the hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased this morning to enter into this debate. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re dealing with a very serious issue. An issue that 
should not be made a political skeptical, but an issue that should 
be looked at and dealt with for what it is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province led the nation — I want to 
repeat that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — this province led the nation 
in putting in anti-harassment policies and legislation in place. In 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government takes this 
issue very, very seriously. But even with the very best 
legislation, and even with the very best intent, you’re not going 
to be able to stop all harassment. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government believes very, very strongly that every employee 
has the right to work in a workplace free of harassment. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it does no good to drag a particular 
issue through the mud for months or weeks. What we need to 
do is fix any problems that may exist. Because with any policy 
or procedure or legislation, there is never a perfect solution. We 
need to continue to amend and to improve the legislation or the 
policies as new situations arise. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there isn’t a single member on this side of 
the House that isn’t concerned about what these nine women 
faced. There isn’t a single member on this side of the House 
that wasn’t disgusted with what these women had to go through. 
And there wasn’t a single member on this side of the House that 
if they had any other way would have paid Murdoch Carriere a 
penny. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the law is the law. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is not a single member on either side 
of this House, there’s not a single member on either side of this 
House that likes what happened. There is not a single member 
that likes what happened. But can we change that? We can’t. 
All we can do is improve the future. All we can do is improve 
the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and ensure that no, and ensure 
that no other individuals have to deal with the same situations, 
the same circumstances, and the same affront that those nine 
women faced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to continue to improve the 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

situation for employees across the province, both in government 
and in the private sector. But most importantly, we need to 
know that we have a desire to do so. Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
this side of the House we do have a desire to do so. We have a 
desire to deliver workplaces where people are free of 
harassment, where they have the opportunity to work in an 
environment they feel safe and secure, and that they have the 
opportunity to work in a respectful and dignified workplace. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard the members opposite try 
to make this particular very serious situation a political 
skeptical for days and weeks now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I’ve heard them attack the credibility of individuals who’ve 
dealt with this issue. I’ve had them attribute motive to the 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission. I can 
tell you that the Minister of the Public Service Commission is 
every bit as concerned about what happened to those nine 
women as is any member of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And I can tell you when this government was 
first looking at implementing anti-harassment policies and 
legislation, I represented the largest union in this province. And 
I can tell you that member was one of the key individuals that 
pushed — that pushed — to ensure that we put legislation and 
policies in place to protect the people in their workplaces. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very, very important that we not 
make something of a very serious situation that it isn’t and that 
we work instead to improve the future for employees in this 
province. And we’re going to work to improve the situation for 
people in this province. 
 
I want to repeat, there isn’t a single, there is not a single 
member in this Assembly on either side of the House that would 
have liked to pay Mr. Carriere $275,000 — not a single 
member. But we can’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can’t not 
follow the law. Mr. Carriere had been disciplined prior to the 
political level understanding. Mr. Carriere had been disciplined 
prior to anybody at the political level understanding or knowing 
the details of his actions. And when his actions became known 
to the members of this Assembly, the right, the right decision 
was made. Mr. Carriere was fired. The right decision was made. 
 
And at that time, at that time we all in this Assembly knew — 
we all knew — it was going to cost us something because we 
knew he’d already been disciplined. And we knew that double 
jeopardy did not allow us to fire him. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the members of the opposition knew. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I apologize to 
the member for Regina Dewdney. I’d ask the member for Wood 
River to please stop yelling remarks across the House. And I 
recognize the hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All 
members in this Assembly who sat here in 2003 knew and fully 
understood that what we did would cost. Because when, when 
you terminate an individual after he’s already been disciplined, 
it’s double jeopardy. But it was still the right decision. And 
members of the opposition urged the government to fire him. 
And yes, yes, we fired him. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to 
look forward now. We need to improve the situation for men 
and women, employees both in the private and public sector in 
Saskatchewan. We need to ensure that no other women ever 
face this type of situation. 
 
But even in the best, in the best situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we cannot guarantee, there is no way to guarantee that people 
will not face harassment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish we could. 
Every single member of this Assembly wishes that we could 
guarantee that no other woman would ever face harassment and 
no other individual in our society would face racism, 
harassment, or abuse in any form. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
can’t guarantee that. All we can do is put in place the best 
policies, and procedures, and legislation possible in order to 
ensure that we can deliver the best possible outcome for our 
employees and for all the citizens of the province. 
 
And yes, I will be very frank and very candid. There were 
decisions that could have been made differently and should 
have been made differently, and every member of this 
Assembly will agree with that — every single member. But you 
cannot go back and change decisions that were made by others 
and in many cases none of us, none of us in this House were 
aware of. Those decisions were made within the bureaucracy. 
They were made at levels other than here. We can’t go back and 
change those decisions. All we can do is focus on improving the 
future. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to concentrate on improving 
the future. We can’t continue to dwell in the past. We need to 
understand that these women faced a very horrific situation. 
And we all feel for what they had to go through. 
 
But we need to ensure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to ensure 
that we do everything we possibly can to ensure that no women 
face these situations in the future. That’s our responsibility. And 
then once we put the policies and legislation in place, we have 
to leave it up to those who are responsible for managing the 
civil service on a daily basis to implement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we must change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
important topic that we’re addressing in the seventy-five minute 
debate today. And unfortunately I think we’ve got a little off the 
important and germane issues that give rise to the particular 
motion before the House today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problems I have in having listened to 
the debate so far is the way that the heart of the matter has been 
avoided. The several troubling issues as they relate to this 
particular situation and the motion that we’re debating today, 
one of them of course . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the hon. 
member but the time for . . . the 65 minutes for time to debate 
has now expired, and we go to the 10 minutes for questions and 
answers. And I recognize the hon. member for Estevan. 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is to the member from Regina Walsh Acres, and I would simply 
like to know why her government refuses to let this issue go to 
the Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government has put forward a 
very good position on this issue in terms of making sure that we 
address that this situation doesn’t happen again in the future. 
And we are committed to doing that, Mr. Speaker. What those 
opposition members are not going to be forthright about and 
haven’t been forthright about so far is their position on the issue 
with respect to supporting the amendments that we would have 
to bring forward because those amendments, in order to be able 
to expedite them, would have to be supported by those 
members. So they’re not being forthright about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, it’s very interesting because in the past they’ve 
shown that they don’t support the legislation regarding 
harassment under occupational health and safety. When we 
were bringing forward amendments in 1993, the members 
wanted harassment removed from the Act. Not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, but they also wanted to have another mechanism in 
there for people who did bring forward complaints under 
harassment. They wanted to give employers extra power to sue 
employees if they brought forward false claims, and that is an 
intimidation tactic if I ever saw one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well procedurally we all know that it takes 
all of the support of all of us to put forward solutions. Are the 
members opposite — and I would ask for the member of 
Kelvington-Wadena — are you prepared to ask your caucus to 
support any changes that would come forward to occupational 
health and safety regulations to protect Saskatchewan workers 
from sexual harassment? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I would love to see the amendments that have 
been spoken about so many times in this House. They keep 
asking us if we’re going to support amendments that we haven’t 
seen. We’d like to see what happened. It’s been stated clearly 
that we’ll look at any amendments that will help. 
 
What I want to know is what this government is doing about 
enforcing the legislation that’s in place at this time. We have a 
concern about the issues that happened in the past. We want to 
know what happened. And if there’s something we can do to 
improve it, we will definitely do it. But my question is, this 
government is so worried about what’s happening in the future, 
they’re forgetting to look at the past as well. And we can’t 
improve it until we look at the past. 

So my question is to the member from Walsh Acres. For 10 
long minutes in her not-so-accurate version of the Sask Party’s 
history . . . and she didn’t want to talk about the things, about 
things like people on social services . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena has answered the question, but she needs to 
be recognized before she asks another. And I recognize the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is to the member for Walsh Acres who did speak about her 
version of the Sask Party. And she didn’t talk about the fact that 
if it wasn’t for the Sask Party, there wouldn’t have been an 
increase to people on social services. There wouldn’t have been 
a Project Hope. There wouldn’t have been a recognition day for 
people with FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder]. 
 
But my question . . . But she did want to say that she’s a proud 
defender of workers of this province. So my question to this 
member is, does she believe for some reason that bringing this 
issue to the Crown and central agency would in some way not 
be in the best interests of the women who were harassed? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we have the Sask 
Party distortion on what the facts are. And the facts were stated 
in my speech, Mr. Speaker, so people can decide for themselves 
which version, I guess, they want to believe — the distortion or 
the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m curious as to whether or not the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Once again I ask the 
member to be recognized for the asking of a question. I take it 
she’s completed answering the question? You’re still 
answering? I apologize to the member. I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if she would be so 
bold as to say the drive-by smearings that they do on a regular 
basis from that side of the House . . . outside of privilege in this 
House where they don’t have immunity from the law and then 
would have to substantiate what they say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it interesting that 
the member for Regina Wascana Plains wants to talk about 
equality considering the record of her government. 
 
According to the victims of Murdoch Carriere, they were 
herded into a room and forced to sign a settlement. And if they 
weren’t going to sign the settlement, if one person disagreed 
with this, they were going to get nothing. And at the end of the 
day, this government offered them $15,000. Murdoch Carriere, 
on the other hand, received $275,000, and the government 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

bumped up his pension so that he could retire well. Can the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains explain to us where she 
sees the equality in that? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite are doing their very best to conjure up a scandal in this 
case. And every day they come forward and they drag in a gag 
order for the women. There was no gag order, Mr. Speaker. The 
hard drive was erased. The hard drive was not erased. The 
member from Athabasca was a personal friend. That was not 
the case. The Premier golfed with somebody. Well we all golf 
with people from time to time when we’re doing . . . Time and 
time again they drag in incorrect statements, so I have no doubt 
that I would need time to check on their statements. 
 
The other incorrect statement, and I addressed it in my remarks 
was, would we settle with Murdoch Carriere if we had the 
choice to do that? We’re very sad that we have to do that. We 
know this settlement was not for harassment. They pose it to be 
a settlement for harassment. They know by their statements it 
was for . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
member for Regina Wascana Plains who was being constantly 
interrupted during her comments. And I recognize her in case 
she would like to finish her remarks. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We all 
know that it’s really misleading, and it’s unfortunate that 
members opposite want to pose the settlement for Murdoch 
Carriere as something that’s a reward. 
 
Would it be a reward that members opposite in the ’80s, when 
they were convicted of fraud, received their pensions, received 
the benefits that were coming to them? You can characterize 
these issues the way you want, but in the best interests of the 
women, I think we have to come to some control in debate and 
look for solutions into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the 
Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This question is to the member from 
Martensville. She has said that the women were herded into a 
room and forced to sign. Can she indicate to this House who 
herded these women into the room? Was it the women’s 
lawyer? That’s question number one. 
 
Question number two. She has said . . . And the second part of 
my question is, she has said that the member from Athabasca 
was a personal friend of Murdoch Carriere. I ask her, what 
evidence does she have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Martensville. 
 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, these nine women, 
we’ve spoken with them. They were brought into a room and 
they were told to sign this. They signed this under duress. And 
this was the culmination after years of harassment that was 
allowed to happen under the watch of this NDP government. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
member from Martensville, but she was being interrupted 
during her comments. And I recognize the hon. member from 
Martensville in case she wants to finish her answer. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 
women . . . This is one of the last steps in a long journey that 
these women had to go through. They were harassed by 
Murdoch Carriere. They went to their supervisors. They went to 
assistant deputy ministers. They went to deputy ministers. They 
wrote the Premier of this province, and nothing was done for 
them. That minister sits there with a smile on her face day after 
day, and these women, their lives have been destroyed because 
of this. And this government has refused to stand up for them. 
 
The former NDP Justice minister said that they would fight this 
vigorously in court and let the courts decide. And you all 
backed down and completely abandoned these women when 
they needed you most. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Time for the 
seventy-five minute debate has elapsed. I just want to say — 
excuse me — I just want to say before we leave this debate, I 
am going to review the record of this debate with respect to 
comments that are alleged to have been made on both sides of 
the House. I’m going to be reviewing the record and reporting 
to the Speaker on this matter for Monday’s session. Members 
came . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, for Wednesday, thank 
you for correcting me. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I’d ask the 
Government House Leader to state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure exactly 
what you were thinking when you just made your statement, 
and if it’s included then I accept that. I do want to ensure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that in reviewing the remarks of the members 
that the Speaker would pay particular attention to the remark 
made by the hon. member for Humboldt while she was on her 
feet and made the remark — and as best as I can recall, very 
close, if not exactly this — that the member for Walsh Acres 
should be taken out behind the woodshed and given a good . . . 
and then she caught herself. 
 
On that, I would ask that attention be paid to that specifically on 
the grounds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is highly improper in 
parliamentary debate for members to question either the 
motivations or to be demeaning of others in the Assembly in 
their remarks. It was made on the record and surely will be 
clearly heard by Hansard, and I would ask that that be 
specifically referred to unless the hon. member wishes to 
withdraw the remark and apologize now. 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I will be reviewing 
those transcripts. But I recognize the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, I take it, on this matter. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re confident that a 
review will show that the member from Humboldt did not say 
anything improper. She stopped midstream through a sentence. 
And if the members opposite want to infer something else, that 
speaks something about where they’re at with their particular 
mentality. But there was nothing intended or impugned by the 
member from Humboldt. And I’m sure that listening to the 
record will satisfy the Speaker or yourself that there was no 
improper statements made nor any improper intent by our 
member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I thank the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Southeast and I thank the Government 
House Leader. I will review the transcript from Hansard on this 
matter, and we’ll address this on Wednesday. We turn now to 
private members’ motions, and I recognize the hon. member for 
Regina Coronation Park. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 —Equalization and an Energy Accord 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to be making a motion on behalf of not only my constituents but 
the people of our great province, Saskatchewan. I am distressed 
that we have to enter this debate, Mr. Speaker, because what 
this debate, my motion, is really about is a matter that goes right 
to the very heart of our democracy, and that is the matter of 
trust of elected individuals — trust in their word. In this motion 
I am speaking directly to the ability, the electorate’s ability, to 
trust our Prime Minister, Stephen Harper, and to trust the 12 
Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] that we have 
elected. 
 
Before I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving, 
seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon Massey Place: 
 

That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
parliament provide an apology to the people of this 
province for breaking their election promise on the issue 
of equalization; and further, that this Legislative Assembly 
call upon the federal government to immediately negotiate 
a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 

Not yet, I’ll be doing this before my remarks end, Mr. Speaker 
— the Pages are ever, ever efficient. And my little aside, I want 
to say the Easter Bunny came early, and I want to thank the 
Pages for dropping off the little chocolate Easter eggs at my and 
my colleague’s desk. Thank you very much for that. It’s much 
appreciated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the matter of trust that Canadians must have in our 
Prime Minister and must have in our politicians really goes to 
the heart of democracy. I want to build a case that is clear and 
logical. I don’t want to get into the details of equalization 

although I’d be happy to do so, but I know that many people’s 
eyes glaze over. It’s not a question of what the heck is the 
formula. It’s a question of what the heck is the Prime Minister’s 
word worth. What the heck is 12 MPs’ words worth? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I have is some quotes. I’m going to 
start with quotes from my own MP, Tom Lukiwski, who in 
Hansard, February 21, 2005, says and this is a quote for Mr. 
Lukiwski: 
 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday several Conservative MPs, myself 
included, met with Premier Lorne Calvert and other 
political leaders from Saskatchewan. 
 
During that meeting we were all united in calling for the 
elimination of oil and gas revenues from the equalization 
formula, but the government, and the finance minister 
continue to ignore and betray the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
[12:30] 
 
Tom Lukiwski, in the federal Hansard, February 21, 2005. I 
want to go fast forward two months — February, March — one 
month, March 22, 2005, and Mr. Lukiwski says again in 
Hansard: 
 

By my understanding, if Saskatchewan were allowed to 
keep 100% of its non-renewable natural resources, it 
would mean an estimated $800 million yearly and perhaps 
even higher than that. 

 
From my MP, clearly set the bar. Eight hundred million, 
perhaps even higher, he says. And this is an hon. member. He 
then goes on a few days later again Hansard, March 9, 2005, 
Mr. Lukiwski says, quote: 
 

This money belonged to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Simply put, the failure of the government to eliminate the 
clawback provisions on non-renewable natural resources is 
a betrayal to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister stand today, stop betraying the people of 
Saskatchewan and commit to the elimination of the 
clawback provision? 

 
Tom Lukiwski, Hansard, March 9, 2005. One more quote from 
that MP, my MP, and this one goes to Hansard, October 2005. 
On October 6 Mr. Lukiwski says, quote: 
 

In fact, if Saskatchewan had a proper, fair and just 
equalization formula right now, at today’s oil prices 
Saskatchewan would be receiving, by my calculations, 
anywhere between $800 million and $1.5 billion in 
additional revenue each and every year. Of course we do 
not have that agreement . . . 

 
Tom Lukiwski, Hansard, October 6, 2005. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
what this speaks to is the credibility of all politicians in a 
democracy. We can’t have politicians so clearly stating, 
outlining very eloquently . . . Mr. Lukiwski is an eloquent 
person. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Short memory. 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

Mr. Trew: — Short memory, short memory perhaps. I think 
not. I think, actually, my MP remembers very much these 
statements. And I think he’s troubled by it. In fact he’s so 
troubled by it that twice in the last week in the Leader-Post 
we’ve had reports of my MP, Mr. Lukiwski, saying, well 
perhaps we weren’t as clear as we should have been or could 
have been around the exclusion of resource revenue. 
 
Well there’s nothing much more clear than the quotes I just 
gave — nothing much more clear. Unless maybe we want to go 
directly, Mr. Speaker, to the Conservative, federal Conservative 
election plan that they printed and published and distributed to 
the best of their ability to every household in Canada — in 
Canada. And what do they say? They say the federal 
Conservatives have the plan. The Conservative government will 
. . . and I’m going to go straight to the third bullet of the plan 
that deals with equalization: 
 

A Conservative government will [they say before they got 
elected]: Work to achieve with the provinces permanent 
changes to the equalization formula which would ensure 
that non-renewable natural resource revenue is removed 
[they say] from the equalization formula to encourage 
economic growth. 
 

It goes on: 
 

We will ensure that no province is adversely affected from 
the changes to the equalization formula. 
 

This is their promise in writing, distributed widely to virtually 
every household in Canada. If some got missed, it was purely 
by accident. I can assure you of that. And that was in 2006 
federal Conservative platform. A platform that Prime Minister 
Stephen Harper would most surely have endorsed; most surely 
he campaigned on it. Most surely the now 12 Saskatchewan 
Conservative MPs would have said, absolutely, this is what we 
believe in. 
 
Every statement that we can find prior to the election said, 
absolutely, we’re the ones, they said. We, the Conservatives, 
are the ones that will deliver on this natural resources 
equalization formula. We’re the ones, they said. They moaned 
and they cried about the Conservatives. And they moaned and 
they cried about the lack of action. Give them the opportunity. 
They said, give us the opportunity and we’ll deliver. Well 
they’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here we are, 14 months after many of these quotes, and what 
have we got? We have got Conservative politicians saying, well 
maybe we weren’t as clear as we should have or could have 
been. Maybe the fine print is coming out now. Isn’t it a shame, 
Mr. Speaker, because I again repeat, you cannot run an election 
campaign that is so crystal clear what you stand for and less 
than 14 months later you’re saying, well no, that isn’t really 
what we meant. 
 
I remind everybody, we didn’t write the Conservative federal 
election platform. We didn’t write it. We don’t agree with much 
of it in the first instance. But we didn’t write it. This was an 
opportunity for the brain trust of the federal Conservative Party 
to put as clearly, as succinctly, as plainly as they possibly could 
to the people of Saskatchewan, what it is they believe in, what it 

is that they would do. 
 
But in typical right wing fashion, Mr. Speaker, what do they 
do? They say anything before an election and deliver nothing or 
worse after. Say anything before an election — deliver nothing 
or worse after. What a shame. And I am confident, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people of Saskatchewan know this. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know that we were promised very, 
very clearly — minimum $800 million a year. A minimum 
$800 million a year by the federal Conservative now MPs. A 
promise made. A promise that they couldn’t run further from. 
 
Let me say how far they’ve run from it. Mr. Speaker, next year 
you know what we’re going to get under the equalization 
energy accord? Zero. Not one nickel. Not one penny. Zero. 
 
Across the way the Sask Party apologists say, oh but, you 
know, really you’ve got to give them a chance. Really they may 
have misspoken. Really our federal cousins, you know, they’re 
just not real experienced. And by gosh, you know, I hope that 
they’ll eventually maybe come somewhere close or in the 
neighbourhood of what they promised. 
 
Well what a shame, Mr. Speaker, because right wingers have 
always been the same. It doesn’t matter whether they call 
themselves federal Conservatives, provincial Conservatives, 
provincial Sask Party — right wingers are right wingers are 
right wingers. They’ll say anything before an election — 
anything at all. Whatever it is you want to hear, they’re first to 
say it. After the election what do they deliver? Nothing or 
worse. 
 
And this motion speaks directly to the credibility of the 
Canadian Conservative government, the MPs, and our Prime 
Minister, and it speaks to the credibility of right wingers 
everywhere. Say anything before an election; deliver nothing or 
worse after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, here we go. I want to just read . . . There is 
some who do want to stand up. Some like Mr. Fitzpatrick, 
who’s, I believe, announced he’s not going to run again for the 
federal Conservative Party. He wrote to the Prime Minister and 
to the Minister of Finance, the federal Minister of Finance on 
July 25, 2006. And he wrote, and I quote the letter directly: 
 

Dear Prime Minister Harper and Minister Flaherty: 
 
We held a Saskatchewan Caucus on July 19th. In our 
roundtable discussions, many issues were discussed. 
Clearly, the dominant issue was the matter of equalization. 
 
All members present believed that anything less than 
substantial compliance with our commitment will cause us 
no end of political difficulty during the next federal 
election. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think, I think that Mr. Fitzpatrick was 
quite prophetic. I say that not because I have an opportunity to 
vote for him or not — it’s up to the voters in that riding — but 
what I do have an opportunity to vote for or against is my 
federal MP. And believe you me, I will. I will because my MP, 
as eloquent as he is, clearly is not standing up for what he said 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

he was going to stand up for before the election. 
 
It is disgraceful or worse, Mr. Speaker, for any government to 
get elected on a . . . It’s disgraceful, Mr. Speaker, for any 
government to get elected on something that is misleading. 
They should be . . .It is an obligation all politicians have, to the 
best of our ability, to describe a situation the way it is. On a rare 
occasion you might have a world war or something that 
interrupts and delays. But tell me what’s happened in the last 14 
months since Prime Minister Harper and the 12 Saskatchewan 
MPs got elected. Tell me what’s happened. 
 
They’re bringing in extra billions of dollars in revenue, Mr. 
Speaker, into the federal treasury. They’ve having difficulty 
spending all of the money, budgeting to get rid of all the 
money. That’s the situation that the federal Conservative, the 
Stephen Harper federal Conservative government find itself in. 
And what do they do? They take our energy accord equalization 
money — by their own statements, Mr. Speaker, a minimum of 
$800 million a year — and they distribute it where they think 
the votes are needed. They distribute it across the rest of 
Canada. They distribute it hugely. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that why you closed the SaskPower 
office in Rosetown? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my former neighbour, the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose says, is that why we closed the 
SaskPower office in Rosetown? I want to tell you, for $800 
million we could run SaskPower for an entire year and not send 
anybody a single bill, and we wouldn’t need all kinds of things. 
We could do that. $800 million a year would allow us to 
provide free electricity throughout the province, period. $800 
million would allow us to double this year’s record expenditure 
in our provincial highway and road system. We could double it, 
double it. We could wipe out . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Exactly. The education portion of education property tax. We 
could absolutely eliminate that and still have money left over. 
 
We could still do . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes it’s not 
quite as good as what Grant Devine and the right wingers say 
— oh Saskatchewan . . . He said in 1981 and ’82, oh 
Saskatchewan’s got so much going for it you can afford to 
mismanage it and still break even. Well he got his chance and 
he actually passed eight successive, he actually passed, he 
actually passed eight successive deficit budgets. He didn’t pass 
the last budget. And I remember it all too well because I was 
sitting right behind where the member for Melfort was. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have got to, we have got to hold 
politicians accountable to their word. We have got to, we have 
got to, we have got to push for an energy accord for 
Saskatchewan. That’s what this debate is all about. It’s about, 
how do we deliver for Saskatchewan? How can we deliver and 
what can we deliver for $800 million? And that’s really the crux 
of the issue. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, on our side of the House we’re fond of 
kind of chuckling. Tommy Douglas who . . . Yes, he is an icon 
of ours. He’s voted as the greatest Canadian. But Tommy used 
to say, when somebody tells you it’s about the principle — it’s 
not about the money, it’s about the principle — he said you can 
always be sure it’s about the money. 

[12:45] 
 
Well I want to tell you right now this is an issue around money 
and principle, but it’s the money. Show us the money. Show us 
$800 million. Man, can we do amazing things for Saskatchewan 
people — $800 million each and every year, Mr. Speaker. And 
imagine how great it would be for us to be able to stand up and 
say, you know, Prime Minister Harper kept his word. You 
know, Tom Lukiwski kept his word . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I heard a heckle, Mr. Speaker, that we’d like to see that. 
 
I will guarantee you that I will at my very first opportunity 
stand on my feet and thank them if they deliver on the energy 
accord. I will thank them. I will include in my MLA report — 
my newsletter — my thanks to Prime Minister Stephen Harper 
and my MP and others. I will be generous with praise, Mr. 
Speaker. But I hope and I pray that I can be generous at some 
point. It looks dark right now. It looks to me like what we have 
is a Conservative federal government that said anything they 
wanted that they thought we would want to hear before the 
election, and deliver exactly the opposite when it’s done. And 
for that, I say shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, I’m just going to go from a quote 
from The StarPhoenix on June 10, 2006. And this one is . . . 
again I referred to Prime Minister Harper and I just want people 
to know that it’s not just my opinion. I’m entitled to my opinion 
— so are others — but what matters is what he says and what is 
reported that he says. And I quote StarPhoenix, June 10, 2006 
on page A8: 
 

In an interview with a Calgary radio station, Harper again 
refused to commit to, and downplayed the significance of, 
the Tory pledge to exclude natural resource revenues from 
the equalization formula and [to] move to a 10-province 
standard — which would mean an estimated $900 million 
in extra federal funding for Saskatchewan annually. 

 
Well there we have it. The number went to 900. I’m sticking 
with 800. But you know, 800 million to one and a half billion 
. . . I’ll say thank you when it hits 800 million. No question 
about that. 
 
Leader-Post, June 15: 
 

It seems Prime Minister . . . Harper is about to renege on 
his campaign promise to remove Saskatchewan’s oil and 
gas resources from the controversial equalization formula. 

 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, just so that we are crystal clear about 
the complicity of all here, let me say I’m going to quote from 
the Prince Albert Daily Herald in October 5, 2006 where they 
say: 
 

As much fun as it might be to watch Tom Lukiwski, Carol 
Skelton, Brian Fitzpatrick and the rest of the federal 
Conservatives with ties to the Saskatchewan Party squirm 
a bit, Harper has already made it abundantly clear that 
losing a seat or two in Saskatchewan isn’t a big deal to 
him. He’d much rather remain in control of equalization 
and fiscal imbalance file so that he can use it as a tool to 
appease Quebec and Ontario. 

 



April 5, 2007 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

Well I think we’ve now got the Conservative agenda. 
Saskatchewan has three and a half — roughly — per cent of 
Canada’s population. We do have representation by population. 
We’ve got our appropriate . . . If you exclude one of the 
founding provinces, Prince Edward Island, which has a 
different formula . . . But we have arguably a fair number of 
MPs for our population. What we lack is a federal government 
that would be straight with us before, during, and after election 
with respect to what it is they believe should happen, say should 
happen, and don’t deliver. They should be delivering on their 
promises, on their written promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here . . . We actually have a federal 
Conservative MP who’s in the cabinet. One out of the 12 in 
Saskatchewan is in cabinet. That would be, that would be Ms. 
Skelton from Saskatoon. Now I just, I just want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I’ve got a few things that she said before and after, 
and I want to just see how this circle might be squared and who 
might be trying to square it. 
 
Federal Hansard, March 22, 2005, quote, “Saskatchewan is 
simply not getting its fair share out of equalization — Carol 
Skelton.” Well fast-forward to September 9, 2006 and Carol 
Skelton says that she rarely hears about equalization in her 
conversations with her constituents. Before and after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, March 22, 2005, quote: “. . . we cannot afford to 
wait forever for this federal government to attend to this 
problem,” says that member in federal Hansard, March 22, 
2005. 
 
In September 2006, the member 
 

. . . doesn’t see equalization as a politically critical issue 
for her Saskatchewan caucus colleagues. In fact, [in fact] 
she doesn’t even see it as an issue of much import to 
Saskatchewan people because “the average person in the 
street doesn’t understand it,” she said. 

 
Well imagine that. The average person in the street can’t 
understand it, according to Saskatchewan’s lone Conservative 
MP. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you the average person in 
the street in Saskatchewan does understand this. They do 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that a promise should be kept. They 
understand that a commitment made before and during an 
election campaign should not be ignored, downplayed, or 
eliminated like Stephen Harper and the federal Conservative 
Party are doing with this one. 
 
They understand when they have been misled, to put it as gently 
as I can. They understand. The people of Saskatchewan are 
much brighter than Ms. Skelton gives them credit for. The 
people of Saskatchewan understand. 
 
In March 22 that member said in Hansard, quote: 
 

We need . . . [an] NDP government in Saskatchewan to be 
supportive of our efforts to get a better deal for 
Saskatchewan . . . At the very least we need a provincial 
government that will hold the federal government to its 
constitutional obligations [says Carol Skelton]. 
 

I think that’s pretty unequivocal. 

September 9, September 9 she then says . . . That was then. 
Now she says, 
 

I don’t know. I guess I haven’t thought about . . . 
[equalization] that much. I haven’t heard anything about 
equalization. I get piles of e-mail and it’s just not a big 
issue. 

 
Well from “we need an NDP government in Saskatchewan to 
be supportive of our efforts” to “it’s not really much of an 
issue” — well which is it? What is it that Ms. Skelton says that 
we can believe? What has credibility? 
 
Is she going to have us believe that the people of Saskatchewan, 
her constituents, her riding constituents, vacillate that much? I 
don’t think so. That’s not been my experience. And I’ve never 
had one of my colleagues tell me that their constituents have 
flip-flopped to that, anything close to that. It is unbelievable, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a Hansard, March 22, 2005, I’ve got a 
quote. 
 
Just last week Prime Minister Harper visited Saskatoon but 
refused to substantially negotiate or disclose the equalization 
matter with our Premier — that from the same Saskatoon 
Member of Parliament, the same Conservative member, she 
said that. But when Stephen Harper came to Saskatchewan and 
refuses to discuss equalization now, the silence is deafening. 
The silence is absolutely deafening. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how is it, how is it that in 14 months or less, 
that a position can change so drastically? Is it a case of perhaps 
the Canadian economy has hit the skids? Well maybe, maybe 
there’s an argument to be made that the Canadian economy 
might be hitting the skids. I can tell you that’s not our 
experience in Saskatchewan. I can tell you that our experience 
here is one of record 20,000 more jobs March this year over 
March last year; record employment, 494,000 people working 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got reports of housing 
prices skyrocketing throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The point I’m making is simply — and everyone knows this, 
almost everyone knows it, almost everyone knows it — that the 
Saskatchewan economy is hotter than a Saturday night pistol. 
Things are just going great here, Mr. Speaker. We are doing 
incredibly well. Now federally, federally what we have is a 
situation where the federal government had things going their 
way. They’d won the election. They said some things before the 
election. Now they’re saying something different. 
 
And they have . . . well, Mr. Speaker, I want to move to one 
more Tory MP before the time runs out on me. And I want to go 
straight to a letter that was published in the Leader-Post 
December 21, 2006. What it says, this letter is from Brad Trost, 
the Conservative MP for Saskatoon-Humboldt: 
 

To the province of Saskatchewan, this would mean $800 
million a year according to Library of Parliament 
estimates. What could 800 million do for the province of 
Saskatchewan? What could it do for the people? 

 
I invite people . . . Because I’m advised that we’re in some . . . 
I’m advised that the opposition want to stop the clock, but if I 
don’t second this motion it might wind up lost. And I am 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2007 

therefore going to move straight to the motion in the interest of 
allowing my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place to take his place. I invite people to contact me; I have 
much more to say on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place: 

 
That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
parliament provide an apology to the people of 
Saskatchewan for breaking their election promise on the 
issue of equalization; and further, that this Legislative 
Assembly call upon the federal government to 
immediately negotiate a Saskatchewan Energy Accord. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place: 
 

That Saskatchewan’s 12 Conservative members of 
parliament provide an apology to the people of this 
province for breaking their election promise on the issue 
of equalization; and further, that this Legislative Assembly 
call upon the federal government to immediately negotiate 
a Saskatchewan Energy Accord. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to second the motion by my colleague, and I’ll 
have a few minutes to speak to it today. And then the opposition 
can rest assured, because they seem quite anxious to hear what I 
have to say, that I’ll certainly be continuing next week, Mr. 
Speaker, with a lot of material that I’ve compiled. 
 
But I want to start, Mr. Speaker, by saying that yesterday, I was 
quite surprised when I was listening to the radio because I had 
been reading the Regina Leader-Post early in the morning, and 
in the Leader-Post I read in an article by James Wood that Mr. 
Lukiwski, one of the Conservative MPs, three Conservative 
MPs elected in this city, Mr. Speaker, along with 12 MPs in 
total from the Conservative Party. 
 
But this is what he had to say, Mr. Speaker, about the promise 
by the Conservatives to deliver an equalization deal, a fair deal 
to the people of Saskatchewan which, as my colleague said, 
they said before the election, he said this, quote, and I’m 
quoting, Mr. Speaker, “If you want to say we didn’t fulfill the 
commitment or keep our promise, fair enough.” That’s what he 
said — not me, not my colleague, Mr. Speaker. This is what the 
Conservative MP from Regina said, Mr. Lukiwski. He said, “If 
you want to say we didn’t fulfill the commitment or keep our 
promise, fair enough.” Because of course everybody knows 
they didn’t keep the promise. 
 
But do you know what they were doing simultaneously, Mr. 
Speaker? In the Leader-Post he admits he didn’t keep the 
promise, and at the same time on the radio which I heard 

driving in my car over here yesterday, they say this among 
other things. They have a very pleasant woman’s voice on the 
radio, and she says, “The Conservative Party kept their 
promise.” 
 
Now imagine this, Mr. Speaker. In the newspaper, Mr. 
Lukiwski says, we didn’t keep our promise, and on the radio he 
is running an ad that says the Conservatives kept their promise. 
I mean, there’s dishonesty, Mr. Speaker, going on even the 
same day — one thing said in the paper and another thing on 
the radio. 
 
And I’m going to have a lot more to say about it, Mr. Speaker, 
and in the course of my remarks as I continue, I’m going to be 
quoting from a very good book that I just started reading. And 
do you know what it’s called, Mr. Speaker? It’s called Lies and 
the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at 
the Right. 
 
And I’m really looking forward to reading some quotes from 
this book, Mr. Speaker, because this is what the author Al 
Franken has to say about Conservative politicians, and I intend 
to detail this, Mr. Speaker. He says this: 
 

We have to be more than vigilant. We have to fight back. 
We have to expose those who bear false witness for the 
false witness bearers that they are. And we have to do it in 
a straightforward, plainspoken way. Let’s call them what 
they are: liars. Lying, lying liars. 
 

That’s what the book Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them 
says, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to refer to this book, and I’m 
going to talk about what the Conservative MPs who now 
represent this province supposedly in Ottawa had to say before 
the election and what they say after the election. And I’m going 
to talk about what Mr. Lukiwski says in the Leader-Post which 
is that they are not keeping their promise at the same time as 
those Conservative MPs, Mr. Speaker are running ads on the 
radio that tell the people of Regina that they’re keeping their 
promise which, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of 1 o’clock, this 
House stands adjourned until Wednesday, pursuant to an order 
of this Assembly, at 1:30 p.m. 
 
I take this opportunity also to wish all members a little break 
from their intensive debate and a very, very happy Easter with 
their families and friends. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................1203 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
 Bill No. 6 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Amendment Act, 2006 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
 Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Easter Wishes 
  Toth......................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 
 Spring and Rebirth 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Kenaston Pee Wees Win Northern Finals 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Paragon Awards 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1207 
 March Job Numbers 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1207 
 Carriere Questions Remain Unanswered 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1207 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Location of Saskatoon Youth Facility 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
 Plans for Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1209 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1209 
 



 

 Compensation for Forestry Secretariat Executive 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1210 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1211 
 Management of Harassment Complaints 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Records Second Highest Land Sale 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1212 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 The Murdoch Carriere Case 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................1213, 1224 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1216, 1224 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Hamilton ........................................................................................................................................................................1218, 1224 
  Morin .............................................................................................................................................................................1219, 1224 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1224 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1225 
  Hagel (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................1225 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................1225 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 —Equalization and an Energy Accord 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1226 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


