




















































Hansard: April 02, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 19A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 531 

 April 2, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to advise members that Mr. Speaker will not 

be present today to open today‟s daily sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly today, there 

are 19 grade 8 students from the community of Milestone that 

are here today. Their teacher is David Hawkins. And I had the 

opportunity to meet with this group prior to coming into the 

House today, and they had some great questions. It was great to 

talk to them. 

 

The interesting part was, as I mentioned to Mr. Hawkins, how 

long he‟s been bringing classes here because I remember him 

bringing a class here almost every year as long as I‟ve been 

here. And it was coincidence enough that he has been teaching 

in Milestone for eight years, about as long as I have been here. 

So certainly great to see them here. 

 

As I said they had some great questions. I know it‟s a great 

school. One of the questions was how did I ever get involved in 

politics or why did I think about getting involved in politics? 

And I said at the time there was a teacher that I had in 

Milestone High School that I think certainly lit the flame a little 

bit as to my interest in politics. And who knows, the next MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Indian 

Head-Milestone may be sitting in that gallery right now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I‟d like all members to again 

welcome them here to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I want to introduce five very special 

people in your gallery. I‟m going to ask them to stand. Starting 

with my oldest daughter, Angela, and my favourite son-in-law, 

Robert — he‟s also my only son-in-law. My oldest 

granddaughter — I forget your name — Brianne. And Jayden. 

And I want you to know that these two girls go to school in 

Martensville and Warman. And then my oldest grandson, 

Terrell, is here from Edmonton. He‟s a hockey player and he‟s 

spending his holidays out here. 

 

And I just want to thank them for their love and their support 

and their patience with me. I know that being an elected person 

isn‟t always easy when it comes to family life. So in front of 

everyone today, I just want to thank you for being here and 

helping me to balance work and family. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today to you and through you I‟d like to introduce, 

seated in your gallery, three employees from SaskEnergy who 

have joined us to watch the proceedings. We have Dave 

Burdeniuk, the manager of corporate communications. If you 

can just give us a wave there, Dave. Thank you. Seated with 

Dave are communications officer Rachel Sala and Rebecca 

Rogoschewsky. With a name like Cheveldayoff I should know 

that. Rogoschewsky is 12 letters, you know. 

 

Rachel is the author of the SaskEnergy annual report. I‟ll have 

the honour of tabling this year‟s edition later this month. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, Rachel won a national energy industry award for 

her writing of SaskEnergy‟s annual report last year. 

 

This is also Rebecca‟s second day on the job as a 

communications officer, after recently moving to Regina from 

Saskatoon. I‟m not sure if I totally agree with that, but we wish 

you well in your new surroundings. I understand her sister 

Jessica just received good news after recently returning to 

Saskatchewan from Edmonton, as Jessica has been accepted to 

a nursing training seat in Swift Current starting this fall. Way to 

go. 

 

I‟d ask all members to please join me in welcoming these three 

civil servants to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

sitting in your gallery today are two representatives from the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. As you know the 

Human Rights Commission does important work in educating 

and promoting the simple but powerful concept that every 

person is free and equal. The commission investigates 

complaints of discrimination, promotes and approves equity 

programs with employers, and educates people about human 

rights law in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I‟ll ask them to stand up. Marilou McPhedran is the chief 

commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

She has brought a tremendous blend of practical and scholarly 

experience to the Human Rights Commission. She is joined by 

Rebecca McLellan who is the manager of operation at the 

Human Rights Commission. 

 

I will have a little bit more to say later on in a ministerial 

statement about the commission and about Ms. McPhedran. But 

I would like to ask at this time that all members of legislature 

make them feel welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 

rise here today to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly a group of athletes seated 

in the Speaker‟s gallery. They are members of Team 

Saskatchewan which competed in the 2008 Special Olympics 

National Winter Games in Quebec City from February 26 to 

March 1. 

 

These athletes, coaches, and mission staff have every reason to 

be proud of their achievements in Quebec City. There were 31 

athletes competing in various events. In total, Mr. Speaker, they 

won 21 medals. There were twelve gold, six silver, and three 

bronze medals. As well as these medals, several of our athletes 

achieved their personal best performances at this meet. 

 

I would ask each of these athletes to stand as I introduce you. 

And I understand Dwight Safroniuk had to leave today because 

of a family emergency, but Dwight Safroniuk; Adam Sanden; 

and Justin wasn‟t able to make it here today, Justin Duong was 

not able to make it; Terry Livingstone; Mike Martin; Robbie 

Bomboir; Lauren Weigel; and her mom, Beatrice Weigel. 

 

Now Adam competed in alpine skiing and won three gold 

medals. Terry Livingstone competed in speed skating and won 

two gold medals and one bronze medal. Mike Martin competed 

in floor hockey. Robbie Bomboir competed in floor hockey. 

Lauren Weigel, figure skating team and did very well, she did 

place fourth. And she‟s the youngest athlete competing at the 

Special Olympics. 

 

Also joining us today are alpine ski coach, Rick Sanden — 

please stand — floor hockey coach, Daryl Wiebe; team 

manager and director of programs, Crystal Thiessen; Howard 

Schweitzer, CEO [chief executive officer] of Special Olympics 

Saskatchewan; Roger Dumont, director of operations. 

 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan is the organization responsible 

for all aspects of team development and participation at the 

Special Olympic Games. They receive annual funding from 

Saskatchewan Trust and supplement their operations with 

various sponsorship and fundraising efforts. The motto of 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan is, “Let me win, but if I cannot 

win, let me be brave in the attempt.” 

 

This is a pretty inspiring message, Mr. Speaker, for all of us, 

and I commend all the athletes who participated in the 2008 

Special Olympic Winter Games for their bravery, their 

determination, and their self-discipline. Please join me today in 

welcoming them to the House and congratulating all the 

athletes, their coaches, the entire organization on representing 

Saskatchewan so well at the Special Olympics. You have made 

us all very proud. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join with the 

minister in welcoming guests to their legislature today. I have 

family who have participated in Special Olympics and as such 

have attended many of their events and fundraisers. I am also a 

former Team Saskatchewan competitor and understand the 

dedication and hard work it takes both by athletes, but also by 

the parents and volunteers that help with them as well. So I‟d 

like to congratulate both the participants, but also the family 

members and volunteers that support them, and congratulate 

them on a very successful games in Quebec. And good luck in 

the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is one special 

friend of mine in that group, and that‟s the operations manager, 

Roger Dumont, who . . . The Dumonts have a cottage next to 

our cottage, and so we share some occasional campfire and that 

as the summer progresses. Anyway this is the first opportunity 

I‟ve had to welcome Roger Dumont to the legislature. And it‟s 

good to see you. I look forward to seeing you a bit more in 

cottage season. Please welcome my friend and neighbour, 

Roger Dumont. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on behalf of 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning the 

withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and the 

withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about the labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Regina, Davidson, and 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have several 

pages of petitions signed by citizens concerned about the 

cancellation of funding or withdrawal of funding for Station 20. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately restore funding to the 

Station 20 project. 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by citizens in every neighbourhood in 

Saskatoon and I believe one in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I‟m 

very pleased to present a petition that, if supported, would 

improve health care service and delivery in Moose Jaw and the 

Five Hills area. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of all 

residents of Moose Jaw. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Canada’s Next Great Prime Minister 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to highlight the accomplishment of Dr. Alika 

Lafontaine who recently won the CBC‟s [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Canada‟s Next Great Prime Minister 

competition. 

 

Alika was one of four finalists selected from hundreds of young 

aspiring politicians. The finalists had to face questioning from 

past prime ministers Turner, Campbell, and Martin, as well as 

current Premier of Newfoundland and Labrador, Danny 

Williams. Alika‟s platform focused on the need for Canada to 

establish a new relationship with Aboriginal peoples. 

 

Alika is originally from Regina and has most recently attended 

the University of Saskatchewan, receiving a medical degree. He 

is currently completing his second year of residency in the 

specialty of anaesthesiology, also at the U of S. 

 

I do not know Alika well, but I have had the chance to meet him 

on one occasion. I found him to be an engaging person who 

truly cares for his community and province. Despite this notable 

accomplishment, Alika is not letting the win get to his head. He 

reports that his splurge item as a reward was a new four-slice 

toaster. So it sounds like he‟s staying well grounded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure we can expect Dr. Lafontaine to make a 

significant contribution to our province in the years to come. I 

ask all members to join me in congratulating Dr. Alika 

Lafontaine for being named Canada‟s Next Great Prime 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

[13:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

World Autism Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is a very important day. On December 18, 2007, the United 

Nations General Assembly declared April 2 each year to be 

World Autism Awareness Day. It‟s a day to set aside to raise 

awareness about autism throughout society and to encourage 

early diagnosis and early intervention. In recognition of this 

day, the Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to announce 

that an advisory group representing health care and 

community-based organizations has been established. 

 

This group will make recommendations on the most effective 

use of $3 million in annual provincial funding for autism 

services. Mr. Speaker, about one in every 166 children born in 

Saskatchewan develops autism, and they need our help. This 

advisory group is a step in the right direction. The government 

will listen to the best advice on what combinations of therapies, 

training, and other supports will make the biggest difference for 

these children and their families. This newly formed advisory 

group will begin meeting this spring to discuss and provide 

suggestions for new autism intervention services and supports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to recognize 

World Autism Awareness Day. Our hearts go out to the 

children, adults, and their families dealing with autism. Mr. 

Speaker, as somebody with a family member who has autism, 

I‟d like to extend my sincere appreciation to the stakeholders, 

advocacy groups, and health care professionals who work hard 

to bring awareness to autism day in and day out. Looking at the 

best ways to provide early diagnosis and intervention are key 

aspects to improving communication, socialization, and other 

abilities in autistic individuals. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

2008 Woman of Distinction Award 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had the 

pleasure of attending the eighth annual Women with 

Disabilities luncheon on March 7. This luncheon, held in 

recognition of International Women‟s Day, celebrates the 

wonderful contributions women make, including those living 

with a disability. 

 

The 2008 Woman of Distinction Award was given to Donna 

Duxbury of Saskatoon. First diagnosed with multiple sclerosis 

in 1977, Donna became active in helping others. She started a 

local MS [multiple sclerosis] support group, then a local MS 

chapter in Weyburn and area in 1985. 

 

Donna went on to serve as president of the Saskatchewan Voice 

of People with Disabilities. During her time the North 

Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre was established. 

Work was done in northern Saskatchewan to educate First 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

Nations people with disabilities on how to establish a voice of 

their own. From those efforts, the Gary Pinker federation in La 

Ronge was established. 

 

Donna went on to represent the Voice nationally on the Council 

of Canadians with Disabilities. She has the MS Society‟s 

Certificate of Merit and the Certificate of Inspiration and the 

Award of Distinction. All of these awards highlight just a few 

of the contributions Donna has made to the disability movement 

over the past 20 years. Donna is now semi-retired and is 

volunteering with new immigrants in a transition to life here in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Donna on her very well-deserved award and wish her the very 

best in her future. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Special Olympic Silver Medal Winners 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the 

pleasure today to tell this House about five young people from 

my constituency — a curling team who proudly are now 

sporting silver medals from the Special Olympic National 

Winter Games in Quebec City. The people of Melfort and area 

share in their pride and excitement. We are proud of their 

achievement in Quebec City, but we are also just as proud of 

the many tasks they accomplished in preparation for the winter 

games. 

 

Since they qualified, skip Danny Fiedelleck and his team have 

spent many hours practising as a team. They also curled in 

regular leagues with people in and around Melfort. There were 

bonspiels to play, fundraising events to work at, and many 

things to learn. Coach Wikstrom said the preparation and travel 

experience was wonderful for her team. Through it all they 

were able to renew many friendships and make new friends, and 

have fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to ask the members of the 

legislature to join me in congratulating skip Danny Fiedelleck, 

third Scot Earl, second Lorin Bussiere, and lead and alternatives 

Rodney Mitchell and Rachel Lumberjack, along with their 

coach Dorothy Wikstrom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Contributing to Community 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed my 

honour to highlight the efforts and to thank Western Christian 

College and High School for their contributions within our 

community. President Mr. Kevin Vance shares that their 

programs promote learning in a safe, secure, and caring 

atmosphere with an emphasis on personal growth and maturity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Western Christian extends its contributions well 

beyond the classroom. Examples . . . a program called 

Encounter which is designed to help first-year students serve 

the world and experience their faith, a program called Reach 

invites at-risk students from the inner city and provides the 

supports necessary for them to finish high school. 

 

Each year Western Christian partners with the Regina and 

District Food Bank to raise funds for the great Canadian benefit 

dinner. Western Christian also provides its facility free of 

charge to several charities each year, including the North 

Central Family Centre, Options Pregnancy Center, and Santa‟s 

Anonymous, among others. I should also make mention of its 

tremendous food services. I have a very fond heart of their 

kitchen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank Mr. Vance, the board of directors, all of 

the staff, the volunteers, sponsors, alumni, and students of 

Western Christian College, past and present, for their enriching 

contributions to our community. I ask all the members of this 

Assembly to join me in extending thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Oil Sands Development 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we finally learned 

the true NDP [New Democratic Party] position with regards to 

the development of the Saskatchewan oil sands. The Leader of 

the Opposition, his Environment critic, and other members of 

the NDP caucus participated in a protest on the steps of this 

building, demanding our government shut down all oil sands 

activity. 

 

For some time the NDP position on oil sands development has 

been ambiguous. Some might even say they were attempting to 

hide their true agenda. But now we know the truth. The NDP 

want to shut down all current and future oil sands activity. 

Maybe this shouldn‟t be a surprise though. The federal NDP 

leader has long maintained that all oil sands activity should be 

shut down. A former NDP cabinet minister, Peter Prebble, has 

even demanded that all oil sands exploration be shut down. 

 

Well that‟s not the position of this government. We believe that 

sustainable and environmentally conscious oil sands 

development holds great promise for the future of our province. 

We believe that the billions of dollars of investment, thousands 

of jobs, and hope and opportunity for the people of northwest 

Saskatchewan is a positive development. Our government‟s 

committed to making it happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn‟t get the job done when they were 

in government, and now we know why. The NDP might ally 

themselves with the radical left, but we are going to ally 

ourselves with the future of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

Red Cross Honours Life Savers 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are not many that can say they had 

the opportunity to save a life, but recently the Red Cross 

honoured four Moose Jaw life savers in a ceremony held at the 

Cornerstone Christian School. 

 

On October 18, 2007, Mr. Bill Green, a teacher at Cornerstone 

Christian School, saved a child from a flaming car crash. Mr. 

Green describes his response as automatic and said, “You see 

something that has to be done and you just do it.” Mr. Green 

said post-traumatic stress counselling allowed him to remain 

healthy after the accident. 

 

Ms. Kristin Carter was at her shift at Harwood‟s restaurant at 

the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa and stayed calm when she 

noticed a woman choking. She offered her help, but it was 

declined. But Kristin, a little persistent, called the front desk for 

an ambulance. Upon returning to the choking woman, her offer 

for help was then accepted, and Kristin managed to dislodge a 

piece of food. Ms. Carter‟s comment was, “I didn‟t realize what 

I had done until my co-workers said congratulations, good 

work.” 

 

Sara and Johnny Renaud were visiting Johnny‟s parents when a 

continued barking of the family dogs drew their attention to the 

pool. Their 16-month old son had fallen in. The father brought 

Dylan inside, called 911, and Sara performed CPR 

[cardiopulmonary resuscitation] to save her son. 

 

Life-saving skills and training are critical in emergencies, and 

the average response time in Canada is eight minutes. 

Permanent brain damage can start in four to six minutes. Mr. 

Speaker, the Red Cross regional council vice-president, Scott 

Osmachenko, said the four had exhibited the power of humanity 

by volunteering to save lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to please 

help me in congratulating these four outstanding citizens of 

Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Developments in Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today is a 

solemn day in Hudson Bay. Weyerhaeuser announced this 

morning that their OSB [oriented strand board] plant, directly 

employing 170 people, would be indefinitely shut down by 

early July. 

 

Similar announcements have recently been made in other 

communities. The Saskatchewan Party has also abandoned the 

people of Prince Albert, the people of Big River, the people of 

Carrot River. There aren‟t many Saskatchewan communities 

with forestry assets left for that minister to abandon. 

 

Can the Minister of Energy and Resources reassure the people 

of Saskatchewan today that he hasn‟t abandoned this file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank that member for his 

question. And our hearts truly go out to the workers at Hudson 

Bay facility today, and the whole community. It‟s no doubt a 

very difficult announcement for them. 

 

We will be working, Mr. Speaker, with Weyerhaeuser to help 

facilitate the reopening of that facility or hopefully to continue 

to keep it open. And failing that, we‟ll help Weyerhaeuser to 

find new owners to reopen the plant if it comes to an actual 

closure. But rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that we will work with 

the community and Weyerhaeuser to alleviate this situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I can assure you that they‟re not resting 

assured now. When I last raised questions about the Prince 

Albert mill in this Chamber, the Ministry of Energy and 

Resources assured me that negotiations were taking place, and 

he promised that, and I quote, “. . . in a few short weeks we 

think we‟ll have a conclusion to this . . .” 

 

And he shouted across the way that when this happened I and 

my colleagues wouldn‟t be happy. Well, Mr. Speaker, today 

we‟re not happy, and neither are the people of Hudson Bay, the 

people of Prince Albert, or the rest of this province. 

 

To the minister: if yet another plant shutdown is the result of 

four months of his work on this file, when will he admit that 

he‟s the problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question as well. The Saskatchewan Party is focused on making 

the forest industry more competitive, whether it be Prince 

Albert or Hudson Bay or any of the other plants in the province 

— mostly shut down by the NDP. The industry association and 

the Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries seems to believe 

that we‟re on the right track with that. 

 

I‟ve talked with the mayor of Hudson Bay this morning, Mr. 

Speaker, and together we‟re examining ways that the 

community development trust money can be used to help 

affected communities. And that money will be dedicated almost 

entirely to communities that have been affected by plant 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

closures in the forestry industry. And I think that the mayor is 

quite satisfied with that approach as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — The member well knows that that funding is 

supposed to support these workers to find another industry to 

work in — cold comfort, I‟m sure. Mr. Speaker, it‟s been over a 

month since the minister gave Domtar the government‟s 

proposal. For nearly three weeks they‟ve been sitting on their 

counteroffer. In the meantime, the Hudson Bay OSB plant has 

been indefinitely closed. 

 

Let me remind members at this time what that Premier said 

when he was in opposition. I‟ll quote. “Anything less than a 

timetable for reopening the Prince Albert mill will amount to a 

failure . . .” His words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only have they declined to set a timetable in this case, but 

their mismanagement has cost the people of Hudson Bay their 

plant as well. 

 

Will the minister admit today that by his own Premier‟s 

definition that he is a complete and utter failure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question as well. Under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And this member hasn‟t been here long, Mr. Speaker, so I want 

to give him a little education on the NDP‟s track record in 

forestry. Under that NDP government, Mr. Speaker, five mills 

closed — Wapawekka, Carrot River, Big River, pulp mill in 

Prince Albert, and the plywood mill at Hudson Bay. That‟s the 

second, second mill that‟s under some threat in the town of 

Hudson Bay and the third one in the region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2006 the NDP Environment minister 

commissioned a competitive report and since then, and since 

then with more than a year, about a year and a half since that 

report was completed — before that government was defeated, 

Mr. Speaker — they made no moves to take action on any of 

those recommendations. Their only action was to hire their 

friend Tom Waller at $400,000 for 13 months to look into . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ll see tomorrow whether the 

members from Prince Albert Carlton and Carrot River Valley 

support a provincial budget which does nothing for forestry and 

which is anything but ready for growth in this industry. 

 

Let‟s review their mismanagement on this file. The member 

from Batoche chaired a task force with no findings. Three times 

the Premier was in Prince Albert, during and before the 

election, to say that they had a plan to reopen that mill. There 

was no plan. 

 

The member for Prince Albert Carlton took out ads in the 

newspaper in Prince Albert saying that a vote for him was a 

vote for the mill open and people working. Clearly that‟s not 

the case. The Minister of Energy and Resources claimed to have 

spoken with Domtar and had communications with them when 

clearly no discussions had taken place. Now another shutdown. 

 

To the minister: why on earth should families and forestry 

communities have any faith in his failed leadership? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, people in forestry country 

should have faith in this administration because negotiations 

have been going on with Domtar, a plant that closed under their 

watch and because they wouldn‟t do some very simple things. 

Mr. Speaker, negotiations are going on to reopen that plant and 

I understand we‟re not far away from some sort of an 

announcement there. And I just ask that member to be patient. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Clean Coal Project 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier promised 

to get Saskatchewan a better deal than equalization. Well he did 

get us $240 million and so far Saskatchewan taxpayers are on 

the hook for at least 1.16 billion additional dollars. 

 

Surely the government wouldn‟t have put taxpayer dollars at 

risk without a plan. Surely the minister has a business plan, an 

MOU [memorandum of understanding], or even the napkin that 

the deal was drawn up on. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]: where is the paper trail to show 

you‟ve done due diligence? Or are you prepared today to admit 

that the Prime Minister pulled a fast one on the Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister for the 

Crowns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for the question. I‟m very pleased to talk about the clean coal 

demonstration project that was announced in the federal budget 

and officially announced by the Prime Minister and the Premier 

just last week in Estevan. 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

I‟d like to remind all members that Saskatchewan lobbied for 

the $240 million. It was a competitive process. Alberta wanted 

it; Ontario wanted it; other provinces wanted it. And we were 

successful here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Two hundred and forty out of 

$250 million in it were allocated to Saskatchewan. Yes, the 

federal government and the Prime Minister saw confidence in 

Saskatchewan, in SaskPower, and in this government, and we 

intend to take them up on their confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the clean coal prototype project for 

our province will cost in excess of $1.4 billion. The Harper 

government committed only 240 million. Saskatchewan people 

are increasingly concerned about being on the hook for the 

more than $1.16 billion that remain before there‟s a single 

penny in the cost overrun. In February the Minister Responsible 

for CIC said the government would look to the private sector 

for additional funding and that he hoped that there might be 

offset by the sales of carbon dioxide. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC: is there a single MOU 

with the private sector for the project, or are you telling the 

people of Saskatchewan to cross your fingers and hope that 

some private-funding white knight will come along? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite clear that 

we couldn‟t have an MOU in place because there was a 

competitive process where we lobbied for this money. We were 

successful for that. The financing is very clear — $240 million 

from the federal government; SaskPower is going to pay $758 

million. And I‟d explain to all members that capital 

commitments within SaskPower are in the 400 to $500 million 

range. 

 

But the important question, Mr. Speaker, is, where do the NDP 

stand on this? Where does the NDP stand on clean coal 

technology? It wasn‟t too long ago . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There‟s a few members 

having conversations across the floor. I‟d appreciate it if they 

take it behind the bar. I recognize the Minister for the Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It wasn‟t 

very long ago that the NDP put all their eggs in one basket. 

They looked at the cost. All of a sudden they went from 1.8 

billion to over $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? They 

walked away. They washed their hands of it, and was there any 

additional planning done after that? None. Is that a responsible 

way to conduct business? No. Is that something that this 

government will follow? No. You will see action on this 

project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So there‟s no due diligence having been done. 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower president Pat Youzwa has been very 

clear that the $1.16 billion price tag for the clean coal prototype 

project will be passed on to power consumers and that rate 

increases will come in waves. The Premier and his cabinet 

signed on to an agreement, apparently without a plan, that they 

now claim will be better than equalization somehow. And 

instead of getting $800 million a year put into the provincial 

coffers, the agreement puts more than . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d like to hear the 

question being put, and I‟d also like the answer to be heard. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And instead of putting 

$800 million additional into the provincial coffers, the 

agreement puts more than $1 billion at risk, and it guarantees 

Saskatchewan families are going to pay more for their power. 

 

To the minister: when can consumers expect the first tidal wave 

of rate increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

residents know that it will cost more money to reach these 

targets. They know that Saskatchewan residents as well as 

every other province in the country will have to pay more to 

reach these targets. 

 

The more important question is, how could the NDP when they 

were in government set the targets with no intention of reaching 

them? How were you going to reach those targets without clean 

coal technology? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It‟s getting increasingly hard 

to hear the question and the answer. I recognize the Minister for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll just 

reiterate. If the NDP set these emission targets without clean 

coal, how were they going to ever reach these targets? That‟s 

the question, Mr. Speaker. And the question that is being asked 

— I believe by members of their own party and members that 

they‟ve lost to the Green Party — is do they actually, do they 

actually support clean coal technology at all? We would like to 

hear an answer on that one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Government Agreement With Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Speaking of 

due diligence, aside from being April Fool‟s Day yesterday, 

yesterday was significant in that it marked the first transfer of 

funds from health regions to the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses], regional health authorities fund that was agreed upon 

in the memorandum of understanding between the minister and 

SUN signed in February of this year. 

 

The members opposite say they are transparent and accountable 

when it comes to taxpayers‟ dollars, but the lip service isn‟t 

cutting it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As such, the minister should 

move past petty politics and strive to answer questions fully and 

accurately. 

 

I‟ll start off with an easy one. Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 

Minister of Health. According to the SUN MOU, the first 

transfer of resources from the health regions was supposed to 

take place yesterday. Tick-tock, Mr. Speaker. The clock is 

ticking. Will the minister please tell the taxpayers today how 

much money was transferred from the regions to the 

SUN-health regions fund as of April 1? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

And yes, the clock is running, and the nice part about that clock 

is every time it ticks or it tocks, there are more nurses working 

here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we set a goal of 

increasing the number of nurses by 800 over the next four 

years, and we‟re well on our way to meeting that goal. Part of 

that goal was sign a partnership with the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses, which is precedent-setting across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. I have answered the question many times, that there 

are many details of that partnership that need to be worked out. 

 

I am very proud to announce that early next week the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, along with SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations], CEOs 

from the different health regions, with the facilitator of great 

ability, Marlene Smadu, will be holding their first meeting next 

week, and work will start on that partnership, which we‟re very 

proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The question 

again: how much money was transferred from the regions as of 

yesterday, according to the MOU, to the fund? And the second 

part . . . How much money from the regions was transferred; it 

was 40 per cent. Now 60 per cent of that is to come from the 

ministry itself. The MOU states, and I quote: 

 

Effective April 1/2008, each Health Region shall 

contribute funding to each Health Region/SUN Retention 

and Recruitment fund equal to 40% of the monthly salary 

and benefit costs of each RN and RPN vacancy that 

existed on November 1/2007, with Saskatchewan Health 

contributing the remaining 60%. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister please tell the public how 

much money was transferred yesterday from the health regions 

to the SUN-RHA [regional health authority] fund? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re really looking 

forward to the results of the meeting early next week between 

the partners — Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, the CEOs, as well as SUN — through the work 

of Marlene Smadu. As I said in previous answers, that there‟s a 

number of issues that have to be worked through, including the 

issue around vacancies and what does that exactly mean, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the one thing that I will say that I‟m very proud of our 

government is not only have we talked about it but we put the 

money behind it. We have put $60 million into a fund that will 

be used to fill the vacancies going forward. 

 

Unlike that government, which number one, Mr. Speaker, 

would never set targets. Because why? Because we wouldn‟t 

meet the targets, Mr. Speaker. What an absolutely ridiculous 

excuse not to move forward. You know, Mr. Speaker, we have 

set a target of 800 nurses to recruit into Saskatchewan. We have 

to set those targets. Provinces like Ontario have set targets of 

9,000 nurses, Mr. Speaker. We need to be competitive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have asked 

the minister two simple questions about money. He has been 

able to answer neither of them. I guess he doesn‟t know the 

answer, so I‟m just going to ask him if he could actually maybe 

pick a number. Some of his colleagues tend to do that — say, 

the Minister of Social Services; she can do that on the fly. So to 

the minister: can you pick a ballpark number for the funds that 

were transferred yesterday since you don‟t know a real number? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, this 

opposition . . . this government . . . that opposition is certainly 

scared of picking numbers, Mr. Speaker. For many, many years 

when we saw a health care shortage, whether it‟s doctors or 

nurses, they wouldn‟t pick a number because they couldn‟t 

reach it. We said, well try 50. Can you attract 50 nurses to this 

province? And they didn‟t want to set that target because they 

wouldn‟t reach it, Mr. Speaker. This government, this new 

Saskatchewan Party government is certainly not afraid of 

picking numbers. We set the target of 800 new nurses in the 

next four years; we‟re well on our way. 

 

As far as the money going into the partnership — I‟ve answered 

it many, many times and I wish she would listen to this — is 

that the fact is there‟s many details that have to be worked out. 

That meeting starts next week, Mr. Speaker. We‟re certainly 

looking forward to the results of that meeting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 

Association of Labour Lawyers is an organization consisting of 

more than 300 lawyers who represent working people across 

our country. According to an open letter they recently sent to 

the Minister of Labour, the government‟s interference in the 

Labour Relations Board, I want to quote this: 

 

Public confidence in the Labour Relations Board is eroded 

when its decision makers are removed before the 

scheduled end of their terms for what appears to be 

political reasons. For tribunals to be able to interpret laws 

impartially and without fear of reprisal, security of tenure 

must be respected. 

 

Will the minister admit that his political interference has 

undermined legal rights of people who work in our workplaces 

across the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our government is 

committed to ensuring that the Labour Relations Board delivers 

timely, responsive, and effective services to Saskatchewan‟s 

labour relations community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact as we look back to previous cases in the 

Labour Relations Board — and this has recently come out in a 

court case — we can see that obviously there were delays, that 

the people of Saskatchewan were not being well served. As part 

of our renewal, Mr. Speaker, a leadership change was required 

at the Labour Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are being well served by the new board Chair 

who‟s capable, competent, and qualified to serve in that 

capacity. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well the minister has had over a month to fix 

the mess that he created when he decided to damn the 

torpedoes, axe the Labour Relations Board, and hire a Sask 

Party buddy to fill the void. He‟s never been able to explain 

some pretty fundamental questions to the public but today we‟re 

going to ask him a simple one. Can he at least provide the 

members of this House with an update as to how close he is to a 

settlement with the outgoing fired members of the Labour 

Relations Board — the Chair and the Vice-Chairs. Can he 

finally explain to the taxpayers how much his bungling is going 

to cost the people of our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously those negotiations 

are still under way but I think the more important question, Mr. 

Speaker, and when we talk about labour relations in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we can turn and say, are the 

members opposite going to actually be supportive of essential 

services, Mr. Speaker? Are they going to actually come forward 

and step forward and say that public safety balanced with the 

right to strike is going to be a priority not just on this side but 

on that side, Mr. Speaker? These are the kinds of questions this 

province wants to know answers to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Outside the House a couple of weeks ago the 

minister admitted that he had absolutely no idea what was going 

to happen to the 30-some cases that are before the Labour 

Relations Board. And in fact there‟s one case that was in 

mid-hearing. We don‟t know if those cases have to start over 

from scratch. Do they continue hearing from the new Chair? Do 

they continue with the old Chair? What is the status of those 

cases? And I wonder if the minister could shed any light on the 

status of those cases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said in this Chamber, 

as I‟ve said I‟m not prepared to speak about individual cases, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s not appropriate, Mr. Speaker, obviously. 

What we see, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of this province 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

are being well served by a capable, qualified, competent board 

Chair, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what we see. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there are employers and 

employees that were before the Labour Relations Board and are 

waiting to hear on 30-some cases. There was a hearing that was 

. . . There was a hearing, Mr. Speaker, that was in the middle of 

the arguments from both the employer and the employees. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I recognize the 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, there are 30 cases before 

the board. One was in mid-hearing. These people are waiting to 

hear. They have not heard from the new Chair of the Labour 

Relations Board. Do they have to start over? Are the outgoing 

members, the fired members, going to hear these cases? What is 

the status? And can the member confirm that they have to 

negotiate a settlement with the Vice-Chair and the Chair before 

there‟ll be any work done on those 30 cases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the member 

opposite is so attentive because then she‟ll know that some of 

the cases went back to 2004, Mr. Speaker. Obviously there was 

a change required, Mr. Speaker, as far as renewal. That‟s what 

this government is about, offering elements of renewal. Mr. 

Speaker, thank you. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to Lead 

Business Enabling Initiative 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 

Mr. Speaker, the Enterprise Saskatchewan interim advisory 

board met earlier this week for the first time and is already 

helping our government push the competitive envelope. 

 

First it moved quickly to begin work on refining one of the best 

practice examples of professional governance for a board in 

partnership with government. A governance committee was 

immediately struck along with other key boards, committees, 

and processes. 

 

Second the new board has already reviewed the future 

organizational design of Enterprise Saskatchewan. They are 

satisfied with our current plan, Mr. Speaker. 

Third, Mr. Speaker, the Enterprise Saskatchewan board has 

agreed to accept my recommendation to oversee and monitor a 

major new initiative which will be soon launched. That is, Mr. 

Speaker, the business enabling initiative which will focus on 

ways to enhance the quality and ease of customer service to 

business, especially for smaller sized enterprises. Mr. Speaker, 

the initiative will also examine ways to minimize excessive red 

tape and modernize and streamline our regulatory systems. 

 

In the coming weeks, Mr. Speaker, a new advisory council will 

be created to work with Enterprise Saskatchewan board and 

staff to directly assist them as a focus sounding board to take up 

this challenge. We see the new business enabling initiative 

encompassing a number of specific outcomes. The overall 

intent is to make Saskatchewan one of the most customer 

friendly and responsive places for small business and other 

enterprises to interact with its government, as well as one of the 

most modern and streamlined regulatory environments in which 

to do business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few key areas and specific projects under this 

Enterprise Saskatchewan-led initiative will be measures and 

targets for reducing regulatory burden to business; facilitating 

and streamlining the process of registering a business; 

improving service delivery, including one-stop web services; 

reducing unnecessary red tape and paperwork, and modernizing 

our regulatory framework. The end result will be more 

consistent and high quality service standards for business, more 

one window service, and less time and pain for smaller 

businesses trying to navigate through the current maze of red 

tape and complex regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a large but important undertaking and will 

not be accomplished overnight. In future months, both 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and the government will make further 

announcements. But, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased with the 

immediate strategy already identified with the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board‟s first meeting as a major indication of 

how committed this talented new board is to making real 

progress and guiding economic development in Saskatchewan. 

And may I say on a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to be 

associated with this board of fine people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to first of all 

thank the minister for providing me with a copy of his 

ministerial statement. If his cabinet colleagues had been half as 

interested in it as I was, I would‟ve been able to hear him 

deliver it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I note that, I note that early in his statement he says that the 

board has already reviewed the future organizational design of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and that the board is satisfied with the 

government‟s plan. And that seems to be the tone of the 

statement, Mr. Speaker, that the board is taking direction from 

the government very well. The statement goes on to state that 

the board has accepted the minister‟s recommendation to 

oversee and monitor a major new initiative which will soon be 

launched — the business enabling initiative — again taking 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

direction from the government very well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only people, according to a government press release, that 

have given any direction, information, or strategic advice to the 

board to date are the Premier and members of the government 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now to accomplish this streamlining that the minister spoke 

about — and I think maybe his seatmate might have been able 

to hear him, Mr. Speaker — there is going to be an advisory 

council to what the Premier has assured us is only an advisory 

council. Enterprise Saskatchewan is nothing to worry about. It‟s 

just an advisory council to government. The advisory council 

now has an advisory council on this streamlining initiative. I 

assume when that advisory council has an advisory council, that 

the government will drop the characterization of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan as fleet of foot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition continues to look forward to other 

bureaucratic encumbrances added to Enterprise Saskatchewan 

in its efforts to streamline business in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

inform the members of the legislature that Marilou McPhedran, 

Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, has accepted a position at her alma mater, the 

University of Winnipeg. To help with the smooth transition to a 

new Chair, Ms. McPhedran will step down from her position 

effective June 15 of this year. This is an exciting opportunity 

for Ms. McPhedran, and we wish her well in the new challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. McPhedran was appointed Chief 

Commissioner in October 2007. Although her time with the 

commission has been quite brief, she has been busy working 

with staff to promote the objectives of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code and representing the commission at 

various conferences and events. Just this week she launched 

two, new electronic outreach initiatives to employers, as part of 

a concerted, proactive approach to human rights education. 

 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, led by Chief 

Commissioner McPhedran does important work for the people 

of this province. It advances the principle that every person is 

free and equal in dignity and in rights, and it promotes 

understanding and acceptance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I wish to express my strong support and 

confidence in the good work of the commission and Chief 

Commissioner McPhedran in particular. I‟m certainly 

disappointed to see her leave; however her reasons are 

understandable. 

 

Ms. McPhedran was born and raised in rural Manitoba and 

attended the University of Winnipeg. She is presented with an 

exciting new opportunity to return to the University of 

Winnipeg in her home province, and I respect her decision to do 

so. 

 

With her departure we will now be faced with the task of 

appointing a new chief commissioner. Mr. Speaker, I can assure 

my fellow members of this Assembly that I committed to an 

open and competitive process that will see the best candidate 

hired for the job. We will follow the same process that resulted 

in the selection of Ms. McPhedran. 

 

On a personal note, I want to wish her the very best in her 

future endeavours. Ms. McPhedran is seated in your gallery 

today, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to ask my colleagues in 

the House to join me in expressing our appreciation for her 

commitment to human rights issues in Saskatchewan and to 

wish her well in her future endeavours. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I‟d like to also say thank you to Marilou 

McPhedran for her work here in Saskatchewan. And I know 

that she has brought some new ideas, some new energy to the 

role that she took just last fall and that the things that she has 

started will continue. And I know that the minister is anxious to 

get another person of the same high calibre through a very open 

process to allow us to continue to make sure that the Human 

Rights Commission work, which is extremely important in our 

province, is done. 

 

So I want to say all the best in Winnipeg. I think that it‟s not 

dissimilar to some of the good events that we had in 

Saskatchewan in the fall which you participated in, and I‟m 

thinking about the Grey Cup, where our coach ended up moving 

on very quickly and he‟s going to be successful. But I know you 

will always keep the good work here in Saskatchewan in your 

heart and that you will use that as you teach new people at the 

University of Winnipeg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to end with just a little advice to the 

Minister of Justice. He is seating with a seatmate there who 

requires a little more assistance in how you get new, 

independent people to be involved . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member is entering 

into debate. Just acknowledge our guest. I would just allow the 

member to finish his introduction and no more. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll continue with my 

response to the ministerial statement. I just make the simple 

comment that I appreciate that the Minister of Justice in this 

particular situation will use the very open process and 

competitive process that has been developed over many years. 

And I would hope that that will be the standard for this 

government. Some places we haven‟t seen it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, 

The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 18, The Public Service Amendment Act, 

2008. Is the Assembly prepared to accept the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read the second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 

able to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — I was able to enter into the debate last night, 

but I had a few, a few more points that I wanted to put on the 

record on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The one thing that I looked for in this budget, Mr. Speaker, that 

our government has come through on is the graduate retention 

program, Mr. Speaker. This is the program that we campaigned 

on. It was one that I campaigned on. I was very supportive of 

this plank in the platform, Mr. Speaker. This is the program that 

will provide for graduates of post-secondary, whether that be 

university degree or some other program through our 

post-secondary institutes, Mr. Speaker. And this would, in the 

case of a university grad, would provide up to $20,000 in tuition 

rebates for post-secondary graduates, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s if 

they‟ve graduated from a Saskatchewan institution, an 

educational institution, Mr. Speaker. And I think that this was a 

good plank, Mr. Speaker, in the platform. And it was one that 

young people I think are very positive on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there‟s one other person that was very positive on this, Mr. 

Speaker. And I wanted to reference something that a 

constituent, somebody that I‟ve come to respect in our 

community, Mr. Speaker . . . He‟s very well regarded in 

Weyburn and throughout the Southeast in the field of education, 

Mr. Speaker. And that gentleman, and I spoke about him a little 

bit last night, Mr. Speaker, was Graham Mickleborough. 

 

Graham‟s the president and CEO of the Southeast Regional 

College, Mr. Speaker. And here‟s what he had to say on this 

commitment, this promise that we kept, Mr. Speaker. He said 

that, he called it “„. . . an aggressive and attractive program for 

our youth.‟” He said, “„I am glad to see efforts to retain the 

youth of our province in this budget,‟” Mr. Speaker. So I was 

very happy to see Graham at the budget that day and welcomed 

his comments on that part, Mr. Speaker. In fact he went on — 

and this is in the Weyburn Review — he went on to talk about 

. . . 

 

And there was some discussion — before I get to that point, Mr. 

Speaker — there was some discussion from members opposite 

in terms of the funding in this budget for regional colleges. And 

I think that members on this side of the House are very 

supportive of our regional colleges, and I would say that 

members opposite are too. They see the value of the regional 

colleges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I happened to be able to take my entire first year 

of university staying at home in Weyburn through the regional 

college, was able to get all of my classes in for my entire first 

year, Mr. Speaker. So I certainly on a personal level appreciate 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

the role that our regional colleges play. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was some questioning from the 

members opposite. I know the member from Elphinstone, he 

had some views on the budget in terms of regional colleges. But 

again, I would go to the experts in this field, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Mickleborough, president and CEO of the Southeast Regional 

College, he says, quote, “„From this investment, one can see 

that the government does understand the potential in regional 

colleges . . .‟” Mr. Speaker. That‟s what he had to say. 

 

And he is looking forward to working with the government in 

terms of some longer-term funding for our regional colleges. 

And I certainly want to work with Mr. Mickleborough on that, 

and I know that this government will, Mr. Speaker. And overall, 

Mr. Speaker, he was very pleased to see . . . and called wise, 

wise decisions by the government when it came to both 

secondary infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and very, very glad to 

see his remarks on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other members that 

want to enter into the debate. I‟ve had certainly my fair share of 

the time, last night and today. I know that, Mr. Speaker. But a 

couple of other points that are pretty key to my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker: the $20.7 million in nurse recruitment and 

retention and what that means, Mr. Speaker, for Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

And this government has certainly . . . on a good start, Mr. 

Speaker. Four months in and we‟re already seeing close to 300 

nurses come from the Philippines, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to 

see those over the next few months. But this money for going 

into recruitment and retention, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not only the 

smaller communities. I know that there‟s concerns in some of 

the smaller communities about whether they can staff, and that 

has simply been because there haven‟t been enough nurses and 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. And so services have been cut over the 

last few years under the former government, Mr. Speaker. And 

so this budget provides hope for those people. But it‟s also what 

we would consider our bigger services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You cannot on a non-emergency basis have a baby delivered in 

the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, in the Weyburn hospital. It‟s 

a service that was ended temporarily under the NDP watch, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last year. It‟s one that I know the region is 

working hard to return that service because we‟re a growing 

community. We‟re a community of 10,000, Mr. Speaker, in the 

area around it, the trading area. 

 

And I know personally, Mr. Speaker, many of my friends that 

because that service is no longer offered in Weyburn, that they 

have to come to Regina. And the Regina hospital can‟t handle 

that extra load as well as they need to, and so there‟s difficulties 

in getting beds. And I know of people that they were told that 

there‟s no beds even though the mother is very close going into 

labour. And then when they do deliver, there‟s unfortunately a 

move to free up those beds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the problem that the region has encountered is that they 

couldn‟t get enough staff to operate both, Mr. Speaker — ICU 

[intensive care unit] and the maternity — and keep all of these 

services operated, Mr. Speaker. And so they had to make a 

tough choice, and that‟s the choice that they make. And I 

certainly will be talking with the region, going forward. I‟ve 

already met with the board to discuss this and some other 

things, Mr. Speaker, and I‟ll be doing what I can for the people 

of Weyburn and area on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that I am really in favour of in this is 6.1 million 

for more physician training seats, recruitment, and retention. 

Mr. Speaker, this is something that affects the constituency. 

 

Coronach is in a situation where the doctor there is looking at 

retiring. He‟s put in, many years of service in. He‟s in his, I 

believe, late 60s. He‟s trying to cut back his practice, Mr. 

Speaker. And the people of Coronach are concerned that there 

won‟t be a physician there in that community, particularly when 

you look, Mr. Speaker, at what happens in Coronach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Coronach, it‟s a SaskPower town, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s a coal town. Not only is it the location where, for the Poplar 

River Power Station, but also the coal mine there, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s heavy industrial activity. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

people of Coronach and the people that work in the mines and 

people that work at the power station want to feel comfortable 

that in the event of a — and it would be an unfortunate tragedy 

— that somebody is seriously injured, that they have access, 

close access, Mr. Speaker, to medical care, to a doctor. And that 

is a concern and one that I hear about when I‟m in Coronach. I 

was just there last Friday, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s something 

that they wanted to talk to me about. 

 

But it‟s not only that, not only Coronach in my constituency. 

It‟s also Bengough. Dr. Wong is covering a very large area and, 

Mr. Speaker, he‟s doing the best that he can. But as services are 

restricted or cut back in Coronach, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Wong is 

probably going to be asked to take in that larger area, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is a concern. 

 

And while we know that these training seats don‟t mean that 

there‟s going to be doctors right now, Mr. Speaker, we had to 

start somewhere. We couldn‟t wait in this province. We 

couldn‟t continue under the manner of the former 

administration that really couldn‟t provide enough training seats 

for these valuable medical professions, Mr. Speaker. And so 

this budget is a good start to getting us on to a long-term plan of 

increasing the numbers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that I do want to briefly mention, Mr. Speaker, 

the $10.7 million for increase in cancer care, and I touched on 

this a little bit, Mr. Speaker. This is going to be going to people 

that, people that we really need to help in this province. 

Whether you talk to people that are now covered for Avastin, 

the cancer drug Avastin for colorectal cancer, Mr. Speaker, 

which was something that we committed to . . . And we got that 

done, Mr. Speaker, almost as soon as we could, Mr. Speaker, as 

soon as the cancer agency could take care of those patients once 

the drug was funded because there were many patients . . . I 

have constituents, Mr. Speaker, that paid out of pocket as long 

as they could under the NDP and then they just, they couldn‟t 

afford it. So that drug will now be covered, Mr. Speaker, and so 

this is such a great development, Mr. Speaker. And we look 

forward to seeing more good work from the Health minister in 

cleaning up a lot of the problems that were left behind by the 

former government, Mr. Speaker. 

 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

Now those are some of the reasons why I support the specifics 

of the budget — specific reasons why I support the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. But I‟ll tell you overall, Mr. Speaker, why I support 

this budget for all of those things, Mr. Speaker — from the 

highway spending, from the health care spending, from the 

cancer funding, Mr. Speaker. Overall though, Mr. Speaker, I am 

very proud to support this budget because this is a budget that 

we campaigned on. This is a budget, a plan that we took to the 

people that we would do if we were elected to the government, 

Mr. Speaker. This is a plan that keeps 40 commitments, Mr. 

Speaker, that we made during the election, not including nearly 

— I believe it was — a dozen commitments even before the 

budget ever came out that we made to the people of 

Saskatchewan and that we now are keeping or have given our 

word that this budget will take care of those issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, for that reason, for the overwhelming 

support that I get from my constituents in favour of this budget, 

in favour of the highway spending, Mr. Speaker, in favour of 

the health care spending, and in favour of a plan that will build, 

that will make this province ready for growth, Mr. Speaker, for 

all of those reasons I will be supporting, voting in favour of the 

budget and I will be voting against the amendment. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to 

enter into the budget debate. The budget of 2008 may be 

characterized by some as a New Democratic Party budget but 

also it has Sask Party gaps. There is very little for affordable 

housing, very little for property tax relief, very little of a green 

strategy to address climate change, and not enough training 

spaces. It is hard not to like spending on needed program 

enhancements and infrastructure, like highways, hospitals, and 

schools — basically mom and apple pie for the province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

However it isn‟t hard to criticize that what wouldn‟t fly when 

the NDP did it and now can clearly get a big pass when the 

Sask Party does the same thing. I‟m referring to the renamed 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the fiscal growth and stability fund 

now and its payload of money — over $1 billion — targeted 

over the next three years to backfill what the Finance minister 

admits are deficit budgets coming soon to a wallet near you, 

starting next year to be exact. It‟s passing strange that this 

announcement would have met with howls of outrage last year 

but merits nary a whimper this year. 

 

In the Leader Post on March 20, Bruce Johnstone says that, 

quoting the Minister of Finance, this year quote: 

 

“. . . it truly is a balanced budget. We‟re close to balanced 

for next year. We‟re optimistic our revenues will improve 

sufficiently enough that we will be balanced next year.” 

 

Now to get to be able to say that you have a balanced budget 

this year, you have to have a Fiscal Stabilization Fund or 

something like it. So technically speaking, the Finance minister 

had to concede that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which his 

party roundly criticized as a make-believe fund with no money, 

had allowed the previous NDP governments to balance the 

budget. And now he could say that he had the 15th consecutive 

balanced budget. 

 

This is of course, as everyone says, the honeymoon period for 

the Sask Party. But we should remember what happens on most 

honeymoons — a lot of frenzied action that is rarely 

sustainable. When everyone comes back to reality, there needs 

to be eyes-wide-open time. What looked good on a beach in 

Hawaii doesn‟t look that good cutting funding to the Station 20 

project in the core area of Saskatoon. It doesn‟t do much for 

homelessness, and high condo-conversion rates, and lack of 

affordable housing. It‟ll take more than two mai tais to deal 

with the lack of training spaces for the tight labour market. 

Even a sunset cruise won‟t help reduce the property taxes for 

Saskatchewan families. 

 

Lots of promises are made on honeymoons. Cash, committees, 

and cronyism are evident promises for this honeymoon with the 

Sask Party. Cash is coming easy. It‟s flowing in with the Sask 

Party not lifting a finger, except the one they‟ve given Station 

20 in Saskatoon. Committees are evident to study everything — 

housing, done and done again by the previous government as 

recently as last summer. And cronyism so appallingly rampant 

that Grant Devine must be very pleased with this protégé from 

Swift Current. 

 

News flash for the Premier: the honeymoon is over. According 

to the editorial in The StarPhoenix, who are not exactly New 

Democrat, it says, I‟m quoting from the editorial of March 29: 

 

If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party used its 

first budget to set the tone for its administration, the 

province has a growing list to worry about. 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the public 

purse, Premier Brad Wall‟s team has been extravagant in 

its spending, ham-handed in its communication strategy 

and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

The latest in a series of embarrassing events include a 

budget-day announcement of the disruption of hundreds of 

jobs that now apparently was made in error, and the 

deliberate cancellation of a much-lauded inner-city 

redevelopment project in Saskatoon. 

 

That no one from Wall to Health Minister Don McMorris 

to Finance Minister Rod Gantefoer [and I‟m quoting] can 

get their stories straight about why a previously made 

provincial commitment of $8 million to the Station 20 

project, which would bring, among other things, medical, 

dental and community services to one of the most stressed 

neighbourhoods in Saskatchewan‟s largest city, does little 

to foster confidence in their ability to manage public 

money. 

 

Going on, to quote: 

 

Until now, the government has requested patience from 

Saskatchewan citizens, suggesting the four months since it 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

took office wasn‟t enough . . . to properly redirect the flow 

of cash. But this excuse is wearing thin. 

 

And there‟s other business people who have more to say, 

including the chamber of commerce who doesn‟t give this 

budget more than a C: 

 

The Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce has given 

the provincial government a “C” for the 2008/09 budget 

released today. Education property tax . . . [is] still a 

problem. 

 

And to quote Kent Smith-Windsor, executive director of the 

Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce: “This province 

risked bankruptcy just a decade ago.” And well all know why 

that was. And he goes on to say: 

 

In this context, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

spending well in excess of population growth and 

inflation. As our province saw just a short decade ago — 

this is unsustainable. 

 

The president of the chamber of commerce says: 

 

This province needs a comprehensive amendment to 

education property tax policy . . . The province needs a 

strategy to get our entire tax system to a competitive level. 

 

Also when we talk about what the budget is, Murray Mandryk 

from The StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post said March 20, he 

said that, when we talked about the government, the budget 

being much like an NDP government “. . . Imitation is the 

sincerest form of flattery.” But that being said, Mr. Mandryk 

went on to say: 

 

. . . what was likely maddening about Finance Minister . . . 

Gantefoer‟s 40-minute address is that it did outline the 

same old jiggery-pokery we‟ve seen for the past 16 years. 

The big difference is, the new Saskatchewan Party 

government already seems every bit as good at the jiggery 

and perhaps even better at the pokery. 

 

The new government boldly proclaims the province‟s 15th 

consecutive balanced budget, even though the 

Saskatchewan Party decried in Opposition last year that 

the budget wasn‟t balanced . . .  

 

But even more critically, the government‟s own 

projections say this will be the last budget surplus Premier 

Brad Wall will deliver this four-year term.” 

 

So this is damning with faint praise indeed, and of course the 

mayors of the big cities are on record saying that they will be 

certainly having property tax increases in their cities. Also from 

the people that represent poor people and poor groups in the 

province, they complain also that there‟s nothing for them: 

 

A lack of affordable housing is causing a crisis in 

Saskatchewan, and Wednesday‟s budget, [this is according 

to Heather Polischuk from the Leader-Post] which offers a 

largely status quo agenda for low-income earners, and 

does little to help, [most of them]. 

 

“I don‟t think that this budget deals seriously with the 

question of poverty in Saskatchewan and it certainly, in 

and of itself, is not dealing with the crisis of affordable 

house quality and affordable housing.” 

 

“What we‟re really not seeing in this budget, given a very 

good financial position for the province, is a significant 

commitment to a social agenda.” 

 

And more interestingly, “Many of the affordable housing 

dollars in the . . . budget come from existing housing programs 

. . .” which our government put in place. 

 

The Station West funding reversal that I just mentioned in 

Saskatoon is a clear indication of the real Sask Party. The 

Premier‟s snappy one-liners fell flat as a pancake with the 

people of Saskatoon after the ill-advised, insensitive, and 

dismissive remarks about priorities in Saskatoon. 

 

I can understand the Station 20 West project meaning nothing 

to the member from Indian Head-Milestone, the Minister of 

Health, or the member from Swift Current, the people‟s 

Premier, but I do think the project should mean something to 

the members from the Saskatoon ridings of Silver Springs, 

Greystone, Northwest, Southeast, and Sutherland. I don‟t hear 

their voices in support of the health and well-being of the inner 

city and core neighbourhood residents of Saskatoon. So much 

for the softer side of the Sask Party. There never is a sheep 

around when you need one. 

 

To hear the Minister of Health say that the Sask Party priorities 

are fire alarms and chillers really does send a chill through 

Saskatoon. The types of comments made by the minister and 

the Premier should signal to all people of Saskatchewan that if 

you live in a core neighbourhood, in an urban centre, you‟re not 

a priority for your government. And the big chill is really going 

through the civil service, where everyone is afraid for their job, 

afraid of repercussions for decisions, and now apparently, 

there‟s email tracking for everyone back two years. 

 

Highways do need to be built and repaired. Schools and 

hospitals need to be built and repaired, but not at the expense of 

the poor and the disadvantaged. These decisions faced our party 

in government as well, Mr. Speaker, and the decisions we made 

with the money we had always were made with everyone‟s 

needs in mind including those that were most vulnerable — 

projects like White Buffalo Youth Lodge in the core 

neighbourhoods of Saskatoon; $100 million recently in 

affordable housing, much of that money in Saskatoon; new 

schools for the west side — W.P. Bate Elementary, Bethlehem 

and Tommy Douglas high schools. 

 

When the announcement of pulling the funding for Station 20 

was made, the Finance minister had one set of wrong facts. The 

Minister of Health had really bad advice. And the Premier had a 

flippant spin. It seems that not only does the right hand not 

know what the left hand is doing; they don‟t even know their 

hands. 

 

It‟s quite easy to spend money when you have it and a lot of it 

— 1.2 billion left in the bank when the Sask Party took over as 

government in November ‟07. I know the new Premier thought 

that this was a stark financial situation, but there has never been 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

such a lucky stark financial situation from any new government 

in Saskatchewan or anywhere else. 

 

I want to talk a little bit more about Station 20 because it‟s a 

project that I‟ve been involved in, and it‟s been going on for 

probably five years. And the Health minister said, among other 

goofy things that have been said, the Health minister suggested 

that it was an 11th hour announcement. This project has been 

going on for five years. Money was in the budget last year, and 

he spoke about that at estimates and asked the then minister of 

Health about it. So everyone knew the money was given. 

 

And it was said by the . . . I have this article from the paper that 

talks about the approval that the NDP government gave Station 

West and gave the money to the health district to hold in trust 

until the project was ready to move forward to the stage where 

it would need the 8 million. And that‟s: 

 

The NDP had approved the funds for Station 20 West, 

which would house a low-cost dental clinic to train senior 

dentistry students, a medical clinic, public health and 

counselling clinics, a co-operative grocery store and other 

community organizations. 

 

Jean Morrison, vice-president of performance excellence 

and chief nursing officer for the Saskatoon Health Region, 

said the provincial government had given the health 

region $8 million to hold in trust for Station 20 . . . while 

the organizations involved worked on more detailed plans. 

 

So the money was already there. It was not a last-minute, 

last-minute project. 

 

And when we talk about this question about the grocery store, it 

just amazes me when members from the opposition talk about 

the grocery store — that‟s all this is going to be. None of them 

obviously have been there. Even the member from Saskatoon, 

from Northwest, talks about the grocery store being across the 

street . . . or this complex being across the street from Giant 

Tiger. It is not across the street from Giant Tiger. That‟s just 

about as clear as his rant the other night, his sense of direction. 

 

This is not about a grocery store. And even if it was about the 

grocery store, most of us can go to Sobeys and Superstore and 

the Co-op and extra-value foods and all those other things 

because we can drive there. And we can carry our groceries in 

our cars and our trucks and our SUVs [sports utility vehicle] 

and whatever else we‟re driving. These people have to walk, 

and they have to take children, and they have to come home 

with their groceries. So talking about five more blocks or ten 

more blocks isn‟t reasonable. And it isn‟t just about a grocery 

store, and the dismissive comments are really insulting. 

 

And the “Letters to the Editor” are . . . I mean there‟s an 

outpouring of support for this project because it was developed 

by the community. 

 

The organizations that are there have not just relied on the 

housing, which is already up and running, so it had nothing to 

do with the election in November. The library is there, which 

had nothing to do with the election in November. But the whole 

project depends on the interconnectivity of all the things that 

will go there to address all the needs of people — an 

interdisciplinary, a holistic approach, not a one-off. It isn‟t 

about groceries. If you‟re talking groceries, you‟re missing the 

point. And it doesn‟t really surprise me. 

 

“Wall has a strange idea of „mall‟” is one letter to the editor, 

which I think is interesting: 

 

Premier Brad Wall thinks [I‟m quoting] the Station 20 

West project is a “mall,” perhaps he‟d like to visit the day 

spa run by the Friendship Inn or tour the luxury condos 

being built by Habitat for Humanity. 

 

. . . [This province Wall has said] At the recent Mayor‟s 

Prayer Breakfast . . . this province would leave no one 

behind in this period of prosperity. Here‟s a news flash [he 

goes on to say]: people are being left behind in the 

community who would be served by Station 20 West. 

 

There are many, many, many of these letters. And honestly it 

was really an ill-conceived decision to take $8 million from this 

project, which was set aside in last year‟s budget, and basically 

put it into chillers and fire alarms and say those were the 

priorities, and to talk to the people of the core neighbourhoods 

and say you are not a priority of this government. That‟s really 

chilling, I think. I think it‟s a real statement of the heart of the 

Sask Party, and I don‟t know where we come to talk about the 

softer side. 

 

Autism, we put more money in autism last year, too, in case 

somebody would like to look at that. 

 

Anyways I‟ll go back to my speech, Mr. Speaker. I do know 

first-hand, and the Minister of Health is always talking about 

how closely I‟ve been tied to SUN. I do know really a lot about 

bargaining and a myriad of other health issues that we‟re 

dealing with on an ongoing basis. And as the minister often 

points out that I had been president of the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses for five years. I‟m a registered nurse. The unique 

perspective that I have from there has given me . . . And I‟ve 

also been working as a nurse for many, many years — more 

than I care to say — and I‟ve been leader of the provincial 

nurses‟ union and been in government for almost 10 years So 

that gives me a perspective, including serving as the associate 

minister of Health, it gives me a perspective that the minister 

will never have, and he will never enjoy this. 

 

I can comment on nursing recruitment and retention and 

specifically talking about how many nurses are here and the 

SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ Association] talking 

about how they‟re looking forward to this government paying 

attention to nursing recruitment and retention. 

 

I have the exit surveys that are done for the nursing education 

program in Saskatchewan, and they talk about how many 

students receive government bursaries and how much the 

government bursary program has contributed to the students 

that are in these programs, and they‟re finishing the programs, 

and they‟re actually entering the programs. And we also talk 

about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh you want to know how 

much. 

 

[15:00] 

 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

Well three quarters, three quarters of the NEPS [nursing 

education program of Saskatchewan] students receive 

scholarships or bursaries, and this percentage is approximately 

constant over the last few years. More than 7 in 10 receive their 

main scholarship or bursary support from the government, and 

this is not anything about the election in ‟07. This is about when 

the NDP was in government, all the things we put in place to 

encourage people to enter the nursing profession and to make it 

somewhat easier for them to do that. 

 

The respondents, when they talked about how their job searches 

would be when they were graduating, 85.4 per cent said that 

they confirmed a job in nursing, and they also are in 

Saskatchewan. 96.6 of the respondents intend to work in 

Saskatchewan. That‟s a lot of nurses staying here, and it has 

nothing to do with the November election. 

 

I also have some statistics and trends from the SRNA that talks 

about the number of RNs [registered nurse] in the province has 

increased in the last year — and this was given out in March of 

this year — over 2 per cent, bringing the total number of RNs to 

an all-time high in the last 10 years of 9,151. For the first time 

in over a decade, they were confident that the RN shortage is 

getting the attention it deserves. That attention didn‟t start 

November 7. These things have happened because of things we 

have done as a government through several ministers of Health 

and hard work with very little money. 

 

In the past five years, the age distribution of practising RNs has 

moved decisively to an older age group, and we all know that. 

But it‟s evident now that there are more young people under the 

age of 30. It‟s increasing that from the last few years. That has 

been increasing, which is really, really good to see. So we‟re 

seeing some of the results of the things that we have put in 

place, and I‟m really pleased to be able to report that. 

 

We talked a lot, the Minister of Health has talked a lot about his 

sponsored trip to the Philippines, and I want to talk about how 

this was started under the minister of Immigration, the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. And that work was started in ‟06 and 

the results of that work has allowed the health districts and the 

department to go to the Philippines more than once to get 

skilled workers to come over here. That is something that has 

been built on because of this. And I think there has been 

recognition that this is not something that has been just done by 

this government, but it has been done by our government when 

we were in power in the last few years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to talk about the MOU that 

has been done with SUN, and I asked the minister some 

questions today about that because the clock is ticking. April 1 

was yesterday. The MOU signed in February stated April 1 

money would start being put into a fund to deal with 

recruitment and retention. I didn‟t get any answers today about 

that. I don‟t know how much money will be put in and I think 

the public deserves to know. I think we need to know where the 

money is, what‟s going to be done with the money. It‟s all fine 

and well to say you‟re getting somebody in there to help you 

with the planning but if you can‟t even tell us where the money 

is, that‟s pretty hard to swallow as a public. I think the public is 

really not that excited about incompetency and basically evasive 

techniques. 

 

I also want to say that this budget . . . Even though we have said 

that we‟re talking about many things that the NDP have done 

and the program enhancements basically built on things we‟ve 

done, as my colleague from Rosemont said last night, a lot of 

the programs were set in place so more money could just be 

enhanced into them and I think that that‟s very significant. 

 

I think what happened, the people of Saskatchewan on 

November 7 voted for change, but they didn‟t vote for change 

from competent to incompetent. They didn‟t vote for change 

from compassionate to mean-spirited, and if they wanted a 

comedy routine, Corner Gas is still the best place to go. So I 

think that when we hear a lot of the gloating about what people 

said in November ‟07, the honeymoon is over. It‟s time to 

realize that you can‟t be both government and opposition. Mr. 

Speaker, the government now likes to duck behind being 

opposition, pretending they‟re opposition and saying, well it 

was your fault; you did it so now we can do it. But it doesn‟t fly 

any more. You‟re responsible now as government for what you 

say; you‟re responsible for it. What you do is your fault. 

 

It doesn‟t matter when you say, what would you do? What 

happened then? You are responsible. People did elect you. They 

elected you to be responsible, not to be flippant, mean-spirited, 

incompetent. They elected you to be government, and by all 

reports I‟ve seen, you‟re not living up to their expectations. 

Because of that, Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting for this 

budget but I will be voting for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

privilege to rise today to be able to enter into the debate on the 

budget. Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview talk about why people were elected and the type of 

commitments that were made. This government was elected to 

fulfill a variety of promises and that‟s what this budget does, 

Mr. Speaker. We are proud of the commitments that were made 

prior to November 7, 2007 and we are proud that we fulfilled 

many of those things. I‟m proud to be a member of a 

government that keeps its word; that delivers exactly what it 

promised during the election campaign, and is focused on a plan 

that will put Saskatchewan on the road to sustained growth. 

 

For many years promises were made and then forgotten after 

the election. It bred a cynicism that is counter to the 

expectations of the Saskatchewan people. I‟m proud that as a 

government we‟re giving people a reason to believe in 

Saskatchewan‟s future. 

 

We all know that Saskatchewan is ready for growth, but our 

infrastructure was not ready. It was neglected for a long time 

under many years of NDP rule. We are moving to fix that and 

build a stronger province. And the first step is keeping our 

promises. 

 

As Justice minister and Attorney General, I was very happy that 

one of the first promises kept was the establishment of a fixed 

date for elections, Mr. Speaker. No longer will the most basic 

and vital democratic right be held hostage by political 

considerations and influences. Everyone knows when the next 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

election will be, and all Saskatchewan residents are better 

served by that knowledge. No more delaying going to the polls. 

No more judging the political winds, trying to guess when the 

best time to face the voters is. We made a promise and we kept 

it. Mr. Speaker, I can stand in the House today and I can say, 

the next election will be held November 7, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also made a promise to make our communities 

safer from drinking drivers. That is another promise that was 

kept back in December. It was kept in time so that we were able 

to keep drunk drivers off the road during last year‟s holiday 

season. We‟ve let drunk and impaired drivers know that we will 

hold them accountable and that repeat offenders will not only 

lose their driver‟s licence but that we will also seize their cars 

and sell them. Saskatchewan is leading the fight to keep 

impaired drivers off the road and make our community safer. 

 

The keeping of those promises and many others laid the 

groundwork for a budget that kept 40 more promises. Provincial 

tax property rebate is also worth almost $160 million. Contrary 

to what some of the members opposite were talking about, 

buying a pizza or something like that, this is real and substantial 

amounts of money that will make a significant difference to the 

homeowners of our province. 

 

We‟ve developed a graduate retention program. We have a 

prescription drug plan that will offer a $15 cap for children. We 

provided money for crop insurance. We provided funding for a 

nurse recruitment and retention program. And I‟m exceptionally 

pleased that my colleagues have travelled to the Philippines to 

try and arrange for 300 new nurses to come to this province. 

Mr. Speaker, those nurses will soon be walking the floors of our 

hospitals, delivering proper and quality health care to the 

citizens of our province, working with their colleagues who are 

already . . . that are also high-quality, well-educated individuals 

that are providing quality health care. And I‟m proud that we‟re 

able to give them some relief because they‟ve been working too 

hard for too long. 

 

Many of my cabinet colleagues will speak about the 

ready-for-growth initiative, a billion dollar program that will 

help us grow in a way that is sustainable for the long term and 

keep Saskatchewan in its new status as a have province. This 

budget brings with it the largest capital investment in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

We all know how the NDP planned for growth. They would 

ignore it, neglect it, and then blame outside forces. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are now doing things differently in our province. 

We are taking a careful, planned, reasoned approach. We want 

to try something new and radical. We want Saskatchewan to 

have success. We want everyone in our province to share in that 

success. 

 

That‟s why my colleagues will talk about the $400 million 

that‟s going towards the backbone of the Saskatchewan 

economy — our highway system. They will highlight the $200 

million that is going towards building better infrastructure in 

our health care system that meets the needs of a growing 

province. They will also point, Mr. Speaker, to the $160 million 

that is going towards constructing the education infrastructure 

that we need to meet the challenge ahead. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is just the capital side. 

This is a budget that will bring new levels of transparency to 

provincial spending. No more hiding or shifting taxpayers‟ 

money in some elaborate shell game. Now everyone will know 

exactly where their hard-earned tax dollars are going. 

 

We want to take steps to keep our youth here in Saskatchewan, 

which is why we‟ve introduced a tuition rebate program and 

maintained the university tuition freeze. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are designed to help meet the 

demand for skilled workers right here in Saskatchewan. And 

you know what else attracts new workers? A health care system 

that works, that people believe in, that delivers quality, timely 

health care. That‟s why in this budget we are expanding the 

number of training seats for health care professionals in order to 

fix the crisis that was allowed to fester for years under the NDP. 

 

I can‟t believe the previous member that was up to speak, a 

former president of nurses‟ union, a former nurse herself, would 

be able to stand up here and say that she has done anything over 

the last 16 years to try and make our health system work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a crisis in health care and this is the 

government that‟s going to work towards fixing those problems. 

We want a health care system that works and you get that by 

careful planning and careful allocation of your resources. 

 

There‟s very much more to talk about in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, right now to move on and take some 

time to talk about some initiatives in the Ministry of Justice. 

 

During last fall‟s election campaign we made a promise to 

make our communities safer. This budget will provide funding 

to ensure that we are able to keep that promise. There are funds 

for more prosecutors, funding for another domestic violence 

court in Regina that is now open. There‟s an increase in the 

victim surcharge fee to provide support to victims of crime. 

We‟re expanding video conferencing in our court system. We 

are adding a large number of new police officers. We‟ve made 

it clear that the guilty in our province are going to be punished. 

However we also know that the court system needs to have a 

degree of restorative focus through innovations like the 

domestic violence court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also ensured that the various alternative 

measure programs continue to have funding and continue to be 

able to deliver the services that they provide. 

 

We are also pleased to provide $430,000 for the implementation 

of a domestic violence court in Regina to address the 

underlying causes of criminal domestic violence and to work 

permanently to alter the behaviour of offenders. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have an expectation 

that the administration of justice will be fair and matters will be 

dealt with as efficiently as possible. That‟s why we are adding 

three additional prosecutors to public prosecution. 

 

As former head of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, 

I‟m very pleased to announce that the commission will receive 

an additional $900,000 to support the commission‟s ongoing 

operations and its share of funding for an additional lawyer 

dedicated to the domestic violence court. I should say . . . 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

[inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. As well, a further $450,000 is 

transferred from the court services budget to Legal Aid for 

court-appointed counsel services to young people. 

 

There‟s more than $3 million of capital funding for courts in 

this province. Video conferencing has worked well, and it‟s 

allowed court and law enforcement resources to deploy more 

effectively, so there‟s $300,000 to expand video conferencing. 

There‟s $700,000 to complete the planning for a new court 

facility in La Ronge. As well — and I speak from experience in 

saying this is a project long overdue — there is $1.8 million for 

planning an addition to the Saskatchewan Court of Queen‟s 

Bench in Saskatoon. There is another $250,000 for 

improvements at various circuit court sites. 

 

As well, the victim surcharge will increase effective July 1, 

2008 to ensure and strengthen the many programs and services 

that it provides to victims of crime. That was a promise that was 

made during the campaign and, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to say 

it‟s another promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be able to say the Saskatchewan 

Party government has taken real, concrete steps to making 

communities safer. As our province grows, that sense of safety 

and community is absolutely vital. 

 

As a lifelong resident of Saskatoon, I am well acquainted with 

that community‟s spirit, the belief that we can achieve so much 

by working together. That‟s why I look on pride as the MLA for 

Saskatoon Southeast, as my hometown continues to grow and 

be a leader in this province. Saskatoon is one of the country‟s 

fastest growing cities. It is a magnet for investment and 

innovation, and this government recognized the important role 

that Saskatoon will play in the future. That‟s why you can see 

more than $21 million worth of capital budget projects for 

Saskatoon in this budget. We want to make sure that Saskatoon 

is ready for growth. And I will list just a few things that are 

going to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Saskatoon mental health will get an additional $3.5 million for 

capital; Oliver Lodge long-term facility, $8 million; St. Paul‟s 

Hospital will receive $400,000 for renovations to allow for a 

fifth MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. And I‟d like to 

commend the St. Paul‟s Hospital Foundation for raising funds 

to purchase the MRI. The University of Saskatchewan is 

receiving $5.9 million for the InterVac program. It is helping to 

keep the University of Saskatchewan a leader in research and 

development. In addition, Mr. Speaker, there is $2.2 million for 

the Saskatchewan provincial correctional centre and as I 

mentioned earlier, $1.8 million for planning of capital changes 

to the Court of Queen‟s Bench in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the goals of all politicians should be to 

make sure that we leave this province a better place and that the 

next generation is prepared to meet the challenges ahead and, 

most importantly, that we have the infrastructure to allow for 

growth. In the past, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government ignored 

Saskatchewan‟s future and instead worried about their political 

present. Budgeting was done on an ad hoc basis by way of crisis 

management. It was not only a disappointment but it was an 

incredible waste of money. I am very proud that we have a 

budget that has vision, that offers a road map for 

Saskatchewan‟s growth and makes it clear where the province 

is heading and how we‟re going to get there. 

 

The future is bright in Saskatchewan. We set a new 

employment record in February with nearly half a million 

people working in this province. We are leading the country — 

not just the region but the entire country — in a host of 

economic indicators from wholesale trade to construction 

permits to new vehicle sales, not to mention football. And the 

Canada West Foundation predicts a Western province that will 

again lead the country in economic growth in 2008 but this time 

it won‟t be Alberta and it won‟t be British Columbia, Mr. 

Speaker. This time it‟s going to be Saskatchewan. This province 

is ready to grow and we have a budget that allows for that 

growth to happen. Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that reflects the 

promises we made in the election. It‟s a budget that we can be 

proud of and it‟s a budget that we can use to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to thank all of my 

government officials that worked in preparing this budget but 

I‟d like to specifically recognize an ADM [associate deputy 

minister] that‟s now retired, a long-term civil servant, Keith 

Laxdal. I recently attended a retirement dinner on his behalf. 

It‟s through work of a committed civil service that allows the 

government to do its duty and allows us to position our 

province so that it is ready to move forward and onward and to 

meet the challenges of growth that our province has. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to be supporting the amendment. I 

am going to be supporting the budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

proud to be supporting this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to rise and speak on behalf of the budget presented by the 

hon. member for Melfort, the Minister of Finance, and on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I‟m speaking in favour of 

the budget of opportunity. I‟m speaking in favour of the budget 

of growth. And I‟m speaking in favour of prosperity and the 

benefits to all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget has vision. This budget has direction. 

This budget begins to fix the infrastructure of the province, 

making it ready for growth and sustaining the economic 

momentum that we‟re experiencing right now. This budget 

offers hope and a brighter future for us and for our children and 

for our grandchildren. And after all, who can deny that? 

 

Recently I had the opportunity of attending a school board 

meeting in my home constituency in Moose Jaw North, when a 

comment was made to me in just a few words that sums up the 

feeling of the people of Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, just in a few 

words, the simple statement, the simple little comment was an 

expression of the people of Moose Jaw. And I think it reflects 

the people of Saskatchewan, the thousands of people throughout 

this province, about the optimistic attitude that emerges in the 

minds of many. That statement was simply this: it‟s nice to be 

able to dream again. 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

I think that‟s pretty powerful — it‟s nice to be able to dream 

again. People are now dreaming of their future here in this 

province. They see opportunity and they see growth. They see 

prosperity. This is a vision that was not prevalent for 

generations under the NDP. In fact back in 1999 a study 

performed by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce found 

that kids as early as grade 7 were planning to leave the province 

after they finished school. 

 

You know, this was a devastating finding, to learn that people at 

13 years old could not see the opportunities in this great 

province. Really the message that our kids were receiving was, 

if you want to have a comfortable future, you‟d better leave the 

province. To fulfill your dreams, you‟ll have to move out, move 

out of this province to find meaningful employment and 

probably settle down, raise a family, and consequently grow the 

economy in another part of the country. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s sad that the government of the 

day would accept, in fact they would endorse, the idea that 

prosperity couldn‟t be achieved in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amenities of this province have been here for a 

lot of years, thousands of years, but the NDP failed to see the 

potential and let it be developed. After all we‟ve got 47 per cent 

of the arable agricultural land in this province. We‟ve got the 

world‟s largest deposits of uranium and the world‟s largest 

deposits of potash, the richest coalfields in Estevan and 

Bienfait, and the magnificent forests of northern Saskatchewan 

besides the oil and gas reserves that we have. 

 

Yet in the past 60 years, mostly under the socialistic 

government, we‟ve had no strategy for growth. All these 

resources, a province filled with wealth and riches, and little to 

show for it, led by a government of negative thinking, 

visionless, lacklustre performance who rejected the idea that we 

could lead the nation in quality of life and wealth. Too long has 

this province drudged through the wilderness of mediocrity and 

deprivation brought on by a lack of vision and a lack of 

leadership by the NDP government stuck in the past with a 

negative vision and a negative attitude toward growth and 

prosperity. Too long have they accepted the fact that 

Saskatchewan will be in and out of equalization and have status. 

 

For years that government has failed the people of the province 

and turned their back on growth initiatives by ignoring the 

suggestions of business and agriculture and the industry 

opportunities. Now who could deny that good social programs 

can only come and be provided if there is good economic 

programs to support that social network? 

 

You know, it has been long said that we really don‟t need 

markers when you enter the province on any roads or the 

highways because the highways and roads have a telltale story 

of crossing the borders. Yes, we must be in Saskatchewan 

again; there‟s a lot of potholes we have to dodge. Hundreds of 

miles of roads and highways were left to crumble and become 

not only a transportation deterrent for products and services but 

also a huge safety hazard for passenger cars and trucks and 

school buses. 

 

Now we have hope and security in our highways with over 

$400 million, $400 million for roads and highways across this 

province. This presents safety and opportunity for investment 

and jobs in towns and cities and farms so products 

manufactured, and goods, can be serviced. And we‟ll be able to 

move throughout this province on roads that are passable to get 

our products to markets around the globe, growing the future of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province provides $160 million for new 

school projects from K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] and 

post-secondary capital projects. If we want to grow this 

province, we cannot afford to neglect the education needs and 

the care of our children. This budget includes funds for daycare 

spaces, a tuition fees freeze, and up to $20,000 tuition rebate for 

post-secondary graduates. That‟s all part of a plan for growing 

the province and sustaining economic momentum. 

 

We will add more physicians‟ and nurses‟ training seats. And 

this is a huge step in ready-for-growth strategy. We all know 

the strain of the health care system due to the shortages of these 

professionals that the NDP created. 

 

I want to tell you about Catherine Guillaume, who assisted me 

in my campaign last year. Catherine applied to enter the nursing 

profession, only to be told that she would have to wait for five 

years to get into the nursing program. Mr. Speaker, a five-year 

waiting list, when we are in desperate needs of hundreds of 

nurses. Catherine was told to wait for five years or get out of 

the province. That was the growth strategy of the NDP. 

 

As part of our province being ready for growth, this new 

Saskatchewan Party government has increased the number of 

training seats; $10.5 million will be committed toward 

increasing the number of training seats — and that‟s a huge 

step. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, the audacity of that party who sits on the 

opposite of the House, who neglected the situation while in 

government, and now, and now gets up on their soapbox and 

starts chirping that more should be done. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

one of our meetings, a former minister of that defunct 

government, a member, the member from Saskatoon Eastview, 

had the very gall, had the very gall to challenge our Health 

minister, asking if he thought he should take the credit for 

hiring 300 nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say yes. This government, this Minister of 

Health, deserves the credit. We did it in less than five months. 

The former NDP just did not get it done. If they needed four 

months, they had that option. They had that opportunity. Mr. 

Speaker, they didn‟t get it done and our minister did. 

 

Instead they spent close to half a billion dollars in the six 

months leading up to the election with monetary gifts to buy 

votes. They even spent part of the Health budget to promote 

their political agenda. I say, shame on them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my home city of Moose Jaw, the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital is in desperate need of upgrades and expansion. 

The Moose Jaw Union Hospital has not had significant 

upgrades since the ‟50s — the 1950s — and surgeons are asked 

to perform operations using old, antiquated equipment in 

crowded operating rooms. Even the structure of the hospital 

requires patients after surgery to take the elevator down and 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

across to the recovery room. It‟s not an efficient system, and 

there are significant challenges in quality of health care in these 

facilities. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, these challenges aren‟t new. These concerns 

have been there for years, and they have been requested for 

improvements from the former NDP government. The nurses, 

the doctors, and the staff take their responsibilities very 

seriously, and they do a commendable job, Mr. Speaker, but for 

years their pleas were ignored. 

 

Their pleas were ignored by two cabinet ministers sitting on the 

government side. And not only two cabinet ministers, the 

former premier, who was a representative of one of the 

constituents in Moose Jaw, also ignored it. So you‟ve got 

ministers and the premier that are ignoring the pleas for help for 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. It is a lack of leadership on the 

former government‟s part. 

 

When it came to health care, Mr. Speaker, there was no care 

with the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. And you know what? Now 

again they get up on their perch, chirping that the position of the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital should be made clear in the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say it is clear. It was made clear on November 7 

when the good people of Moose Jaw North said, we‟ve had 

enough of the lack of representation on the part of the elected 

officials. We‟ve had enough of being taken for granted and 

treated second class while the NDP were sure of two safe seats 

in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Union Hospital can now begin 

planning for the health needs of the community and the region 

after 16 years of NDP neglect. This vital structure, with its 

dedicated professional staff, can now look forward to the 

upgrades that are long overdue. 

 

And I‟ll say it again for the members opposite so they can 

comprehend it. The Moose Jaw hospital is now in a position it 

has never been in the past 16 years of NDP mismanagement and 

ignoring the situation. It is now on a priority list for expansion, 

for upgrades, and the plans can begin. 

 

I‟ll even repeat it especially for the two members of Saskatoon 

Riversdale, who was the former representative from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, and the present Wakamow representative, who have 

ignored it completely while in government. And now they stoop 

to petitions from friends and hard cores, and who uses his free 

radio time displaying a little bit of a lack of class to take cheap 

shots that try and put down the progress that has been made for 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital by this Saskatchewan Party 

government in less than five months, where they, the NDP, 

ignored the needs for decades. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while we‟re talking about class, I might 

mention a comment from one of the members, the member from 

Regina Coronation Park, that was made on Monday. Let me say 

this to that member, Mr. Speaker: the electorate is always right. 

And on November 7, they made it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Seems the level of interest and 

participation has increased; however there is one individual 

been recognized to speak at this time. I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll say again 

about a comment from the member for Regina Coronation Park 

on Monday. Let me say this to the member, that the electorate is 

always right. And on November 7, they made that decision for 

change. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of respect for my 

predecessor for his dedicated 21 years of service. But let me say 

this: you know, even the Liberal candidate had enough class to 

come and express his congratulations on election night. I didn‟t 

get that from any NDP counterpart. 

 

You know, I would say this to the member as well: there are 

other good people who perhaps should be here, who would have 

added significant value to the leadership of this province. But 

the electorate is always right, and the electorate chose 

differently. But on November 7, the people of Moose Jaw North 

spoke. And to that, I say to the member, the Moose Jaw North 

people are right, and I am pleased to be here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care is important, and the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital has been in need for more than a decade, and 

for decades it was ignored. But now we can start the planning. 

And as the process for the planning and preparation 

commences, the funding will be made available. 

 

Another area that defies logic is the lack of action taken on the 

part of the NDP administration in regard to property tax, Mr. 

Speaker. Funding education through property tax is unfair and 

has been for generations. In fact, as was brought out earlier on, 

one of the statements that Tommy Douglas had made in 1944 

was to do away with the education on property tax. Mr. 

Speaker, that was 63 years ago. And over 47 of those years was 

under CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation-New Democratic Party] and they didn‟t get it done. 

 

A few years ago, just before the ‟03 election, they 

commissioned a report, the Boughen report, only to ignore the 

recommendations. Oh pardon me, all but one. There was a 

recommendation to raise the PST [provincial sales tax] and they 

did that. But the other part of that recommendation was to direct 

that raise in the PST toward the property tax, but they failed to 

do that. So where was the leadership in that, Mr. Speaker? Well 

there was none. There simply was none and again they didn‟t 

get it done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, true to our election commitment, the property tax 

rebate is being increased. In just five months of being elected, 

we are keeping the promise. Furthermore the Saskatchewan 

Party government is researching meaningful resolutions to 

substantially reduce the unfair tax on property. Yet all we get 

from the NDP opposite, as they get up on their little perches and 

start beaking about how much more should be done. 

 

After 47 years of failing to find a solution, 47 years of studying 

the problem, asking for suggestions, then ignoring them and 

doing nothing, they didn‟t get it done. And now they have their 

little temper tantrums on the issue and they say enough studies 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

have been done and that we‟re not doing enough, while they did 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well they might say the money wasn‟t there. Yet there was 

money; 35 million for SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]. There was 72 million plus for 

Navigata, 8 million for mega bingo. They even had $275,000 

for Murdoch Carriere, fired for harassment and convicted for 

assault. 

 

You know, the money was even there for Domtar, an attempt to 

buy votes last fall. Thank goodness smarter heads prevailed and 

better decisions were made, Mr. Speaker, which saved every 

person in Saskatchewan — man, woman, and child — on the 

average of $100. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party is doing some things. It made the 

promise and is now keeping it and we‟ll be doing more. This is 

a budget of keeping promises, Mr. Speaker. This budget is a 

huge growth to benefit all the people. You know, I‟ve only 

touched on some of those benefits. 

 

I‟ve talked about the roads and the highways where the NDP 

couldn‟t understand the necessity of vital transportation links. 

And now the Saskatchewan Party is upgrading highways to help 

sustain economic momentum. I‟ve talked about education 

provisions and the assistance to retain our youth in this 

province. I‟ve talked about the health care and the NDP neglect 

of the health needs, and the Moose Jaw Union Hospital for over 

16 years and the commitment for the Saskatchewan Party to put 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital on a priority list and begin 

expansion plans. 

 

And I‟ve mentioned property tax, Mr. Speaker — the property 

tax relief that the NDP had pledged to do away with since 

1944, but again they didn‟t get it done. Well the Sask Party 

has increased the rebates to the property owners and is 

seeking solutions to a more permanent answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget may be defined as the most 

significant budget in decades toward growth and sustaining 

the economic momentum, and ensuring all Saskatchewan 

people will benefit. It starts, Mr. Speaker, by fixing the 

infrastructure of this province, which creates more wealth and 

economic benefits, and will translate into a positive, 

sustainable, social structure that will benefit all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the well-being of this province, I cannot 

accept the amendments to the budget. But, Mr. Speaker, for 

the well-being of this province I do support a budget for 

growth and benefit for all. I will support the budget that was 

presented by the minister. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity 

to enter debate on the budget. I‟d first like to thank the 

constituents of Saskatoon Fairview who have again put their 

trust in me to represent them here in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are truly interesting times, and certainly it 

has been quite an eye-opener to see how soon the Sask Party 

has shown their true colours. Not only, Mr. Speaker, have they 

gone back on their word by saying one thing before the election 

and doing another after being elected, their legislative agenda is 

exposing their true colours. Mr. Speaker, it is becoming quite 

clear on this side as to who they are pandering to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m amazed as I listen to the speeches at the 

number of members on the government side who seem to think 

that they have created the perfect economic storm. Somehow all 

these economic essentials have just miraculously appeared after 

the Sask Party was elected and Saskatchewan began to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is beyond political partisanships, and perhaps 

they‟re sliding into a bit of historical amnesia. Sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to repeat, repeat, repeat. Mr. Speaker, it was 

the NDP who fixed the economic basket case that 

Saskatchewan was at the end of the ‟80s. Mr. Speaker, it was 

the NDP tax policies, the NDP programs that brought this 

province to this present growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are members on the government side who 

immediately after the election said the finances were stark. 

They said the finances were stark after the election, and now 

after the budget we see they have increased the overall budget 

by 10 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, they announced that they are 

sitting on a $1.3 billion mountain of money. These are also the 

same people who are calling, who were calling our last budget 

unsustainable. Unsustainable, they said, and now they increase 

the budget by 10 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just yesterday members opposite were taking 

credit for the population increase. I want to remind them that 

the population increased over 1 million people in September of 

2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they used to talk about our Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund as a slush fund. Now they have a fiscal Growth and 

Security Fund to balance the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be making four points on this budget. 

Number one, this government has $1.3 billion and all they were 

able to give Saskatchewan residents was an average of $27 of 

property tax relief. A two-for-one pizza. What does this mean? 

It means, Mr. Speaker, an increase of taxes to our cities — 

Yorkton, Saskatoon, Regina. It‟s in the newspapers and 

everyone is talking about it. 

 

Number two, housing. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party‟s answer to 

housing is to study. The member from Athabasca said it best. 

The Sask Party is cutting ribbons on NDP housing projects, 

taking bows, and smiling for the cameras. Mr. Speaker, there is 

no plan, and initially they wouldn‟t even admit there was a 

crisis. Mr. Speaker, there is a shortage of affordable housing in 

Saskatoon, and that is a fact and you don‟t need a study to know 

that there is a crisis. Mr. Speaker, people are demanding action. 

 

Number three, the environment. Mr. Speaker, they diverted 

$320 million we had set aside for the environment in the Green 

Future Fund to help our province meet our emission targets. 

The Sask Party has put in a paltry $10 million toward climate 

change. Of all the ministries, this is certainly the most 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

disappointing. 

 

And number four, Mr. Speaker, training. To allow this province 

to continue having the required workforce, we need training 

spaces. The Sask Party with their pile of money have only 

designated 1,100 training spaces. Mr. Speaker, we say we 

should have created 2,000 training spaces which we did in our 

last budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have just heard that we have done nothing 

for 16 years. Well let me tell those members opposite what the 

constituents of Saskatoon Fairview . . . what has happened since 

I have been elected in 2003. The constituents of Saskatoon 

Fairview appreciate the two new high schools, Bethlehem and 

Tommy Douglas which opened in the fall of 2007. They 

appreciate the new family holiday in February. They appreciate 

the tool tax credit, the increase to the minimum wage. They 

appreciate the 2 per cent cut to the PST, the income tax reform. 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I just mentioned a few to attempt 

to correct some of the misconception on that other side. Mr. 

Speaker, this does not sound like nothing for 16 years. This is 

not what the constituents in Saskatoon Fairview think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must comment on Station 20. Particularly on this 

issue, the Sask Party are starting to show their true colours. 

They are taking away from the community a project born in 

community and they are taking away from the most vulnerable 

in our society. And they are doing it and saying this government 

does not subsidize grocery stores or malls. Mr. Speaker, if this 

wasn‟t so serious, it would be pathetic. Mr. Speaker, their 

comments and actions speak volumes to the people of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party terminated the Chair and 

Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board. They have no 

answer, Mr. Speaker, as to what will be the financial or legal 

ramifications of their actions and what message their actions are 

sending to the practitioners in this field, the message regarding 

the impartiality of the Labour Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, as 

we heard earlier, the member from Regina Lakeview has 

indicated that there are ways to do transitions and then there is 

the example with the labour board. What is the message when 

you make statements that this board will be more in line with 

the thinking of the Premier? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance inserted in his budget 

speech two short sentences. “We promised to introduce changes 

to ensure greater democracy in the workplace and to protect 

essential services. We have kept these promises.” 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these two short sentences, the minister felt 

these legislative changes important enough to insert in the 

budget speech. But I would ask the minister when it was that his 

party promised essential services. Was this promise in the Sask 

Party platform? Was this promise made in a public speech or 

was it whispered behind closed doors? Or sent in an email? Or 

sent in an email? And when did the Sask Party promise 

essential services legislation to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, quite the contrary. They said essential 

services legislation was not on. It was not necessary. It was not 

an option. They said all this before the election, and we all 

know differently now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as for democracy in the workplace as proposed by 

the Sask Party, I can only say that it is not going over well with 

a good portion of the citizens of this province. And if this is a 

definition of democracy, then it would be foreign to most labour 

relations regimes in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his budget address, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour said that his party will “. . . 

be fostering a more fair, balanced, safe, and competitive labour 

environment, thereby ensuring essential services are available 

[to] . . . families during labour [disputes] . . .” 

 

An Hon. Member: — He hasn‟t taken any steps in that 

direction. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — He has not taken any steps, as the member 

says. He said, we plan to partner and foster strategic 

partnerships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, working families of the province have played a 

significant role in returning Saskatchewan from the dark days of 

the ‟80s, a return so that today we can speak of population 

increases surpassing 1 million. We can speak of the $1.3 

million mountain of money. We can speak of paying down the 

debt by 250 million. We can speak of a return to brighter days 

so we can build hospitals, research facilities, schools, roads, 

invest in infrastructure. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what are the thanks that the good working 

families of Saskatchewan receive? What are the thanks that they 

receive? The thanks, Mr. Speaker, is to get democracy in the 

workplace and essential services legislation Sask Party style. 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the thank you they were expecting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on essential services legislation the minister talks 

about being in the middle of the pack. Mr. Speaker, this is 

absolute nonsense. It lacks any clarity or any understanding. 

There are only different models, Mr. Speaker. There are models 

that are in place throughout the country within which collective 

bargaining is done. Mr. Speaker, to speak of being in the middle 

of the pack is nonsense and it should be withdrawn and we 

should quit talking about that. Discuss the various models, 

that‟s what should be happening. Have consultation. Have 

debate. But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party — and perhaps 

because they are completely unaware of this Act, act as if there 

are no essential services provided during strikes in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And here is what Rosalee Longmoore, president of 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, had to say. Mr. Speaker, in a 

posting on the SUN website, March 18, Rosalee Longmoore 

says: 

 

Premier Brad Wall, when the Saskatchewan Party was 

sitting as the Official Opposition stated in a January 10, 

2007 letter addressed to myself, Rosalee Longmoore, 

SUN President: 

 

“I want to emphasize that it is our view that in the past, 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, on their own volition, 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

has been responsible for protecting public safety by 

agreeing to provide essential services during a strike.” 

 

That‟s what the Premier said when he was in opposition. 

 

SUN has now said: 

 

On five occasions in the past 34 years, SUN has taken job 

action to obtain a fair collective agreement for members. 

During job action, SUN members are on call, either on 

site and or nearby, ready and willing to respond, if 

requested by the employer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say: 

 

SUN members do not require government intervention to 

fulfill their professional obligation to patients and the 

public . . . Therefore it is clear the true intent of the 

proposed Bill No. 5 has nothing to do with respect to 

ensuring public safety, but rather is intended to strip union 

members of their right to strike. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who‟s that from? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Rosalee Longmoore, president of 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are in excess of 37,000 employees in the 

health care alone which essential services will affect, not 

counting the countless other workers contemplated in the 

government‟s essential services legislation. Mr. Speaker, what 

in particular do these groups want? 

 

The Health Sciences Association, they would like public 

hearings. Service Employees International Union has a 

campaign 365 — no legislation without consultation. The 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses state: 

 

As a matter of fundamental fairness at least, the 

Government must afford deep and meaningful consultation 

to those affected by such legislation . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quoting from the 

Grain Services Union: 

 

. . . it is our firm belief that the legislation proposing to 

change the dynamics of labour relations should be enacted 

only after extensive consultation with the affected 

stakeholders. In addition, the proposed stakeholder 

dialogue should be accompanied by appropriate 

opportunities for open public . . . [debate]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Canadian Union of Public Employees: 

 

“If the genuine objective is to [be established] „fair and 

balanced‟ labour laws,” then the new government should 

establish an independent committee of review to hold 

public hearings . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have is instead a government 

ramming and pushing legislation down people‟s throats, and 

there‟s nothing other than that happening here. Mr. Speaker, 

these workers are calling on the government to hold meaningful 

public consultations and public hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is speaking of fostering relationships. 

And here I would think that he would have a wonderful 

opportunity to allow for meaningful dialogue and meaningful 

consultations. Allow the public hearings on the issue of 

democracy in the workplace and essential services during 

strikes. Mr. Speaker, workplaces require a co-operative 

approach, particularly in the area of health care. The residents 

of this province expect nothing less than professional care. 

 

And I would ask the minister: exactly why is the Sask Party 

bringing this legislation? Why the mean-spirited approach, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? The Sask Party says, people won‟t come to 

Saskatchewan because of the unions and the labour laws. Mr. 

Speaker, our population was growing before any changes to the 

labour legislation were proposed. 

 

And what signal does this send to the labour force we so dearly 

need to come to our province during this period of rapid 

growth? Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in a competitive 

environment. Working families are not interested in 

mean-spirited workplaces. They want to work, earn a living, 

and raise their families. What is the message we are sending to 

our workforce? 

 

The Sask Party said business wouldn‟t come to Saskatchewan 

because of labour laws. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are on an 

economic roll under our present labour laws. Saskatchewan is 

blessed with natural resources, agriculture, scientific research, 

and working families take a back seat to no one. And now we 

are number one in Canada — the number one economic engine 

in this country. Why then has the Sask Party singled out 

working families? Why have they singled out working families? 

Why the mean-spirited attack? Why has it come to people 

having to say, this is the worst labour legislation in Canada? 

Why derail the economic roll that we are on? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask the minister to rethink his 

approach. Allow a thorough discussion of the legislation 

through public consultations and hearings. What is he afraid of? 

What is he afraid of, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And with this, I would like to end by saying this. It takes all the 

people in Saskatchewan to make this province work, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I want to thank the working families of 

this province for all that they do. And I want to thank all the 

people of this province because we in the NDP are an inclusive 

party and, Mr. Speaker, we govern for all. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and 

voting against the budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s certainly a privilege to join in the 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

debate on this, the first Saskatchewan Party budget in the 

history of this province, Mr. Speaker, and it truly is a historic 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot that has happened over the last four 

or five months. And, you know, I just want to recap a little bit 

starting back on November 7, on election day. That the people 

of Saskatchewan on that day decided to certainly go from a 

party that was tired, was old, looked back to the past all the 

time, that really wasn‟t forward-thinking, really had no new 

ideas, Mr. Speaker. And they voted for something new, 

something youthful, something forward-looking, and a party 

that had a lot of great ideas and you‟re certainly seeing come to 

fruition in this provincial budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have been sitting and listening off and on to 

many speakers on that side of the House which you know 

interestingly, as long as those speeches are, they have been old, 

they have looked to the past, they haven‟t looked to the future. 

You know, they‟ve been complaining and the one thing that I 

have really noticed over the last day and a half, couple days of 

people speaking is that they haven‟t figured out that they lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November 7 there was 38 seats elected for the 

Saskatchewan Party and just 20 for the NDP. And I heard one 

of the members back when the Speech from the Throne, yes but 

if you‟d looked at popular vote and if we would have got a few 

more votes here and a few more votes there, we might have 

almost won. They lost, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They lost, and they 

haven‟t really learned. Obviously in their speeches . . . speech 

after speech they talk about, well this is almost an NDP budget 

and everything that‟s good in the province is because of what 

we have done when we were in government. They lost. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on November 7 people of 

Saskatchewan gave them enough credit to have 20 members in 

this Chamber. And in four months, they‟ve dropped down by 

one already. They‟re at 19, and it will be very interesting to see 

in the next couple of years how many more realize that they 

didn‟t lose this election — I truly believe, with a budget like 

this, they‟ve lost the next election and possibly even the next 

election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think they‟re seeing it. I mean it was only a month and a 

half or two months after the last general election where you saw 

the member from — is it Cumberland? —Cumberland decide 

that she wanted to try her chances in the federal election, which 

we certainly saw how that ended up. 

 

Am I correct when I say that the NDP Party in the federal 

election finished third? It was the chosen candidate by the 

Liberal Party, and she didn‟t do very well. Didn‟t do very well 

at all, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s interesting that in such a short time, 

I mean she was elected by the people and within about a month 

and a half, she realized the writing was on the wall. She realized 

what was happening within that caucus which really was not 

productive. It was a lot of navel gazing and saying, poor us, and 

I think the people made a mistake and if we keep the shag 

carpet and the lava lamps, I think people will come back to that 

eventually, Mr. Speaker, and they will elect us the next time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that she was probably the wisest 

of them all so far. I would say that the former member from 

Cumberland was probably the wisest of them all. Realized that 

the . . . well quite frankly, under the leadership of the former 

premier, that the future wasn‟t real bright. And from some of 

the rumours, quite frankly, of people that are looking at putting 

their names forward, some of them sitting in the opposition 

bench right now, I think she probably looked at that and said, 

what are the chances moving forward that we‟re going to do 

well in the next general election? I don‟t think we‟re going to 

do that well. Personally I think my only opportunity of being 

elected on any sort of a string again now, well maybe if I 

entered into federal politics on the Liberal side of things, maybe 

that will help. 

 

Because quite frankly when you look at the issues that that 

opposition has been raising, the questions that they‟ve been 

asking, and the speeches that they have been giving in this 

budget debate, it really is old. It‟s tired. It isn‟t looking to the 

future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it quite often tells me that they 

just quite haven‟t got it yet. They just quite haven‟t learned that 

they lost the last general election. Thirty-eight will be 20 and 

now 19. Probably, I‟m going to predict, in about six months to a 

year it could be down to 18, might be down to 17. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And we‟re certainly looking forward to those by-elections 

because when people realize . . . You know, there was certainly 

a lot of fearmongering that went on during the last general 

election about private health care and about senior homes that 

were going to be closed down and about all sorts of things that 

were going to happen. And they see the first budget of this new 

government, and people are saying, man, they‟re putting money 

towards infrastructure. They‟re putting money towards human 

resources. They‟re putting money towards education. They‟re 

putting money towards highways. They‟re dealing with issues 

in social services, social programs. They‟re hitting on all 

cylinders. So we‟re looking forward to, when the by-election is 

called in Cumberland, of doing very well. 

 

And as I said, in the next six months to a year or two, as a 

couple more realize that the future is so dark on that side and 

they step down, and the people of Saskatchewan realize how 

bright under this new government and this new budget that the 

future looks in the province, I think you‟re going to be seeing 

more members join this side of the benches than will join on 

that side of the benches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I do want to talk about in the half-hour that I 

have is the numbers around the Ministry of Health, the numbers 

around the Ministry of Health. Certainly it‟s been a very, very 

positive budget in many, many different areas. 

 

But when we campaigned and when we were in opposition for 

eight years and learning certainly the way the government ran 

and some of the pitfalls that the former NDP government were 

running into, we knew that human resources in health care was 

a very important issue. And we‟ve talked about that — when I 

was a critic, and before myself when the member from Melfort 

was a critic in health care — that human resources, the shortage 

of nurses, was going to be a huge problem. 

 

And had the former government listened to ourselves at that 

time — which I certainly don‟t expect them to — had they 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

listened to ourselves about eight years ago and started dealing 

with the nurse shortage, I don‟t think we‟d be in the dire straits 

that we‟re in right now. But I can certainly understand. I mean, 

being the NDP Party, they wouldn‟t want to listen to what the 

Saskatchewan Party had to say. 

 

But maybe they would have listened to the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses, who called on them year after year to deal with the 

nursing shortage. And I think the NDP figured when they had 

the now critic of Health, who is the former president of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, well that should quiet down the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. We‟ve brought this person 

onside. We‟ve got her. She‟s been elected, and it will be just a 

panacea. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It went the other 

way, quite frankly. It was really a slap in the face because that 

government didn‟t listen any more after they had somebody 

come from the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses than they did 

prior. In fact when you look at the criticism from the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses over the last eight years, it has 

only increased year after year after year. And the frustration 

level — I‟ve had the opportunity to meet with the nurses on 

many different levels, whether it‟s leadership to whether it‟s 

people on the floor — the absolute frustration they had with the 

previous government is astonishing. 

 

And it‟s interesting to listen to I think the critic, the Health 

critic who was talking a little bit about it earlier, and I want to 

kind of revisit some of those comments in a little bit. But we 

certainly talked a lot about health care, human resources. But 

what we realized when we became government is the huge 

deficit left in capital, the huge deficit left in repairs, left in 

buildings that were deteriorating, left in buildings that have 

seen past their useful life. 

 

And I am so proud. I really think the cornerstone, the 

foundation of this government moving forward, the foundation 

of this budget is the $1 billion — that‟s with a “b” — $1 billion 

that will go to infrastructure in this budget alone. It‟s absolutely 

amazing. And, you know, I know after dealing with a number 

of the CEOs and the number of health districts — I‟m sure the 

Minister of Education will say the same as he deals with school 

divisions; I know the Minister of Highways will talk about it — 

that it‟s not that this deficit in capital was not known. It wasn‟t 

that this all of a sudden sprung up over the last four months. 

 

The former government, the NDP Party, knew exactly the shape 

of our buildings, whether it was schools, whether it‟s hospitals, 

whether it was highways. They knew exactly the shape, but 

they didn‟t care. They felt that wouldn‟t gain any votes. Let‟s 

try and put money towards — oh I don‟t know — 100 million 

in Prince Albert to shore up that seat or whether it was 8 million 

towards Riversdale to try and shore up that seat. They never 

dealt with the key infrastructure issues and problems that were 

facing the province. 

 

And within four months, within four months of our government 

being named to office, we absolutely realized the infrastructure 

deficit that we had been left. And instead of doing what the 

former government did and try and hide from it and think that 

there isn‟t a problem there, our government has put money 

towards that — $1 billion towards infrastructure. 

Now I can understand that the opposition will probably vote 

against the budget. In fact pretty much anyone that spoke or 

everyone that spoke says they‟re going to support the 

amendment; they won‟t support the budget. And isn‟t it 

surprising because in 16 years they knew this deficit was there. 

In the last eight years, they knew that deficit was there. In the 

last four years, they knew that deficit was there. And in 

particular in the last year they knew that deficit was there 

because they spent $2 million on studying all the health care 

facilities we have in the province and realized — $2 million on 

this study, this VFA study — they realized the problems that 

our health care facilities were in. They know the problem our 

health care facilities are in. And it‟ll be very interesting if they 

stand in their spot and vote against $100 million that‟s going to 

rectify the problem, that opposition . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Are they going to vote against money 

that is going to go long-term care homes whether it‟s in 

Kinistino, that has black mould. Are you going to vote against 

repairing those long-term care homes, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, is that opposition . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh 

they‟re howling because I might be pointing my finger. I said 

you; I shouldn‟t have said you. 

 

Is that opposition going to lobby and vote against the fact that 

we‟re going to put chillers on top of the hospitals in Saskatoon, 

and Regina so we don‟t have to cancel operations this summer 

like they had to last summer because they simply didn‟t keep 

the buildings under repair, Mr. Speaker? Is that opposition 

going to vote against money that is going to fix those problems? 

Or are they going to continue to vote against that because 

they‟re going to continue to stick their head in the sand because 

they don‟t want to acknowledge the problem is there? I think 

that‟s certainly what‟s going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many dollars in this budget 

that are moving, whether it‟s health care, whether it‟s education, 

whether it‟s any ministry that is going to move this forward, 

this province forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When I look at — oh where to start — $100 million into 

primary repairs of health care facilities; another $32 million in 

capital funding that will continue the work in Regina at the 

Regina General Hospital; which will help complete the 

Humboldt hospital; that will certainly do work in Saskatoon, 

whether it‟s the Oliver long-term care facility. That money has 

been put forward because we know that some of these facilities 

have passed their useful life. We‟ve continued to put that 

money into the budget so that those facilities will be finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are boosting the spending on nursing 

recruitment, and retention programs by 20.7 million, bringing 

the total expenditure in this area to 26 million. That‟s on top of 

the 60 million and one-time funding the government recently 

allocated in its recruitment and retention partnership with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 

 

So I talked a little bit about the money that we put into capital. 

And it‟s huge dollars. And it‟ll be interesting if they vote 

against that. But I can see they‟ll vote against that because they 

have always wanted to deny that the problem is there because 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

they never addressed it themselves. 

 

In fact as I see the member from Moose Jaw North or Moose 

Jaw Wakamow listening very intently, I just have to comment 

on the public record how interesting it has been and how I 

really will applaud her for standing, day in and day out, reading 

petitions on the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. That is just really, 

really quite interesting because I believe that member was in 

cabinet for five years, six years? Well she‟s glad that I noticed. 

 

I think the problem is, is the people of Moose Jaw never noticed 

anything that she did regarding the Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

over the last eight years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it was 

never mentioned. It became a very important election campaign 

issue. In fact I think it was the issue that we were on top of, and 

that‟s why we have the member from Moose Jaw North joining 

our ranks . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I can guarantee and I can tell the 

people of Moose Jaw that he‟s carried the message stronger and 

louder in four months about the need for that hospital in Moose 

Jaw than two cabinet ministers did in that city for 16 years. In 

fact the message is being carried louder and stronger by that 

member as he talks to our cabinet members than any petition 

read by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So certainly we‟re moving forward in a number of areas such as 

capital. But I do want to talk on just briefly, the time that I have, 

on the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Government of 

Saskatchewan partnership and how historic that is and how 

excited we are to see that move forward. 

 

Now I just heard the member from Regina Lakeview talking 

about something about, oh there was partnerships before but I 

just wasn‟t there. Well I know. I know the work that was done 

by the former government, the opposition. I know the work that 

was done, the painstaking work that was done, taken, just prior 

to the last election to try and sign a partnership agreement with 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and they just couldn‟t get it 

done. They couldn‟t get it done. They didn‟t get it done. 

 

And quite frankly, they would never have got it done because it 

took a new government with a new perspective to get that done. 

And we signed the partnership within three months of being 

named government. And I think that‟s quite significant. Not 

only did we sign the partnership; we put money behind it. We 

put $60 million behind what we said. 

 

Well the member again from Moose Jaw Wakamow has a lot to 

say, always has a lot to say about health care when she‟s been 

in opposition. I didn‟t hear her raise a word about health care 

when she was on the government side. But I‟d certainly be glad 

to answer the questions and the concerns that she has about $60 

million and did you transfer it yesterday or did you transfer it 

tomorrow. 

 

The $60 million has been allotted to go towards the partnership. 

But the partnership, it‟s specific in the partnership that it deals 

with vacancies and there will be allotments paid to a fund that 

will be co-managed between SAHO and SUN. But what we 

have to do is work on the base number of vacancies and move 

from there to see, as we fill vacancies, where we‟re at and how 

much money should be put towards that fund. 

 

I wish we could have had a meeting with all the partners and 

groups prior to Monday, when our first meeting with Marlene 

Smadu will be conducted. I wish we could have had it earlier, 

but because of busy schedules, we have got it scheduled for 

Monday. And I look forward to the start of that process, the 

start of the results that, through Marlene Smadu, the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, SAHO, and the CEOs of the 

health districts, will start moving ahead. And I think you‟re 

going to see great things come out of that partnership. 

 

And I certainly understand that, you know. I‟ve been surprised 

that they‟ve even stood and asked any questions on nurse 

recruitment and retention because we‟ve done a very good job 

in the last four months of recruiting and retaining nurses. And I 

know they like to take credit. It was interesting that, when we 

talk about the recruitment efforts that went to the Philippines 

and how successful that was, and the critic from the opposition 

would certainly talk about, well that was our initiative, and 

we‟ve gone a long ways to making that happen. And I know the 

former minister of Health, when we were in committee a couple 

months or a month ago, he was saying, well I don‟t think you 

can take credit because we certainly went a long ways to that. 

 

And I will say that there is certainly some ground works put in 

place. But it never would have happened until there was a 

change of government. It would have never seen, seen the 

results that it saw if it hadn‟t been a change of government 

because there was never a sense of urgency. Number one, they 

could never admit, the former government could never admit 

that there was a shortage. And they would never admit that they 

should set a target. They just couldn‟t bring themselves to that 

because, if they did, they would be acknowledging that they had 

failed over the last 16 years. 

 

So we certainly moved on it immediately, and we brought 300 

nurses. Now the member from Regina Lakeview‟s mumbling. I 

know he‟s frustrated, and he‟s angry that we‟ve been so 

successful in recruiting so many nurses. But we brought 300 

nurses within four months. We will be bringing 300 nurses from 

the Philippines. 

 

The interesting part is, the interesting part is that the critic of 

health care is quoted as saying, well we‟re not so sure that we 

should be doing it because it could be unethical recruiting, in 

one breath, and then she stands in the House and says, but they 

can‟t take credit for it because it was really our idea. So how do 

you do that? You say it was our idea to recruit the nurses from 

the Philippines in one breath, and then you stand over here and 

you say, but I don‟t think you should really do it — because 

we‟ve done it — because it‟s unethical recruitment. And then 

she stands in the House today and says, but now that they‟ve 

done it, it really was our idea. 

 

They didn‟t get it done, Mr. Speaker. And they didn‟t get it 

done, whether it was on human resources. They didn‟t get it 

done, whether it was on capital. And within the first four 

months of a new government and the first budget of a new 

government, we‟ve got it done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We will continue to get it done 

whether it‟s on human resources. We‟ll continue to get it done 

whether it‟s on infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely 

proud to support the first budget of the new Saskatchewan Party 

government. Mr. Speaker, it‟s the first budget of many that I‟ll 

be looking forward to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to enter into the debate on the 

2008-2009 provincial budget, the first budget delivered by a 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

It‟s a budget that clearly outlines our plans to make sure that the 

province is ready for growth. But not only does it plan for 

growth; it sets out our plan to sustain growth in the many, many 

years into the future. It sets out a plan for lasting prosperity, 

something that Saskatchewan people have been looking for for 

many, many years and, I‟m sorry to say, have been disappointed 

for the last 16 years under that NDP government. 

 

Every person I talk to, Mr. Speaker — and I mean every person 

— can‟t think of a better time to be living in Saskatchewan than 

right now, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve talked to NDP supporters. There‟s 

still a few of them out there. I‟ve talked to Liberal supporters, 

even Green Party supporters, Mr. Speaker. And what do they 

say? Every one of them says that we‟re off to a good start and 

that it‟s the best time to be living in Saskatchewan. 

 

We are leading the nation in many, many economic sectors. 

We‟re leading the nation when it comes to statistics about the 

province. And I can say that I‟m very proud to be part of a 

government that‟s involved with that. We had a pretty good 

year in 2007. We‟ll agree to that. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

2008-2009, it‟s going to be going gangbusters in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we will set records. We will keep our promises for 

growth and security, and we will keep all our election promises, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and talk about the great job that the 

Finance minister did. He took his first opportunity as a budget 

and he made history. It is a record budget. 

 

Before I go on and talk about my opinions on the budget, I just 

want to talk about what some of the people had to say regarding 

this budget. Marilyn Braun-Pollon from the CFIB [Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business] . . . and I know that the 

members from the opposite, from the opposition, they quote her 

as well. So I know that they‟ll be very interested in hearing 

what she had to say. She said, “I think small business owners 

will be glad that the government has listened to their priorities.” 

That‟s what Ms. Braun-Pollon had to say. 

 

Dave Marit from SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]: “It‟s pretty nice to see infrastructure is one of 

the focal points . . .” Jayson Clunie, Saskatchewan roadbuilders 

association: “very pleased with the provincial budget.” Sandi 

Urban-Hall, Saskatchewan School Boards Association: 

 

There has been a significant increase to capital . . . It‟s a 

very encouraging . . . step . . . with the billion dollar 

backlog in capital in the province right now, boards are 

excited to see that being recognized and that that message 

has been heard by [this new] government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Very encouraging words. Very 

encouraging. Steve McLellan, Sask Chamber of Commerce: 

 

The fact that they‟re investing as much into infrastructure 

of this province which will allow us to grow the way we 

need to grow strategically . . . is a very positive thing. 

 

Yes. And it goes on and on. I can talk about the Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Health Region. The Regina Qu‟Appelle Health 

Region is thrilled with the building dollars, Mr. Speaker. Yes. 

Here we have Mr. Dave Dutchak, a good boy from Blaine Lake, 

Saskatchewan, with the chamber of commerce: “Clearly, we‟ve 

got to plan for the next 20 years and proper infrastructure needs 

to be in place. So that was good to see.” 

 

We‟ve got quotes here from Marlene Brown of SUN: “I‟m sure 

that you would be aware of all the situations occurring right 

now in health care and how desperately we need to retain nurses 

in the workforce.” I‟m glad to see that the government is doing 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Okay. Ken Rasmussen, director of the Johnson-Shoyama 

School of Public Policy: “. . . a huge under-investment at all 

levels of government over the last decade.” It‟s good to see the 

government is addressing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That‟s just what some of the 

community leaders from across Saskatchewan have had to say 

about the situation and about this very, very positive budget that 

the member from Melfort was able to deliver. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being, I had the 

privilege of being the Finance critic in this House in the last 

legislature. So I was very involved in going out to the rotunda 

and talking to people after the budget, talking to stakeholders 

and seeing what they had to say. And I can honestly say that 

I‟ve never seen a budget that generated more positive reaction 

than I saw on March 19, and that‟s a credit to my colleague the 

Finance minister for the work that he‟s done. And I know he‟ll 

work hard to improve upon it next year to have an even better 

budget. But this is a terrific budget. This is a terrific budget to 

see. 

 

You could hardly find anyone that was critical, that had 

anything critical to say. Even — even, Mr. Speaker — even the 

NDP found it difficult to say anything critical about the budget. 

 

Now I know being Finance critic isn‟t the easiest job in the 

world. However what was the stinging criticism? What was the 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

smoking gun, the stinging criticism that that NDP government 

came up with? What did they have to say? Well they said, it 

was an almost-NDP budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well normally that would be a severe criticism, Mr. Speaker. 

Every member of the House and certainly every member of the 

government side and most people watching at home know that 

nothing could be further from the truth. The Finance critic, he 

failed to realize — the member for Regina Douglas Park — he 

failed to realize one thing: that people remember what NDP 

budgets were like. They remember what NDP budgets were all 

about. You can‟t fool Saskatchewan people very often. And the 

NDP tried, but it usually backfires on them. 

 

Now let‟s have a little trivia question here. It‟s not exactly Are 

You Smarter Than A 5th Grader, but it‟s close. Who can 

remember the NDP budget of 2004? Can I see a show of hands? 

Who can remember the NDP budget of 2004? The member 

from The Battlefords can remember, and I‟m glad to see that. 

What is the first thing that that . . . Do we remember the 

election first of all? It was an election where the NDP, they 

squeaked out an election win with a fear-and-smear campaign. 

So what was the first thing that that newly minted NDP 

government did? And of course not one word about this during 

the election campaign. What did they do? What did they do? 

They raised taxes, Mr. Speaker. The first thing they did of any 

importance was they raised the PST. They created $135 million 

in revenue. They had the Boughen report to look at. They only 

read every other page, just when it talked about increasing. But 

nothing for property tax. 

 

When asked, of course, what did the then Finance minister, the 

current member from Regina Douglas Park said . . . What did 

he say? He said those famous words, that governments don‟t 

talk about raising taxes at election time because it‟s not popular, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s what the member from Regina Douglas 

Park had to say about their first real financial endeavour in that 

new government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke many times as a Finance critic in this 

House, and I also spent time as Post-Secondary Education 

critic. I can remember asking the Post-Secondary Education 

minister at the time, Mr. Thomson, why tuition rates in 

Saskatchewan rose 217 per cent from 1991 to 2005. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not a misprint. I‟m not misspeaking — 217 per 

cent increase. And it was outlined in the University of 

Saskatchewan USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students‟ 

Union] annual report. It was one of those reasons why the NDP 

drove the youth out of Saskatchewan for 16 straight years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Compare that to our $12 million graduate retention program. 

This program will give back up to $20,000 in tuition rebates for 

post-secondary graduates of Saskatchewan, and it will provide 

$125 million over four years to post-secondary institutions in 

our province. Record setting, Mr. Speaker. Record setting 

contributions. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is hardly an NDP 

budget. 

 

Now speaking of education — and I know the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow will be very interested in what I have to 

say — no more is there a striking difference between the NDP 

of old and the new Saskatchewan Party government. 

I can remember being in this House day after day presenting 

petitions asking the NDP government to address the 

infrastructure deficit in K to 12 education. The need for capital 

dollars was very evident. Schools were crumbling around the 

province, roofs were leaking, walls were falling down, and the 

NDP would throw very little money, very little money and even 

less support. They would provide very few dollars for much 

needed repairs and hardly any new construction. 

 

Areas like Arbor Creek in my constituency had received no, no 

support from the NDP government. We had one of the only 

places that under that NDP government was actually growing in 

the province. People were moving into Saskatoon. They‟re 

paying the highest property taxes in the country, and you know 

what the NDP did? They not only ignored the citizens like the 

Arbor Creek initiative group. No, they did much more than that. 

They did much more than just ignore them. 

 

When the Saskatoon public school board made Arbor Creek 

school their number one priority, the Department of Learning, 

on the direction of the previous minister, through her deputy, 

what did she do? She sent an intimidating letter to the school 

board demanding that they change their policies. Of course the 

school board did change their polices, and the schools were 

never built in Arbor Creek. And that‟s why, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP enjoyed less than 20 per cent support in Arbor Creek in 

the last election. And I intend to make sure that it stays that 

way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a sad situation under that NDP government. 

But fast-forward, fast-forward to a new Saskatchewan Party 

government that we have in this province — a new Finance 

minister, the member from Melfort of course, and a new 

Minister of Education, the member from Canora-Pelly. And 

what do we see? A record setting — well members opposite I 

think would like me to fast-forward through the whole speech, 

but that‟s not going to happen because I know they don‟t want 

to hear what I have to finish up with here — a record setting 

$164 million for K to 12 school projects and capital initiatives, 

a record amount of money. 

 

What does this mean for Saskatoon Silver Springs? What does 

this mean for rural Saskatchewan, for urban Saskatchewan, for 

places like Willowgrove in Saskatoon? It means no more 

pleading with the government. It means that moms and dads can 

do things with their kids in the evenings, instead of going to 

meetings to try to lobby a government that wasn‟t listening like 

the NDP government. They didn‟t need all the meetings. They 

just needed a Minister of Education that understood what it 

means in Saskatchewan to support infrastructure in K to 12 

education. 

 

Yes, barely four or five months into this new government the 

government is delivering for parents. It‟s delivering for 

students. It‟s delivering for rural Saskatchewan. And yes, it‟s 

delivering for urban Saskatchewan. It‟s delivering for growing 

places like Willowgrove and Saskatoon Silver Springs. And as 

a result of the budget, school boards and the residents of 

Willowgrove can now plan for their school. Their 

neighbourhood will have a community centre, and their 

neighbourhood will have a cohesiveness that needs to be built 

around a school. 

 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I‟m getting to the end of my speech, I 

want to talk about a very important lesson that we learned in the 

last election. Now who can forget our Premier‟s impassioned 

speech on election night? Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be honest with 

you. I heard from people . . . That was live on television across 

the country because they knew that something very, very 

significant had happened in Saskatchewan. I heard from people 

from Ontario, people from Prince Edward Island, people from 

British Columbia. Never before had they heard such an 

impassioned speech from a new Premier coming into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Members opposite, some of them may not have listened. They 

were busy at the time trying to recount some numbers, but the 

theme of that was hope beats fear. Yes, Mr. Speaker, hope beats 

fear. 

 

The NDP . . . You know, the fear has worked in the past for 

them, and nowhere has it been more pronounced than with 

Saskatchewan‟s Crown corporations. We all heard on the 

doorsteps when we door knocking how the NDP would incite 

fear to the employees in Crown corporations, how they told 

Crown corporation secretaries that had not a political bone in 

their body that they may not have a job after the Saskatchewan 

Party gets in. The stories of how the NDP tried to incite fear are 

quite disturbing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here in contrast, here‟s what we promised as the Saskatchewan 

Party government. This is a document that I‟m sure many, 

many people are familiar with. The Saskatchewan Party will 

ensure Crown corporations continue to provide Saskatchewan 

people with the highest quality utilities at the lowest cost while 

directing Crown dividends to priorities like health care, 

highways, and education. Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we 

promised. That‟s what we promised the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s what we delivered on March 19. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Crown corporations were an important part of that — $200 

million dividend from the CIC to the GRF [General Revenue 

Fund]; $365 million special dividend, 215 million of that for 

debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, keeping our promise of $250 

million in total; $140 million for highway infrastructure; and 

$40 million, $40 million to be used for green initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know members opposite will be interested in this next 

point: $1.4 billion clean coal project. It came up in question 

period today. And it‟s just very interesting: where does the NDP 

stand on clean coal? Where do they stand? There was some 

concern about members opposite. But after question period, I 

just had a chance to come across some things that were said by 

the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

And this was April 19, 2007, on CBC news, and you know it 

was something. He said people would pay more for power to 

help the environment. And I quote, “Saskatchewan people are 

saying they‟re prepared to pay higher power rates if that‟s the 

cost of fighting climate change, Environment Minister [and I‟m 

quoting] John Nilson said.” 

 

So there it is, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know what‟s happened. 

That‟s not even a year ago — April 19, 2007 — and they‟re 

trying to change. It is a flip-flop, Mr. Speaker. I could go on and 

on about it. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, what are the Crown corporations doing under 

this government? We‟re working with the private sector. We‟re 

working on hydroelectricity, wind generation, and heat 

recovery. We are improving our transmission system. We are 

working on a cross-Canada grid. The Premier has talked to the 

Prime Minister and has made it a priority. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we are not afraid to talk about nuclear power 

generation in Saskatchewan. That‟s something that the NDP has 

kind of talked about, but really nothing, nothing, nothing has 

been done. 

 

We‟re providing high-speed Internet service and cellular 

coverage to more Saskatchewan residents than ever before, 

investing in digital technology. We‟re bidding on the wireless 

spectrum auction. We‟re making strategic infrastructure 

investments in gas distribution, transmission, and storage 

services. We are protecting our environment by partnering with 

the private sector in flare gas capture, extending benefits of 

natural gas to more residents, helping customers use less 

energy, updating SGI‟s [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

aging and complex computer system, enabling Saskatchewan 

residents to do their own online searches for vehicles at SGI. 

We‟re offering quality water and waste water services 

infrastructure and development to communities. Mr. Speaker, I 

could go on and on. 

 

What sums it up though, Mr. Speaker, is an email I received 

from one of the people that work in the Crown corporations. 

And they said, and I quote: 

 

I didn‟t know what to expect from the Sask Party. All we 

ever heard [in the Crowns] is about the NDP. 

 

Now in your first four months, I can see that you intend 

on running the Crowns like a Business. 

 

No goofy investments. 

 

No political agenda. 

 

Just provide service at the lowest possible cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker that‟s exactly what our commitment was to the 

people of Saskatchewan and that‟s exactly what we were 

intending to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it was one of the many, many 

thousands of people that are coming to learn more about the 

Saskatchewan Party government and their comfort level is . . . 

And I know it upsets, it upsets members opposite when they 

hear things like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s what we are delivering. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan residents like it. Saskatchewan taxpayers like it. 

And yes, even to the consternation of members opposite, Crown 

corporation employees like it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s another reason why hope beats fear. It‟s 

another reason, Mr. Speaker, why members on this side of the 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

House will continue to stay here for a long, long time. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a reason why members over on the other side, even 

though their numbers are dwindling, will stay there for a long, 

long time. 

 

With that I would like to take my seat and indicate that I will be 

voting to defeat the amendment and to support the budget. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. It‟s indeed a pleasure to enter into this budget debate. It‟s 

time, time to have some good, level-headed debate about this 

very important decision that we‟re going to make in the next 

few days and weeks ahead. And this decision, of course, will 

have long-lasting effects. And as the member opposite said, we 

will remember this budget, I‟m sure. 

 

Before we start though, I just want to say that I want to reflect 

on an event that many of us were at a few weeks ago in 

Saskatoon — the Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate 

Association. Many of us were there and were watching the kids 

and high school kids debate. And we were talking and we were 

joking amongst ourselves how we were going to learn some 

lessons from these debaters, these high school debaters, some of 

them as young as grade 5. 

 

And one of the main themes or one of the main practices you 

have is what you call ad hominem. You attack the argument and 

not the person. You rely on the logic and not the emotion to get 

you through that. And of course over this past few days we‟ve 

seen a lot of emotion. People get wrapped up, but they kind of 

ignore the logic. And I think that‟s what some of the problems 

with this, this debate on this really important budget misses the 

point. Of course there‟s some good points that . . . I have to say 

I appreciate the emphasis on infrastructure. Infrastructure‟s 

clearly very, very important and they‟ve made their choices. 

Some of the choices we would have to disagree with very much 

and one that I have to talk about and it‟s a headline from The 

StarPhoenix, March 20. It talks about no funds and I quote: 

 

No funds for St. Mary replacement 

 

Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools is bitterly 

disappointed Wednesday‟s budget included no 

replacement money for a crammed and crumbling 

inner-city school. 

 

At the heart of a city-driven plan to revitalize the 

neighbourhood of Pleasant Hill sits St. Mary Community 

School, which was so crowded earlier this year classes 

were held in the teachers‟ lounge and the library doubled 

as a homeroom. A failing boiler frequently leaves the 

gymnasium freezing. 

 

“Disappointed probably really underscores our feeling 

towards the St. Mary project,” Don Lloyd, the school 

division‟s superintendent of administrative services, said 

Wednesday. “(It‟s a) very valuable project for that 

community.” 

 

And I agree. So there are some points like that that were missed 

and I have to say it was a real disappointment. 

 

I also have to say, you know, it‟s interesting the members 

opposite say they don‟t want to look in the rear-view mirror. 

They don‟t want to talk, and the next line they talk about is 16 

years. But yet at the same time I‟ve seen the press release that 

talks about the 15th balanced budget. Kind of interesting how 

you put those together. It‟s kind of a, kind of a odd thing. 

 

And I had to say the member from Silver Springs, one the 

favourite things I heard from him last year was we‟re sitting on 

a mountain of money and this year they are sitting on that 

mountain of money — $1.3 billion — and what have they 

chosen to do with it? I have some very, very grave concerns 

about. 

 

But we‟ll go to some of those quotes. And I do want to say and 

reiterate that our side has identified four major concerns. The 

first of course is the property tax or what we might call the 

pizza rebate, the $27 that we might see. But with the, what the 

city officials from many cities are saying, they‟re very worried 

that this will be eaten up. For example here‟s another headline 

from The StarPhoenix again on March 20. This headline is: 

 

Budget shortchanges city: Atchison 

 

Gov‟t revenue-sharing . . . coming to city won‟t be 

enough to stave off tax increase . . . 

 

Now what does he say. Here‟s the quote: 

 

“The province was saying that they were going to put in 

seven per cent (more) in revenue sharing, and in fact it is 

seven per cent for the cities — so that‟s about $1.2 to $1.4 

million. [That‟s] What we‟ve been asking for, though, is 

approximately $5 million from the province. So we‟re 

short about $4 million at this time,” Atchison told 

reporters at a press conference after the budget was 

delivered. 

 

“So what that means for taxes this coming year is it‟s 

going to be a very, very difficult year for us — because 

last year we did receive $5 million, and people have to 

understand that for every $1 million, that‟s one per cent 

on taxes.” 

 

Now it‟s interesting. That same article goes on to quote Roberta 

Fehr, a homeless woman who works for . . . This is quote: 

 

Roberta Fehr, a homeless woman who works for a 

community group helping people coping with extreme 

poverty, was incredulous to learn Saskatchewan Housing 

Corp. will receive $5 million less than last year. The 

province‟s newly-created task force on affordable housing 

is a waste of resources because homelessness has been 

studied to death, she said. 

 

So this is a problem about the property taxes. 

 

Another one of course is training spots. This is a real weakness 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

and for somebody, a minister who has direct experience in this, 

we should have expected more. 

 

Our third concern focuses around environment. And I have to 

say that it‟s a sad, sad day that we have a Minister of 

Environment who won‟t champion environment causes but 

seemed delighted and happy to have our green initiative fund 

gutted — gutted, Mr. Speaker — and diverted to other projects. 

Other projects that are worthwhile, but when you see green 

funds going to highways I have to wonder what‟s going on. 

And she seems very happy with the paltry amount that‟s in 

there. 

 

And today we had a discussion about clean coal and all those 

energy things. And I think the key word — and this is one word 

I would ask her to learn — is sustainability because 

sustainability is the key. They‟re taking many of our reports — 

the green strategy, the climate change action plan — very 

important, but learn about sustainability, sustainability. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, our fourth concern, and this is so 

important, is about housing. And of course I was really 

disappointed, I was really disappointed that the day before the 

budget the Minister of Social Services announces the 

establishment of a housing affordability task force. Well my 

shock and disappointment continues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟ve been talking. Many people have approached me and 

they‟ll say, how do you make contact with this group? How do 

you make contact with this group? Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve 

learned on the website that actually they have a little web page, 

and you write them. And if they are so inclined, they‟ll invite 

you. 

 

But I have to tell you I‟m very disappointed in the minister for 

not announcing public meetings and a public consultation. Here 

she took three months, three months to organize a two-month 

task force, and so this is really, really disappointing. 

 

And of course we know that Mr. Merriman when he said, you 

can‟t sit back and do nothing, and we‟re going to look and see 

what those folks actually produce out of this report. It‟s a very 

interesting thing. And of course we can see the headlines, and 

they are shocking. Here we go. “Milroy tenants up in arms.” 

That was the February 16, 2008. A couple facing $215 rent 

increase in apartment. What‟s happening? We get a study, 

another study. “Student protest out in the cold.” Students aren‟t 

even included in this group. So what‟s happening there? And 

little done to address the housing crisis. It‟s very, very sad. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we were equally shocked not to hear that part 

of the attention on the task force would be on First Nations or 

Métis housing, both on- and off-reserve. This is a very 

important area, and not a word about that. And of course the 

North. And one area that I think is very, very important is 

dealing with people living with disabilities and their housing 

needs. Clearly ignored. Clearly, clearly ignored. Well as I 

pointed out a few weeks ago, our government in February a 

year ago announced over $100 million for renewing our 

communities. Sixty million of that were going specifically for 

housing initiatives. 

 

And I said then, and I‟ll say it today, and I will continue to say 

it, and I will ask this government to have the same brave, bold, 

strong leadership for our inner cities in this province — not 

only for Saskatoon, but for Moose Jaw, for Regina, Prince 

Albert, all the cities and communities. You know it was 

interesting when I was phoning around after the budget was 

delivered. People were talking about housing even in small 

communities. When you announce training spots, you have to 

have places for people to be. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in many ways this Throne Speech was 

described by one journalist as a bit of job jar. They had a list of 

things they were going to do. Didn‟t really make a lot of sense. 

They‟re high on the hype. They‟ve got a lot of hype going into 

it, but really there was no overlying vision that people could 

understand. Where was this government going? Now you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? This budget looks like a bit of a Pandora‟s 

box. We‟re opening it up and we‟re getting a peak inside and 

we‟re really starting to understand what is happening with this 

government. 

 

Did they really take the time to plan out some of these things 

that they‟re getting into a little bit of trouble about? For 

example, the other night we were asking about the highways, 

how many more kilometres were actually going to be paved this 

year than last year. The minister was very evasive on that. 

Wouldn‟t answer it. Wouldn‟t answer it. And it turns out, and it 

can‟t be denied — and if it is, that‟d be great; I‟d love to hear it 

— but it turns out it‟s something like 28.5 more kilometres, 

28.5 more kilometres. That‟s pretty sad for all the hype that 

we‟re getting here. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And of course we‟re talking . . . And we‟ve had some 

interesting news today about the modernization strategy of 

Social Services. Of course this now looks like it‟s ancient 

history, a bit of a train wreck. You know, it‟s a Doppler effect 

coming down the road. You know something‟s not very pretty 

about what‟s happening here. 

 

And of course the press release today was even more alarming 

because all the little code words . . . like really, what does it 

mean? It talks about layoffs not due to this strategy, but what‟s 

really, really happening? We see in the budget book — and, Mr. 

Speaker, I just want to take a minute — we see in the budget 

book the employment support and income assistance section 

goes from last year, 310 million down to 298 million. That‟s a 

change of over $12 million. And then in their book over here it 

talks about a savings of $1.1 million. Now what‟s happening 

with that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now I do have to say there‟s some very good things that are 

happening, but we need to know more about it, because there 

may be problems with it. For example, the 1.1 million for 

increased funding for transition houses and sexual assault 

centres — very well received. And I think the government 

deserves kudos if they deliver on that in a meaningful way that 

helps all centres and all people who are in that area of need. 

Very important. So I will give them credit for that. 

 

I am also looking forward to the 500,000 one-time funding to 

host a summit of CBO [community-based organization] 

organizations. I am looking forward to that because I think it is 



April 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

very important to involve people from the CBO sector in their 

planning. I think it is good, and I think that a lot of credit 

deserves to go to government for that. 

 

But I do have some questions about that. Will those be public 

meetings? When we did the green strategy, I know the critic 

came to every meeting at the green strategy. Will the same thing 

be happening with the CBO summit? Or will we or others who 

might have a different point of view be frozen out? So I will be 

looking for how those CBO summits will be handled. I think 

it‟s a very important initiative, and if we can get people to 

work, that‟s very, very important. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, getting back to this strategy, modernization 

strategy, I do have some deep, deep concerns because of where 

the government was going. And I don‟t know what kind of 

consultations happened in January, February, and December 

after the disabilities council was disbanded in the dark of night. 

But the minister assured us all that she was talking to different 

groups, and that‟s good. 

 

But clearly, clearly anybody who‟s been involved in this area of 

Social Services knows that, over the course of the past few 

years, one of the most important areas are dealing with people 

who are living with disabilities and disability income supports. 

 

The information is out there. Over 70, 75 per cent of the people 

on a static caseload are people with disabilities. So if the 

minister wants to make a big impact, a big impact in that area, 

consult with those folks on disabilities, those people living with 

disabilities, so they can have supports that have dignity and 

respect and can help those folks get to work. 

 

There are many problems with Social Services that are always 

trying to be refined and improved. But I would say and I would 

recommend to this government, take a look because, if you talk 

to a lot of groups across Saskatchewan, the issue around 

disabilities is very, very, very important. And so to ignore that 

and say, we just want to refine, we want to polish up the Social 

Services, that area of employment support and income 

assistance . . . You know, if you want to make something really 

happen for this province in a big way in the next four years, 

take a look at how you can support people living with 

disabilities — huge, huge stuff there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I do have some concerns about 

what‟s going to be happening in this area of Social Services. 

The minister has not established her credibility very well. She‟s 

had some issues since January, starting with the disabilities 

council, then going to the housing task force the day before the 

budget came out, the modernization strategy. That‟s a bit of . . . 

I don‟t know how else you describe it. But the government got 

caught, got caught trying to lay off people, and now they‟re 

backtracking. 

 

And when you read this press release — and I was trying to 

make sense of it — I got to tell you, they should get somebody 

over there who can write plain English. Plain English would go 

a long way because this is . . . What is this? Do you want to 

hear it? The minister‟s over there, I mean, and it‟s all . . . Well 

they can get it on their website. It just came out before, before 

House. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are concerns, huge concerns about this. 

But I do want to say, another headline here, “Little in budget for 

poor, groups complain.” This is again the day after, and this is 

what Peter Gilmer said in that. The headline is, “Little in budget 

for poor, groups complain.” It starts, I quote: 

 

“I don‟t think . . . this budget deals seriously with the 

question of poverty in Saskatchewan and it certainly, in 

and of itself, is not dealing with the crisis of affordable 

house quality and affordable housing . . .” said Peter 

Gilmer with the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry. “What 

we‟re really not seeing in this budget, given a very good 

financial position for this province, is a significant 

commitment to a social agenda.” 

 

And then it goes on: 

 

“It didn‟t go far enough to include the things that would 

make sure everyone can participate, especially those with 

low incomes who cannot afford the skyrocketing prices of 

housing in Saskatchewan,” he said. 

 

Both Forbes and Gilmer welcomed the announcement that 

$5 million will be set aside for food banks and 

community-based organizations (CBOs) for life skills, 

development and job-skills training for under-skilled 

individuals. 

 

So we can recognize the good stuff, but there are some serious 

issues. Even the Minister of Finance, even the Minister of 

Finance recognized the day after that there were some 

questions. And I‟ll read from the canada.com network. And the 

headline is “Saskatchewan housing situation needs more than 

the budget provides: Gantefoer.” And this is in the Leader-Post, 

Wednesday March 19, 2008. It goes: 

 

Regina — After announcing a budget that focuses largely 

on areas such as highways, health care and education, 

Finance Minister Rod Gantefoer admitted the budget 

didn‟t go as far as he would have wanted to address some 

social issues. 

 

“We‟ve addressed many of those issues in our platform of 

commitments and we‟re certainly doing that,” he said on 

Wednesday. “There are some things that are still undone 

and I recognize that. For example, we need to get a good 

handle on what needs to be done to improve the housing 

situation more than is provided for in this budget.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can go on, and I can go on, especially 

about the Health Disparity by Neighbourhood Income report 

that the Minister of Health assured me that he was going to read 

but seems to be more interested in the infrastructure report. 

Should have read this report because I tell you the whole issue 

around Station 20 would be clear as day why they should be 

putting money into Station 20. 

 

But I see my time is almost up. I just want to end with a quote 

here from The StarPhoenix: “Government‟s actions signal 

trouble ahead,” and clearly it does. And I will quote now: “If, as 

is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party uses its first 

budget to set the tone for its administration, the province has a 

growing list to worry about.” Mr. Speaker, I couldn‟t agree 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2008 

more. Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the amendment and 

against the main motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

certainly pleased to be able to enter into this budget debate. As 

many of my colleagues on this side of the House have said, it is 

certainly a historic budget. History will regard this budget as a 

pivotal budget, a turning point for this province when this 

province . . . a turn to the future and let the past be behind it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A record investment of $1 billion into infrastructure. A budget 

that‟s entitled Ready for Growth, Mr. Speaker. And in order to 

grow, as the Minister of Finance and many of my colleagues 

have said, you require the things that, the infrastructure and the 

services that support growth, Mr. Speaker. And of course 

highways comes to mind. And we‟re seeing record investment 

in highways, the biggest investment in capital construction in 

highways in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I noticed with some interest what some of our local media 

outlets had to say on budget day. And on one of the websites, 

Mr. Speaker, this was the headline of one of our media outlets. 

It said, “Torrents of cash and wet concrete are coming,” Mr. 

Speaker. And they went on to praise the infrastructure 

investments because they realize that for far too long those 

members opposite neglected the infrastructure needs of our 

province. We were living on our depreciation. And you can 

only do that for so long before things completely crumble and 

your economic growth which provides the revenue for social 

service programs and services that the people of our province 

need, Mr. Speaker . . . You can‟t continue to live off of your 

depreciation without reinvesting. And this is what we on this 

side of the House are doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why have we given such importance to infrastructure at 

this time of prosperity in our province? Well I‟m going to tell 

you. As the Minister of Finance has said and many of my 

colleagues have said, because some of the additional dollars and 

some of the prosperity that this province is seeing at this time is 

coming from our resource sector, and those resources are not 

endless. They will be depleted over a period of time, so we have 

to treat that revenue from those resources very carefully. And 

they are one-time dollars that we are receiving, Mr. Speaker, 

and so we need to be careful. We cannot take that revenue and 

use it for ongoing programming. 

 

So the Minister of Finance very wisely has decided, along with 

his cabinet colleagues, to take those one-time dollars and invest 

them into infrastructure which will provide growth for many 

years to come, Mr. Speaker. And this has given increased 

optimism across the province. We have seen it in our major 

urban centres with increased demand for housing, increased 

retail sales, investor confidence, and the list goes on. 

 

Quite often what members in this House and in particularly on 

that side of the House don‟t realize that this optimism also 

transcends into rural Saskatchewan. We see a very strong 

agricultural economy, commodity prices at record heights. 

 

But we also are seeing it in our smaller communities — some of 

the communities that I represent, Mr. Speaker, communities like 

Strasbourg, where there aren‟t any lots available. The same can 

be said for Balcarres. The town of Ituna has seen people from 

Calgary selling their property in Calgary, buying homes in 

Ituna, very happy to relocate. Of course the friendliness of rural 

Saskatchewan is making those people feel right at home. The 

services are there. 

 

Certainly we need to improve some of the services, and I know 

one of the concerns that has been raised with me is over Internet 

service. And I know the minister responsible for the Crowns is 

working on that and so on. But there is a community, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. We have such a short period of 

time left, that it would be appropriate to allow the member in 

the time he has to at least be heard. I recognize the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly appreciate 

the members coming to order to hear the good story of the 

community of Markinch in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

small community located on Highway 22, and I know the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs knows exactly where that 

community is because he had the privilege of visiting it here on 

the weekend. 

 

And it was a community who was undergoing change for many, 

many years. It was sandwiched in-between two larger 

communities. Thirty years ago or more they lost their school. 

Slowly other services left their community, but the community 

hung on and they stabilized at a population of about 65 people. 

 

And the people living there seem to be very content because . . . 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve represented that community for the 

last nine years, and I never seem to get any inquiries or calls for 

assistance and so on. They seem to be able to look after their 

affairs very adequately and have a lifestyle that is enjoyed by 

the residents there. 

 

Well I‟ll tell you what‟s happening there, Mr. Speaker. There 

isn‟t a lot available. There‟s a number of vacant lots, but there 

isn‟t a lot available because they‟ve all been bought up. 

Investors have seen the opportunities in that small community, 

bought up the lots. Now they‟re looking for vacant homes that 

can be repaired or are livable to move them onto the vacant lots 

so that people . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being the time of adjournment, the 

Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 531 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 531 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 531 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 531 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 532 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 532 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 532 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 532 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 532 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 533 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canada’s Next Great Prime Minister 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 533 

 World Autism Awareness Day 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 533 

 2008 Woman of Distinction Award 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 533 

 Special Olympic Silver Medal Winners 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 534 

 Contributing to Community 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 534 

 Oil Sands Development 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 534 

 Red Cross Honours Life Savers 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 535 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Developments in Forestry Industry 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 535 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 535 

 Clean Coal Project 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 536 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 536 

 Government Agreement With Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 538 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 539 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan to Lead Business Enabling Initiative 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 540 

 Chief Commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 541 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 542 

 Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 542 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 544 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 549 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 552 



 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 558 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 561 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 564 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


