




















































Hansard: November 18, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 14A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1701 

 November 18, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before I recognize other members, 

I want to on behalf of our Sergeant to welcome a couple of 

individuals who have joined us in the Speaker’s gallery: 

Michael Lonechild and his wife Phyllis Mosquito from White 

Bear First Nations. I’d ask the members to welcome these two 

distinguished individuals to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery a couple of 

very good friends and supporters of mine and on behalf of the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton and myself, we would like 

to have a warm welcome for Bob Romanchuk from Aallcann 

Wood preservers in Prince Albert. He has his company in my 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. And also Karen Worobec 

from the Enterprise Saskatchewan tourism sector team. So I’d 

like all members of the Assembly to give them a warm 

welcome to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a group of students, the grade 12 law 30 class, 

Yorkton Regional High School — my old school. Graduated 

there in ’81, contrary to popular belief. And I’d like to have you 

welcome them to this Assembly along with their teacher, Ms. 

Susan Onda. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of the 

residents of Moose Jaw, and it speaks to the high reliance on 

property tax for the funding of education. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant 

sustainable long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents of Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions today 

on behalf of people of Saskatchewan regarding indexing of 

minimum wage to deal with the issues of sporadic wage 

increases for minimum wage earners and the cost of living. And 

the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Petitions are signed by people from Regina, Prince Albert, and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary 

education. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present this petition on behalf of 

the students that signed it from Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to present today a petition in support of new child care 

spaces. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens in the good province of 

Saskatchewan from Saskatoon, Sedley, Regina, and 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Philanthropist Supports Centre for 

Innovation and Entrepreneurship 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to stand up and recognize the latest accomplishment of 

Saskatchewan’s Brett Wilson, an individual who exemplifies 

the qualities of entrepreneurship and philanthropy. 

 

Recently Mr. Wilson could be seen on the popular CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] show, Dragons’ Den. But 

this successful businessman has Saskatchewan roots, born in 

North Battleford and having attended the University of 

Saskatchewan where he received his Bachelor of Engineering 

degree. 

 

In one of the many ways he’s giving back to his home province, 

Mr. Wilson put $1 million behind the Wilson Centre, which 

will support innovation and teach undergraduates about 

entrepreneurship. Part of the Wilson Centre aim is to change 

mindsets about what to do with a degree and to foster an 

innovative spirit in our province, a cause that is near and dear to 

this government’s heart. Through initiatives such as Innovation 

Saskatchewan and measures to help out those who are 

self-employed, our government is also working to support the 

Saskatchewan entrepreneur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing the latest achievement of Brett Wilson, who 

continues to work towards building an innovative and 

entrepreneurial Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

One Step at a Time Campaign in Moose Jaw 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a new 

partnership has developed in Moose Jaw. The Moose Jaw 

Warriors have joined with McDonalds restaurants, the Moose 

Jaw Health Foundation, and the Five Hills Health Region to 

form the One Step at a Time campaign. On the day of every 

remaining home game of the Moose Jaw Warriors in the 

2008-09 regular season, $1 from every Big Mac purchased will 

be donated to the renovations of the special room in the 

pediatric ward at the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

The members of the Warriors have been very involved in 

providing ideas for the design of the room. This new area will 

feature a floor that will look like an ice surface coupled with 

simulated rink boards around the walls. There will also be a 

Warriors autograph wall where current and former players can 

write motivational messages to the young patients. The redesign 

is scheduled to begin as soon as possible. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to commend all of the organizations 

involved in the One Step at a Time campaign. Special 

recognition must go to McDonalds and the Moose Jaw Warriors 

for their tremendous effort to give young patients in our 

community a fun place to spend time while recovering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members join me in thanking those 

responsible for the One Step at a Time campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Rescue at Atton’s Lake 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

I would like to call attention to some of my local constituents: 

Millie Prescott and Gerald, Dayson, and Declan Desmarais. 

 

It was on October 10, Mr. Speaker, that these individuals 

worked together to save the lives of three young men. It all 

started when four youth went to visit a friend at Atton’s Lake. 

While canoeing, their boat capsized and everyone fell into the 

water. One young man swam to shore to look for help and 

stumbled upon Ms. Prescott’s house. Millie then contacted one 

of her neighbours, the Desmarais family, to ask for assistance. 

Gerald and his boys immediately responded to her call. Gerald 

and his son Dayson borrowed Millie’s canoe, and after several 

attempts they were able to rescue the three youths from the 

water. Mr. Speaker, what is exceptional about this action is that 

Gerald is a non-swimmer. 

 

After the rescue, Gerald took everyone to his home while his 

other son, Declan, ran over to Millie’s to retrieve the first young 

man. During this ordeal, Millie stayed in contact with the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], keeping them 

informed of the situation. After their rescue, Gerald took these 

freezing young men to his home. His family provided them with 

dry clothes and a safe place to warm up. 

 

Will Rogers once said, “We can’t all be heroes because 

somebody has to sit on the curb and clap as they go by.” Mr. 

Speaker, I think we should join in congratulating the heroism 

from the Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Saskatchewan Party Convention 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to reflect on the recent Saskatchewan Party convention held in 

beautiful Saskatoon. For a new government, Mr. Speaker, one 

year into its honeymoon phase with a $4 billion inheritance, one 

would expect 12 to 1,500 people to show up. But how many 

delegates attended the one-year anniversary of the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well if you exclude all the Sask Party candidates, the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and their spouses or 

friend, that amounts to 116 people forced to go. You then 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

exclude the Sask Party constituency executives which probably 

totals about 174 province-wide. The provincial executive and 

their spouses, add another 30, Mr. Speaker. Guaranteed 30 

observers and 10 media. Add up all these numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, and that totals 360. 

 

We’re told that the attendance was 400 people, meaning a grand 

total of 40 people showed up, Mr. Speaker. Furthermore, of the 

38 sitting MLAs, they were commanded to each bring a family 

friend. And, Mr. Speaker, that again brings us down to two 

people. And oh, I forgot — the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

sent two observers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They then pondered 18 resolutions brought forward by three 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker. And they debated alternatives to 

plastic bags. They almost talked about splitting the party over 

the plastic bags resolution. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party leader, 

making the joke that there are so many jobs available in the 

province, that Saskatchewan quote “isn’t just a great place to 

be, it’s a bad place to . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Weyburn. 

 

Ogema Wins International Recognition 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today in the House to share some inspiring news from one of 

the great towns in my constituency. I’m speaking of the 

community of Ogema. This small community, home to 320 

people, has recently received international acclaim. Ogema may 

be small in size for now, Mr. Speaker, but it has lots of spirit 

and determination, and has really shown us what can be 

accomplished with a positive and entrepreneurial attitude and 

with people who have a vision and are willing to step up to be 

leaders. 

 

In the 2008 contest of the world’s most liveable communities, a 

United Nations recognized event held in China, Ogema placed 

silver out of 11 communities with a population under 20,000. 

The categories they were judged on included sustainability, 

healthy lifestyles, and planning for the future. Mr. Speaker, 

Ogema also received the Heritage Management Award, beating 

out 50 other competitors from across the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mayor Wayne Myren credits the entire town with 

having the vision and initiative to take on projects such as 

acquiring a short-line rail line, the restoration of the old railway 

station, and the development of local industry which is 

attracting new immigrants to the area, increasing their 

population, and, Mr. Speaker, keeping the local school viable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about creating a stronger 

Saskatchewan and enhancing quality of life, this town is what 

it’s all about. On behalf of the government and the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, I want to congratulate the town of 

Ogema on winning silver in this world competition, and thank 

them for showcasing Saskatchewan to the rest of the world. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Diabetes Awareness Walk 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, November 

14, I had the opportunity to participate in the Diabetes 

Awareness Walk that was held at the Saskatoon Field House. 

This date was chosen, Mr. Speaker, because it was World 

Diabetes Day. The awareness walk was made possible through 

the co-operation of the student wellness initiative towards 

community health or SWITCH, Central Urban Métis Federation 

Inc. or CUMFI, White Buffalo Youth Lodge, the Saskatoon 

Health Region, the Saskatoon Community Clinic, Kinistin 

Saulteaux Nation, the city of Saskatoon, and the Canadian 

Diabetes Association. 

 

As we walked laps around the field house track, participants 

shared with me how they were learning to be more active and 

healthy through programs offered by the partner agencies. In 

particular, I was told how beneficial the Fitness Food Fun 

program has been for its members. Mr. Speaker, this program is 

provided by Saskatoon Community Clinic staff and regularly 

meets at the White Buffalo Youth Lodge. 

 

After the awareness walk, participants were able to meet with 

representatives from the Canadian Diabetes Association to ask 

questions and learn more about diabetes awareness and 

prevention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was only a few days earlier that many MLAs 

attended a reception here at the legislature hosted by the 

Canadian Diabetes Association. I know we all appreciated the 

opportunity to meet that evening and I appreciated to see 

first-hand the work done by the association in the community, 

the work that it does so well all year long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

many agencies and people that made the Diabetes Awareness 

Walk a success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Saskatchewan Exports Hit All-Time High 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great time to live in 

Saskatchewan. In global uncertain economic times, our 

Saskatchewan economy is sound and continues to grow. We 

learned this morning, Mr. Speaker, that international exports 

from Saskatchewan have hit a new all-time high. Over the past 

year the value of those exports has climbed almost 120 per cent. 

That’s over six times the national average. In September $3.2 

billion worth of Saskatchewan goods was shipped to points 

around the world. We are number one in Canada again. 

 

In the year since the people of Saskatchewan voted for change, 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, we have been leading Canada in many key 

economic areas including GDP [gross domestic product] 

growth, wholesale trade growth, retail sales, earnings, the 

number of people employed, the lowest unemployment rates, 

population growth, new vehicle sales, and the growth in 

building permits. Our government has been able to put that 

growth to work for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

resulting in historic tax cuts, record debt reduction, the largest 

infrastructure investment ever, and $2 billion fiscal insurance 

policy. 

 

We’re working to make Saskatchewan a stronger place, Mr. 

Speaker, which means a better life for everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Decline of the Forest Industry 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Sask Party 

quietly announced its plan to save the forestry industry. They — 

wait for it — gave the Saskatchewan Forest Centre a new name: 

ForestFirst. So encouraging was this news that the very next 

day Tolko Industries in Meadow Lake announced they were 

laying off more than 100 employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does changing the name of 

the Forest Centre bring any hope to the now thousands of 

people who lost their income under this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, clearly this is an industry 

that’s in a great deal of peril. Everyone understands that. There 

are forestry companies shutting down operations all across 

North America. We see housing starts in the United States a 

fraction of what they were a few months ago. I think if we 

examine the record, I believe that there are eight primary 

forestry companies that have shut down in Saskatchewan — 

two have closed under the Saskatchewan Party administration; 

six closed under the former administration. So clearly although 

it’s a challenged industry, we’re working with the industry to 

see what areas we can do in terms of addressing the competitive 

issues that need to be looked at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, there are some exciting 

opportunities in biomass and agroforestry, but biomass energy 

is supposed to be generated from the residue left over after the 

rest of the wood has been used. It’s not supposed to be the 

forestry industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does he propose to replace jobs in 

saw mills, paper mills, and OSB [oriented strand board] mills 

with a handful of jobs, growing trees just to burn them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if you recall the record, the 

former administration assigned an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] with Domtar, committing $100 million of 

taxpayers’ money to that. You can only wonder where, given 

the market today, where that $100 million would be gone. 

 

And in light of the own member’s, the member that asked the 

question, his own comments with respect to this, where when 

asked does he believe that the Saskatchewan government 

should be putting money into these industries, the member 

himself said no he didn’t. 

 

So which way is it today, Mr. Speaker? Does he believe as he 

said earlier that they should not be putting money in, or does he 

believe that, as the former premier believed, that they should be 

putting money into it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Forest first. It’d be a welcome change, but I’ll 

wait for the details, given their record. This minister refuses . . . 

[inaudible] . . . the future of this industry. And he’s so proud of 

this change that he didn’t even issue a news release or bother to 

attend the event. 

 

The only new dollars being invested in forestry development in 

Saskatchewan right now are federal dollars. Will he at least 

guarantee us that communities most affected will benefit from 

those dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have said time and time 

again, both in the legislature and outside of the legislature, that 

we are examining all of the different things that can be done to 

help an industry that is clearly challenged in these times. 

 

We see housing starts a fraction of what they were in the United 

States. Today, Mr. Speaker, there is an industry that is in peril. 

We are discussing it with the industry on a number of 

occasions. We had representatives from Tolko in yesterday to 

talk about areas of interest to them in terms of competitive 

issues. 

 

It’s an industry that we are working with, will continue to work 

with, but at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, a healthy industry 

is not an industry that’s funded by the taxpayers of the 

province. 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the Saskatchewan 

Party has no plan to stop the bleeding in the forest industry. It 

was their promise before the last election, and we all remember 

the ad taken out by the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

Why do forestry workers and their families come last for this 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

would be helpful if the opposition clarified where they’re at. Do 

you believe, as the former premier believes, that you should be 

putting $100 million of taxpayers’ money at risk? Or do you 

believe, as the member for P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote 

believes, and that money should not be put at risk? Well I 

would say to the member opposite that the Saskatchewan Party 

made the decision very . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister’s been acknowledged; 

they have the floor. The Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when governments in the past 

. . . and the NDP have a very, very strong track record in terms 

of putting money into industries, they lose money on every 

occasion. That’s your track record. And if you look at this 

industry, Mr. Speaker, the $100 million of taxpayers’ money 

that they were willing to commit, Mr. Speaker, one can only 

wonder where that money would be today, given the market as 

it is. 

 

So who is it that speaks on behalf of the NDP — the P.A. 

Northcote member or the former premier who wanted to 

commit money to this, clearly in opposition to what his own 

member is saying today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Corrections Issues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government is getting more 

arrogant by the day. Yesterday a delegation of front-line 

corrections workers visited their legislature to raise issues that 

they believe are important to help them do their job safely. 

Workers were particularly concerned that the layout and 

corresponding staffing levels at the Regina Correctional Centre 

leaves employees vulnerable to attack or abduction. 

 

When questioned about this, the minister dismissed workers’ 

concerns, saying he had toured the site and everything looked 

okay to him. Why does the minister believe that he knows 

better than the front-line staff who work at the Regina 

Correctional Centre every day? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to answer 

that member’s question quite clearly: 14 years working in 

federal corrections, partly in the special handling unit where the 

most dangerous criminals live, day and day out; maximum 

security prison; medium security prison; and a minimum 

security prison, Mr. Speaker, I have some expertise and some 

knowledge as to prison design — what’s worked, what hasn’t 

worked, Mr. Speaker. When I saw that unit, Regina 

Correctional Centre, it’s state of the art, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The unit in 

Regina, the replacement unit, Mr. Speaker, is a state-of-the-art 

unit. We have other jurisdictions coming to Saskatchewan to 

look at that unit, Mr. Speaker. They believe that it’s cutting 

edge, state of the art — not going backwards, Mr. Speaker, but 

going forwards and being the leader. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, during a media scrum yesterday, 

the minister said he wanted to work in a spirit of co-operation, 

not dictatorship. But he thinks that one tour makes him 

qualified to judge whether the concerns of front-line workers 

are valid or not. 

 

Another issue corrections workers raised was the need for more 

training on how to interact more closely with inmates. Surely 

everyone agrees that people working in such a dangerous 

occupation deserve the very best training possible. Currently 

workers receive only two weeks training when they commence 

employment and no further training for months or even years in 

the future. But instead of being open to the idea of more 

training, the minister’s reply was there are staff willing to work 

there. 

 

To the minister: why won’t he listen to front-line workers who 

are telling him they need more training? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for that question. We can’t lose the sight 

of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that it was under their government they 

tendered that facility. They approved the plan, they put that into 

action, and now the members who work there have to work 

there under their design model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will tell you right now something, Mr. Speaker, that the 

training the staff receive all across Saskatchewan in corrections 

deals with facility security, inmate security, inmate 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

programming, and staff security, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to 

the next question on that particular government and that former 

minister’s inadequate action on facilities and infrastructure. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is confident that he 

knows better than his own front-line staff. It doesn’t matter that 

workers are expressing concern about their safety; he’s been on 

a tour. It doesn’t matter if front-line workers feel the need for 

more training; he’ll tell them they’ve had enough. Of course he 

won’t say those things to their faces. Yesterday he had the 

opportunity to meet with them face to face and hear their 

concerns, and he refused. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he refused to listen to the concerns of the workers 

who take risks every day to protect our safety. Instead he went 

into the ministerial protection program. He went into hiding. To 

the minister: why is he hiding from his own staff? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, these are matters internally being discussed with CPSP 

[Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] officials, SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 

member officials as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s take a look back at the record. January 2004, senior 

officials in CPSP studied the problems inside the correctional 

facility. They struck a committee, Mr. Speaker, with SGEU 

members. In early 2006, when there was a cabinet shuffle when 

the previous government was in power and the member from 

Regina Dewdney became minister, he stopped all committee 

work, Mr. Speaker, involving staff safety, institutional security 

concerns throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Answer that 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Support for Renters 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A renter in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has been recognized. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, a renter in Saskatoon wrote to 

us saying that as of February 1, 2009, her rent will be increased 

to $960 a month for a one-bedroom apartment — an increase of 

$270. She believes the rent increase is intended to recoup the 

cash incentives the builder’s owner offered to each tenant to 

encourage them to vote yes in a recent tenant vote on condo 

conversion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whatever the reason for the increase, this renter’s 

situation is hardly unique. Many Saskatchewan people are being 

forced out of their homes due to rising rents and condo 

conversions. To the minister: what will she do this year to 

provide relief to renters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — As I said many, many times in this 

House and out of this House, what we’ve done this year, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we’ve increased the shelter rates; we’ve indexed 

them to the regions, to the market rates. We’ve increased the 

rental supplements and indexed those to the regional market 

rates. And so I’m not sure where the member opposite wants to 

go. The condo conversions are approved by municipal levels of 

government, not the provincial level of government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the province’s problem 

whatever is causing it. The trend towards condo conversions 

has resulted in a declining number of rental units in 

Saskatchewan. Many of these condo units which were brought 

up at the beginning of a boom currently sit empty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s own task force on housing 

affordability suggested a number of ways to increase the supply 

of affordable rental accommodation, but she has yet to act on 

them. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is she doing to help 

Saskatchewan families being squeezed out of rental 

accommodations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 

where the member opposite is going with the supply. In 

actuality, there are 673 units, social housing units that are in 

progress in Saskatoon, the city that he’s referring to. These are 

the Saskatoon housing activity of this year. Of those, 106 units 

are within the expression of interest, so those projects are under 

way. There was 40 units with the First Nations and Métis trust. 

There are various stages of units being built or renovated within 

Saskatoon to a total of 673 units, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

increases in benefits, but for many people, those benefit 

increases are being clawed back by rising housing costs and by 

other increases in the cost of living imposed by this 

government, like rising SaskEnergy rates and means testing for 

the seniors’ drug plan. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, a Regina senior named Shirley 

wrote to the Premier on October 31. She writes, quote: 

 

Today I’ll pay for food, rent, phone and power — no frills 

unless you call the dentist a frill. But I’ll manage. I’ll pay 

my debt and needs and keep trudging on. My mind 

imagines a time and place in which low-income people are 

able to pay their rent without pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s make that time today. To the minister: when 

can people like Shirley expect to see a time when they could 

pay the rent without pain? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well I’m sure that Shirley was very 

pleased on the day that we announced 110 per cent increase to 

the seniors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I’m sure that Shirley had increases to 

her utilities, to her rent, to her cost of living over the past 16 

years and saw absolutely no help by the former NDP 

government. So for the first time, Shirley saw a provincial 

government that was willing to step in and give her a hand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this minister talks of all that 

she has done for renters, but she has not provided new funding, 

she has not provided new funding for a single new housing 

project since she became the minister. The previous NDP 

government added nearly $61 million to affordable housing in 

2006-2007, but this minister cut $5 million out of the Sask 

Housing budget this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people we’ve talked to live on fixed 

incomes. Rising rents are making it harder for them to make 

ends meet, and while renters are affected by rising property 

taxes, they don’t benefit from the rebates. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: will this government provide a property tax rebate to 

renters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member who’s 

asking the question needs to ask his Housing critic, his 

colleague, about the $5 million because I’ve explained it to him, 

I believe, about five times. 

 

The transfer in Social Services to the Housing Corporation is to 

pay for programming within Sask Housing. The programming 

in the previous year cost $9.3 million, so therefore a $10 million 

budget more than ensured that those programs continue. So 

therefore we are covering the programs. 

 

The actual capital money is within the corporation, so the 

corporation had money at the time of the election. And we have 

since committed that to housing projects, Mr. Speaker. We have 

in total 935 projects in progress around the province. That has 

been a continuum of housing from those that are being 

completed to those that are in progress to those that are in 

design, Mr. Speaker. We have announced an unprecedented 

$1.5 billion infrastructure capital fund; of that will be more 

funding for housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Relocation Costs 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this 

government doesn’t seem too interested in helping out renters. I 

guess their only concern kicks in when you’re moving from one 

home to another, not trying to make ends meet in an apartment. 

 

To the Deputy Premier: can he confirm that in the Sask Party’s 

first year in power they’ve spent almost $200,000 on moving 

costs to move 12 different political staff members here from out 

of province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm the exact 

amount. The member opposite suggests that there is up to 

200,000. There are relocation incentives that are offered to 

employees. And I can provide that information in due course 

directly to her, that I can explain exactly how many dollars were 

spent on relocation costs for bringing people back to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has money to 

throw around on their political staff, but nothing for livestock 

and hog producers. Can the Deputy Premier explain why the 

Minister of Agriculture spent $24,000 on moving two 

employees here for his ministerial office? Let me guess: there 

are no agricultural experts in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I didn’t get the 

opportunity to finish answering a question for the member 

opposite because she didn’t ask another question. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to tell the member opposite, when she talks 

about change in government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call members to order. I 

recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there are changes that are 

made by government each and every year. There are changes 

that involve bringing in new people. They will come from other 

parts of Canada. That’s what happens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to indicate to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the former 

government from 1992 to the year 2006 had 645 people that 

were released without cause. Mr. Speaker, 645 people were 

released by that former government. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, 

that there were people that were hired, people that were offered 

incentives to replace these people, Mr. Speaker. These were 645 

people that were dealt with through the negotiation process of 

severance as provided by the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, meanwhile back at the 

ranch, I understand the Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety had to import his entire political staff from out of 

province. I guess you need the best PR [public relations] people 

in Canada to make the minister shine. 

 

But can the Deputy Premier please explain why the Minister of 

Public Safety gets $25,000 moving allowances for his political 

staff and the Minister of Advanced Education and Labour only 

gets to spend $5,000? Clearly the Advanced Ed minister needs 

some help as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in the last 

number of days of this Legislative Assembly, as a government 

moves through its transition process, as it changes the staff . . . 

The former premier released 150-plus people from this 

Legislative Assembly. They would have had to have been 

replaced, Mr. Speaker. Those people, as I indicated yesterday, 

received $4.5 million worth of compensation. Mr. Speaker, 

those people are being replaced. 

 

And I dare say, Mr. Speaker, across our government, we have 

attracted back many former Saskatchewan people that were 

driven out of this province by the policies of the NDP. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re happy to welcome back Saskatchewan people to 

assist in a new government’s policies of moving this province 

forward — not into a state of decline, which is where the NDP 

moved this province for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, will the Deputy Premier 

confirm that the Premier spent $35,000 moving a single person, 

a single political staffer, into his Executive Council? Thirty-five 

thousand dollars — that’s more than some people in this 

province make every year. To the Deputy Premier: how can he 

justify $35,000 for a political staffer to move to Saskatchewan? 

Aren’t there any PR people in Saskatchewan that can do that 

job, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that 

we have attracted a great many qualified individuals who are 

assisting not only in Executive Council, not only in Advanced 

Education, not only in Agriculture; they’re helping with all of 

our ministries. Some of the people have come from outside of 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

growing province, a government that wants to attract quality 

people has to ensure that there are some incentives to ensure 

that they come. Some of those incentives involve moving 

expenses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the entire amount of information is going to be 

displayed in public accounts that will be distributed for the 

entire province, and we will ensure that that information is open 

and transparent within public accounts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve got $35,000 for a 

political staffer in the Premier’s office. We’ve got $20,000 for a 

political staffer in the Minister of Agriculture’s office. We have 

over $17,000 for one political staffer in the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety. We have over $9,000 for the 

Minister of Social Services for one staffer. Mr. Speaker, where 

did they move from? Thirty-five thousand — where would you 

be moving from? Was it China? Hong Kong? Was it London, 

England? Was it Germany? Where on earth would someone 

move from and have $35,000 worth of moving expenses paid 

for on behalf of the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Deputy Premier, I just 

want to remind members that it would be nice sometimes if we 

could actually hear the response to the question or the question 

given. Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the member opposite asked me questions about 

settlement packages, negotiated packages with different 

individuals. Mr. Speaker, there were 44, there were 44 people 

on that list that was provided in the way of a written response to 

a question asked by that former government. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, of the 44 people on this 

list, there are three individuals who received a severance 

package commensurate with the legislative policies of over 

200,000 but less than 275,000. Three individuals, Mr. Speaker, 

of a list of 44. Mr. Speaker, there is one individual that received 

$275,000 from that former government. That member, Mr. 

Speaker, is Murdoch Carriere. Mr. Speaker, there was a 

suggestion in this Legislative Assembly by a number of the 

members opposite that that member was dismissed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Deputy Premier can wrap up his 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, clearly there was a 

suggestion to a number of people from Justice officials, from 

other officials, that there would be wisdom in challenging and 

going to court. They said no, it was not going to be because it 

would be more expensive. Mr. Speaker, the information that 

we’ve been provided, it would have been far less than 275,000. 

Two hundred and seventy-five thousand is more than any of 

these 44 people have received. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Members will 

come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 62, 

The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 62, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

[14:15] 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 

The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

has now been introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

that Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 64, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

that Bill No. 64, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2008 (No. 2) now be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 73, The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

that Bill No. 73, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 107 and 108. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers tabled to questions 107 and 108. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise today in the House to move second reading of 

The Election Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments to The Election Act, 1996 introduced today will 

implement the promise that this government made to extend and 

toughen the election advertising requirements of Saskatchewan. 

 

To quote from this session’s Throne Speech: 

 

During the course of the last election, my government 

promised fairer elections by removing the advantages held 

by the governing party — advantages that led to political 

gamesmanship and voter cynicism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what our government wishes to achieve 

with passage of this Bill. The provisions of the existing election 

Act have been in place in our province for more than 20 years. 

They are intended to protect the fairness of the electoral process 

by ensuring that the government of the day is not perceived as 

using political resources or the civil service to conduct its 

political campaigns. 

These provisions are also intended to protect the public service 

from being unintentionally drawn into a political debate during 

an election campaign. As promised in our election campaign, 

with this Bill we are taking steps to not only maintain these 

principles but also to significantly enhance the protection of 

these principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides that in the 30 days prior to the 

issuance of an election writ, no government ministry shall 

advertise in any manner with respect to the activities of that 

ministry. This prohibition is subject only to emergency or 

compelling public safety information. 

 

In the 90 days prior to this new 30-day pre-writ restriction, 

there will also be a restriction providing that no government 

ministry shall advertise in any manner any information except 

for the following: information that is intended to inform the 

public about programs and services of the ministry for the 

public benefit of Saskatchewan people and information which 

addresses public safety issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government resources and the public service must 

not be used for partisan purposes. By extending these 

restrictions, we are confident that fairness will be enhanced and 

the integrity of the public service will be protected during this 

period of heightened political activity. This Bill will address the 

long-standing concern that government advertising seems to 

spike upwards prior to an election. 

 

In the 120 days prior to the issuance of a writ for a fixed-date 

general election, no government ministry shall spend more than 

the average monthly amount for advertising. As with the 

existing section 277, Crown corporation advertising with 

respect to their competitive business interests would remain 

exempt from these advertising restrictions. This exemption 

would exist to avoid erosion of their market position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also heard concerns that advertising 

intended to promote Saskatchewan to other provinces has been 

run within Saskatchewan as goodwill advertising in the period 

leading up to an election. Accordingly we are addressing this 

problem. In the 120 days prior to the issuance of a writ for a 

fixed-date general election, no government ministry shall 

advertise within Saskatchewan information that is intended to 

promote our province to audiences outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the change to a set election date, several of 

the concerns we are addressing with this Bill have become more 

acute. Now that all Saskatchewan residents know the date of 

our next provincial election, government advertising in the 

pre-writ period requires more attention to ensure fairness. As 

promised, we have taken important steps in that direction with 

this Bill. Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading 

of An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 59, An Act to amend 

The Election Act, 1996, Mr. Speaker. I listened intently to the 

introduction by the Minister of Justice, and indeed I found a 

number of his comments interesting that I will refer to shortly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we all recognize that prior to the election just 

past, Mr. Speaker, members of the then opposition 

Saskatchewan Party and now the government across the way, 

Mr. Speaker, were quite critical of government advertising prior 

to the election, Mr. Speaker. And of course when we review 

what some of those advertisements were doing — informing 

members of the public of how to access government programs, 

and to know that on matters of importance to them that in fact 

their government was working, Mr. Speaker — we find that of 

course there was a lot of political rhetoric at that time with 

regards to financing, government financing of advertisements 

prior to election. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we are aware that the 

Saskatchewan Party is now in government and are working very 

diligently, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that some of the things that 

they said in opposition — not all, as we know, Mr. Speaker, but 

some of the things that they said in opposition — they’re 

actually going to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I will outline in a few minutes, this is a 

Bill that perhaps has some unintended consequences that I think 

we should examine before this Bill is concluded in the 

Chamber. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, not only 

unintended consequences, but can actually allow for some 

additional manipulation by governments, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to address some of that as well. So that’s the direction that I 

will take in my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s just review this again for the public that are listening, Mr. 

Speaker. The Election Amendment Act, 2008 does a couple of 

things. It addresses the issue of the fixed election dates, Mr. 

Speaker, and it tries very hard to work back from that fixed 

election date established in a previous piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that we have some dates set aside for 

publications of one kind or another, and indeed talks about 

advertising 30 days before the issuing of the writ, and in fact 

other dates like 120 days prior to the setting of a writ. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all of this is built upon the idea that a fixed 

election date is in fact a fixed election date. We have legislation 

passed by this Chamber earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, that sets 

the date for the next election in 2011 — a very specific fixed 

election date. Now, Mr. Speaker, nothing wrong with that if 

governments are certainly prepared to follow the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know in this Chamber, anyone who 

watches politics closely, that if the Sask Party’s Conservative 

cousins in Ottawa do something, it’s not too long later that the 

Saskatchewan Party in Saskatchewan does something similar. 

Or if the Saskatchewan Party’s government here in 

Saskatchewan sees something being done by their Conservative 

cousins in Alberta, it’s not too long later that it’s done here in 

Saskatchewan by this government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we just came through a federal election. We 

just came through it, Mr. Speaker. Only a few weeks ago that 

election was completed, Mr. Speaker. Prime Minister Stephen 

Harper, before that election was called, had brought forward 

legislation to set fixed election dates. He campaigned on fixed 

election dates, he put them in place, the legislation was passed, 

and then what does he do, Mr. Speaker, after he gets an 

election? He ignores the legislation and calls an election. Which 

we also know, Mr. Speaker, at the end of that election showed 

that in fact nothing had changed; there’s still a minority 

government in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all of the money spent on that federal election, Mr. 

Speaker, which could have been used on so many other things, 

Mr. Speaker, basically a lot of Canadians are saying, well that 

money was just wasted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a fixed 

election date passed by law. This legislation in front of us today 

depends on that legislation being honoured by government. 

Pardon us, Mr. Speaker, if there are some in Saskatchewan who 

have expressed some skepticism that in fact this government 

can be trusted to keep that fixed election date promise now that 

the legislation is in place. And Ottawa has proven — their 

cousins in Ottawa have proven — that indeed we don’t have to 

listen to the law of the country, of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are. It’s interesting that in fact this 

piece of legislation continues on politics but not very much on 

substance, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got this Bill, as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, that could indeed have some unintended 

consequences, Mr. Speaker, that we have to pay some attention 

to. And in fact if all of this process is set in place but the 

government chooses to ignore its fixed election date, what 

happens to all of this stuff, Mr. Speaker? You could ramp up 

spending in 2010, call the election at the end of 2010. 

Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely nothing in this 

legislation in front of us today would apply. It’s absolutely 

meaningless, Mr. Speaker, in that context. 

 

And indeed, what about the other concern that it allows for 

some manipulation? One clause in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

actually talks about spending being an average of the previous 

year’s expenditures, monthly expenditures. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

knowing when the election date is, there is nothing to prevent 

this government from upping election spending in the year 

prior, therefore increasing the amount of money that could be 

spent in the months preceding the election based on the 

language in this legislation. So there’s the possibility, Mr. 

Speaker, for some manipulation to occur. It’s all about the 

politics. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at the same time as we’re thinking about 

these things and we take the concept of, it’s all about politics, 

one step further, Mr. Speaker, let’s just see if there’s anything 

in this legislation. Maybe we should all read it together, Mr. 

Speaker. Is there anything in this legislation that actually 

provides for a penalty if they break it? Oh, Mr. Speaker, I see 

nothing in here about a penalty or consequence if the Act is 

ignored or, in fact, broken on purpose, Mr. Speaker. I mean I 

could take time and read this for everyone here if they haven’t 

figured it out yet, Mr. Speaker. But my goodness — no 

penalties, no remedies. 

 

[14:30] 

 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

You know, Mr. Speaker, they’ve done a lot, the government 

that is, Mr. Speaker, is doing an awful lot to say they’re keeping 

a promise, but you know, they’ve made sure that there’s no 

consequence to this. The promise is kept today; it can be broken 

tomorrow and no consequence, Mr. Speaker. They will rely on 

somebody in the media saying, you know, oh my goodness they 

broke this promise, three years from now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s very interesting that we have an Act setting out some very 

serious matters that the public was obviously somewhat 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker, and then no penalty, no 

consequence. I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to take that, keep 

that in mind as we review this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minster of Justice in his remarks said 

very clearly, and I support this quote entirely, he said, you 

know, the legislation in front of us is intended to protect the 

fairness of the election process. Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

intended to protect the fairness of the election process. 

 

We have to do everything we can, Mr. Speaker — whether 

we’re in government or in opposition or just members of the 

public watching these things, Mr. Speaker — we have to do 

everything we can to ensure that the election process is fair 

across the board, Mr. Speaker. If there’s a test about how fair 

this Act is to the process, Mr. Speaker, I would think this piece 

of legislation would fail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice also said he was confident 

integrity would be enhanced by this Bill. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

where’s the integrity when there is no consequence to breaking 

the Act itself? Where is the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I know 

that the member from Moose Jaw across the way is saying 

something, but I don’t know . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members not to bring 

other members into the debate and just continue on with the 

response to the Bill that was brought before us. The member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So I repeat 

that the Minister of Justice said he was confident the integrity 

would be enhanced. But I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, integrity is 

something that is very clear. It stands out; you recognize it right 

away; and there is no questioning what integrity is all about, 

Mr. Speaker. If there’s the possibility of unintended 

consequence, if there’s a possibility of manipulation, and if 

there’s no consequence to action, Mr. Speaker, we are not, we 

are not seeing integrity being enhanced by the piece of 

legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I indicate to the Chamber that I believe that 

we are seeing — in this Bill anyway, and I think we will see 

that in other pieces of legislation that the government has 

introduced — we are seeing in this piece of legislation the 

government’s intending to inject politics into the legislative 

process. Mr. Speaker, this is something that we have to ensure 

goes beyond politics and recognizes that there is fairness 

needed in the delivery of legislation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

we are going to review this legislation with members of the 

Saskatchewan public and therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this point I 

would move that debate on Bill No. 59, The Election Act 

amendments be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment on Bill No. 59. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise 

today to move second reading of The Senate Nominee Election 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of this Bill, this government 

is taking an important step towards ensuring that in the future 

Saskatchewan senators can be chosen democratically by the 

people of our province, rather than in the backrooms of Ottawa. 

 

This Bill will authorize provincial elections held to elect 

individuals to be put forward as Saskatchewan nominees for 

federal appointment to the Senate. The number of nominees to 

be elected in the given election would be set by order in council 

depending on the number of Senate seats that are available or 

that may become available in the immediate future. The 

qualifications for a nominee are primarily those established by 

the constitutional requirements for a senator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides that a Senate nominee election 

would be conducted at the same time as a provincial or federal 

general election, or on such other date as set by order in 

council. 

 

The decision to hold a Senate nominee election would not be 

automatic with every provincial or federal general election. If it 

is not viewed as necessary to identify additional nominees at the 

time of a general election, there will be no Senate nominee 

election held at that time. The term of a Senate nominee would 

run from one Senate nominee election to the next. A Senate 

nominee may run as an independent or as a representative of a 

federal political party. 

 

As this is a federal rather than a provincial position, the election 

spending limits and the requisite deposit for a nominee would 

be based on that of a federal MP [Member of Parliament]. Any 

matching payments to a nominee post-election would be 

provided federally and not provincially. Political contributions 

to a nominee for election purposes would not receive a political 

tax credit under The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act. 

Similarly, the election expense limit for a candidate under this 

Bill is based proportionately to that of a federal MP candidate. 

The regulations under the Act will ensure that election expenses 

and other financing requirements are adopted from The Election 

Act, 1996 and adapted as appropriate. 

 

In terms of procedure, the Bill adopts The Election Act, 1996 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

process and terminology as much as possible in the conduct of 

voting, enumeration, balloting, final count, and return of the 

writ. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the results of the election would determine the 

candidates in the order of preference in which they would be 

recommended for appointment. The order of the candidates 

would be based on the number of votes each received. If only 

one candidate ran for election, he or she would be acclaimed. If 

there were two or more candidates, then an election would be 

held to determine the order of preference for recommendation. 

In this manner, Mr. Speaker, we can determine who has the 

highest level of support from Saskatchewan people for 

appointment as one of our senators. In turn we can recommend 

to Privy Council and to the Prime Minister his or her 

appointment to the Senate. It is our belief that any federal 

government of any political stripe should not ignore this clear 

expression of democratic support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are aware that this approach has not met with 

universal support in Ottawa or in some other provinces, and we 

are aware that Alberta’s successes in this regard have come 

slowly and with much effort. However we are firmly of the 

view that democratically elected senators are a critical evolution 

for Saskatchewan within Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this Bill we are not demanding drastic 

constitutional change in Ottawa, nor blindingly championing 

the unlikely dissolution of the upper chamber in Ottawa. Rather 

we are taking the democratic steps that are available to us and 

expressing our commitment to elected Senate nominees for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my very great privilege to move second 

reading of An Act to provide for the Election of Saskatchewan 

Senate Nominees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure today to stand up and present somewhat of a different 

version of what should be going on with respect to the Senate. 

And just to be absolutely clear, I don’t have a lock on this 

position, just like government doesn’t have a lock on their 

position of an elected, effective Senate. That’s broadly speaking 

the Government of Saskatchewan’s view of the national Senate. 

My view of the national Senate would be one of more of a triple 

A position which is the same as my leader — a triple A position 

is abolish, abolish, abolish. 

 

I want to try and mount why I come to this thoughtful position, 

Mr. Speaker. This isn’t something that I just decided last night 

or in recent times, but the way I feel about our whole electoral 

system is that we need to — particularly in this era of instant 

information — we need to find ways to break down barriers 

between the electorate and elected officials, be they MLAs or 

be they members of parliament or city officials. But we need to 

find ways to reduce the barriers, the buffers that are between us. 

 

And I submit that the Senate of Canada provides a buffer 

between the electorate and their MPs, and I further submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that what we really do need to make our whole 

electoral process effective is for people to be engaged. And 

that’s really what this Bill, An Act to provide for the Election of 

Saskatchewan Senate Nominees, I believe, is intended to do, is 

to engage people. And for that I congratulate members of the 

government for at least trying to find ways to engage people. 

 

I am submitting that Canadian politics shouldn’t be . . . We’re 

different than politics in other countries. I’m going to use an 

analogy of recent events in the United States, but at the same 

time I want to be quick to say, Mr. Speaker, I don’t favour that 

Canada adopt the United States version of electing senators or 

congress people or anything else. Our great neighbours to the 

south have a wonderful constitution and it has served them very 

well in the past. I believe it will serve them well into the future. 

I’m not trying to dish the United States here, but we have a 

different form of representative democracy in Canada, and we 

followed more the British model of parliament and that’s a 

model that has served us very well. 

 

The elected Senate has come out of a period of Western 

alienation, a time when Preston Manning led the Reform Party 

of Canada and there was many people in Western Canada, I’ll 

describe — I think it was more in Alberta, but I’ll describe it as 

Western Canada because there were people in Saskatchewan 

and British Columbia that felt equally alienated. But the whole 

idea of an elected Senate came out of that reform policy, that 

reform time, when the West was feeling blocked out of Ottawa. 

And I submit that this was a time of, great time of BS — that is, 

before Stephen. And now we have a Prime Minister that got 

elected out of a Calgary riding and times have somewhat 

changed. 

 

So the reasons that many people wanted to have an elected — 

and they said effective and equal was part of it — Triple-E 

Senate, which this Bill doesn’t address. This is simply an 

opportunity to nominate a senator. This is simply providing an 

opportunity to nominate, for people of Saskatchewan to 

participate in the nomination of a process that at the end of the 

day the Prime Minister, whoever the Prime Minister of the day 

is, has to take that nomination forward to the Governor General 

for appointment. So it’s just adding one more cog in the 

electoral process without anything coming back at it. 

 

We need, Mr. Speaker, more reasons to participate in voting. I 

said I was going to talk a little bit about our great neighbours to 

the south, and I’m greatly encouraged. I know that people 

around the world are greatly encouraged, some a little 

discouraged. But mostly it’s universal joy with the fact that we 

have President-Elect Obama who is going to be . . . Clearly he’s 

about change. Clearly he’s about engaging people. Clearly there 

are minorities in the United States that are now looking at that 

model, at President-Elect Obama as potentially even a role 

model, and that the importance of this is, Mr. Speaker, that the 

United States have an elected Senate. We have an elected 

Senate. What I’m trying to portray is that in the United States, 

in great numbers, people have gone out to vote, and they have 

because they’ve been engaged unlike any engagement that 

they’ve had in recent decades. 

 

[14:45] 

 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

I’m submitting that in Canada this Bill No. 60, which is An Act 

to provide for the Election of Saskatchewan Senate Nominees, 

is intended to engage the electorate. Absolutely. And I’ve 

already congratulated the government members for trying to do 

that — engage people. I’m submitting that there’s a more 

effective way of engaging people, Mr. Speaker. The more 

effective way is to have fewer buffers. 

 

Right now the senators of Canada are nice people. They’re good 

people, and most of them even work hard. I’ll give them that. 

Most of them are even working hard. but at the end of the day 

what they’re providing is a second voice or a potential veto for 

any federal legislation. Whether I voted for my current MP or 

not, we had an opportunity and I participated in that election. 

We elected members of parliament to go to Ottawa to represent 

our views. 

 

A Senate provides an additional buffer, and I just want to know 

that at all times I have access, at all reasonable times I have 

access to my Member of Parliament. I can write a letter. I can 

send an email. I can drop by at my MP’s riding office if I so 

choose. There’s various ways of connecting with elected 

officials. I don’t find it helpful to have a senator that I don’t 

know who my senator is. And I’m far from alone in that, far 

from alone in that. And I don’t see a ready value in a senator 

being around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I do know in this Bill No. 60, An Act to provide for the 

Election of Saskatchewan Senate Nominees, is there’s even an 

attempt to limit the amount of money that a nominee can spend 

in the process of getting elected to be a nominee so that the 

name can be submitted to the Prime Minister of Canada. And 

the Prime Minister of Canada in turn might, might resubmit that 

name to the Governor General for appointment. 

 

And for the privilege of maybe working your way through that 

process and maybe, maybe getting a nomination, maybe being 

appointed to the Senate because that’s the way it is, you might 

make something less than what the spending limit here is. The 

spending limit is $180,000. And that leads me to question — 

there’s no tax credit for it — where does this money come 

from? And what favours might be involved with Senate 

nominees? What might they have to promise to get elected or 

nominated to the Senate? 

 

I pointed out that this is one approach. It’s an approach to 

introduce a Bill to involve the electorate in the selection of a 

Senate nominee for Saskatchewan. It is one way that we could 

go. I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that it was done at a time when 

the situation was different in Western Canada. We felt we were 

on the outside looking in. Now some of us feel we’re on the 

outside looking in anyway but for a completely different reason. 

And now we have a Prime Minister, for better or worse, who’s 

elected out of a Calgary riding. And you know, Stephen 

Harper’s my Prime Minister just like he’s the Prime Minister of 

all other Canadians. And we have a great system that allows us 

to have a say at election time around that. 

 

The money that this could cost, Mr. Speaker, I note that there’s 

comment of . . . Let me just find it here. I’ve got it right at my 

fingertips. But campaign spending limits will be set by a 

formula based on federal parliamentary constituency limits. 

That would likely mean at $180,000. So I or anyone else could 

spend $180,000 to become a Senate nominee and there’s no tax 

credit support. 

 

So who is it that’s going to come up with $180,000? At this 

time, when I see the cattle industry in a crisis, I see grain 

producers — I grew up on a farm and have family on a farm — 

I see fertilizer at $1,200 a tonne and up. I see prices going 

down. The money that’s spent on this could be spent in support 

for agriculture. It could be spent in many, many different ways. 

 

In this same article it points out . . . I know I talk about the 

$180,000 per candidate but, Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the 

Leader-Post yesterday. And the article, just so people know, 

can follow, it’s “PM may appoint new senator.” That’s the 

headline. And this is by James Wood in yesterday’s 

Leader-Post and I’m quoting from this. Quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s bill also allows for cabinet to 

set a stand-alone Senate election. But Justice Minister Don 

Morgan suggested again Monday the province doesn’t 

want to pay the potentially more-than-$6 million cost for a 

stand-alone vote and would only hold one if the federal 

government footed the Bill. 

 

And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the same taxpayers that are 

footing this $6 million bill. When I file my income tax, some of 

it goes to the federal government and some of it goes to the 

provincial government. But it’s the same. I file it at exactly the 

same time and the two tax structures are connected. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line of all of this is there are people 

that feel there’s a different way other than electing senators. 

There are those of us who would like to see the Senate simply 

abolished, and I think that a good number of Saskatchewan 

people would salute that position. 

 

I am urging that when the time comes, that there be support for 

a position that my leader has taken, and that is that he has 

already served notice that he plans to urge that there be another 

question put on the ballot and that question being one of, do you 

even want to elect a senator? Because that’s a fundamental shift 

in where we’re at. And I think that we should, before we say 

let’s get on with electing the senator, let’s have a plebiscite; 

let’s have . . . If we want to do it in that democratic way, let’s 

have a vote on should we elect a senator or not. And then 

subsequently, if the vote was yes, well obviously we would be 

bound by the yes vote. And if the vote was no, obviously that 

should end that portion of the democratic reform. As my 

colleague, seatmate says, it’s fairly straightforward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s more that I would wish to speak to on 

this Bill, and I just might take up that opportunity. But for the 

moment I’m going to move that we adjourn this debate on Bill 

No. 60. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved that adjournment of debate on Bill No. 60, The 

Senate Nominee Election Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 61, The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, The Local 

Government Election Act provides a legal framework for fair 

elections in municipalities and school divisions. This Act 

governs elections for mayors, reeves, and councillors in all type 

of municipalities, including cities, towns, villages, rural 

municipalities, and northern communities. It also governs 

school board elections which are usually conducted by 

municipalities on behalf of school divisions. 

 

Amendments to the LGEA [The Local Government Election 

Act] are generally made between municipal and school division 

elections. The next elections are in fall 2009. Rural municipal 

elections occur every year as RM [rural municipality] 

councillors have two-year, staggered terms. 

 

The amendments proposed are intended to fine-tune the Bill to 

address minor issues that have arisen as a result of recent 

elections. At this time, Mr. Speaker, I will discuss amendments 

that address issues raised by our municipal sector partners. 

 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] asked 

for amendments to allow councillors to stand as candidates in a 

by-election for mayor or reeve without resigning their council 

position. Without amendment, if an election were to be held and 

several councillors wanted to run for mayor, they would all 

have to resign their council position. Council might lose a 

quorum as a result. The municipality would then be unable to 

conduct business during the by-election, and a second 

by-election would be needed to replace councillors who resign. 

Mr. Speaker, this situation will be avoided through the proposed 

amendment in the Bill, which will let sitting councillors run in a 

by-election for a mayor. If they are elected mayor, they will 

resign their other seat. 

 

The city of Saskatoon asked for an amendment allowing a 

municipality to withhold the candidate’s deposit until he or she 

complies with the bylaw requiring disclosure of campaign 

contributions. 

 

The current Act permits a municipality to pass a bylaw 

requiring candidates to disclose their campaign revenues and 

expenditures, but does not provide means of enforcing such a 

bylaw. The proposed amendment is similar to the provisions of 

The Election Act for provincial elections. 

 

The current Act provided only urban and northern 

municipalities with the process for developing and using a 

voters list. Mr. Speaker, the proposed Bill provides a process 

for rural municipalities to develop and use a voters list instead 

of requiring all voters to make a declaration at the polling 

station. This provision is comparable to that for urban 

municipalities. 

 

The provincial government decided not to go ahead with the 

proposal to lengthen the term of office for urban and northern 

municipal and school board officials at this time. While there 

was support from the municipal and education sectors, other 

stakeholders expressed concern. As a result, we believe that 

more public consultation is appropriate. 

 

A number of proposed amendments are housekeeping items that 

clarify procedures and make adjustments to the legislation so 

that it continues to meet the needs of stakeholders. For example, 

several amendments are being made to reflect amendments 

proposed to The Education Act, 1995. That Act will no longer 

require school boards to appoint a secretary-treasurer. All 

references to a secretary-treasurer are removed from this Act 

and replaced for references to school boards and their 

employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed in consultation 

with representatives of municipal and education sector 

associations, including SUMA, SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities], the Saskatchewan 

Association of City Clerks, the Urban Municipal 

Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, the Rural 

Municipal Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association, the Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials, and New North. I 

would like to take the opportunity to thank those individuals 

who took the time to provide advice in the development of this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance 

municipalities have in our province’s future. We intend to 

continue working with municipal leaders to ensure that we have 

fair, responsible, and appropriate municipal governance to build 

the quality of life we desire and to provide a future for our 

families and young people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 61, The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

that Bill No. 62, The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

respond to the minister on this particular piece of legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that the provisions of this legislation do 

come from an ongoing process that has been developed for 

many years within the department of or the Ministry of 

Municipal Affairs, or whatever the present name is right now, 

whereby people who run into problems in local government 

elections can bring forward ideas for change or correction. 

 

I think the other thing that’s part of this particular Bill relates to 

the fact that there’s a desire at the local level to have many of 

the rules in local elections be similar or the same as those in 

provincial elections or in some cases federal elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a process that I know a number of my 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

colleagues on this side of the House put into place over many 

years. The capable people within the ministry have listened 

carefully, worked together with the officials in the Department 

of Justice, and have been able to bring forward this legislation. 

 

Now there are a number of provisions in the legislation that 

relate to specific requests from municipalities or from others 

who are given the responsibility of administering this Act and, 

Mr. Speaker, those requests seem to have been reviewed quite 

carefully. There are a number of places where we will want to 

ask some questions of the various groups who have suggested 

the changes, and also from some of those groups that we know 

on this side of the House may not be as in favour of the changes 

that are here. My general sense is that this has been a relatively 

carefully drafted piece of legislation, but we think it’s important 

that we spend time looking at the specific provisions to make 

sure that we catch all of the nuances of the suggestions or 

identify problems that may arise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we have quite a number 

of people who have experience either at the local government 

level or as being a minister involved in this particular area, and 

they will be looking carefully at the provisions to make sure 

that they’re in tune with what’s going on. We also may identify 

a few other areas where we would suggest to the minister that 

he may want to fine-tune this. We will be doing all of this over 

the next period of time, but we also understand that we want to 

get this completed so that it will be available for the next local 

elections. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn debate and 

have this matter adjourned. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 58 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by 

commenting on a remark that came across the way when my 

colleague and seatmate, the member from The Battlefords, rose 

to enter into the second reading debate on this Bill, the first 

member from the opposition to speak on the Bill. And one of 

the members opposite, I believe it was the Minister of Health, 

said well surely you’re not going to argue with the tax cuts. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all that we do over here and I think 

the Minister of Health, who’s spent quite a bit of time over 

here, knows that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re not merely arguing or necessarily arguing at all with 

the income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. I would characterize these tax 

cuts as the least the government could have done in the 

circumstances and say that politically they have done the least 

that they could do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We were in a financial situation coming up to the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, where, despite what the government had 

said upon coming to power, that the cupboard was bare, that the 

situation was stark, the financial outlook for the province and 

for the government, its revenues, its ability to balance the 

budget was, in the terms of the Premier, stark. 

 

Well that representation of the state in which the previous NDP 

government had left the province and the government and its 

finances didn’t last much more than one day of withering 

criticism from all sides, Mr. Speaker. It was a joke and it was 

quickly abandoned. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, these are the circumstances. An enormous 

surplus was left to this government by the previous government. 

No government leaving office in this province has ever left such 

a circumstance, such a happy circumstance, such a surplus for 

the incoming new government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly 17 years ago, Mr. Speaker . . . And I know the 

members opposite like to talk about the 16-year record of the 

NDP government: four successive majority governments during 

which there were 16 credit upgrades, Mr. Speaker, in case the 

members opposite forget what that record was really about 

financially. But when that government came to power in 1991, 

it did not find itself in the circumstance where it could possibly 

think about income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. And you might 

remember that tax increases that had been imposed by the 

previous Conservative government because of the debt it had 

created, the deficits it was running, were maintained in some 

form or other for a number of years until the corner was turned 

in the mid-1990s, Mr. Speaker. But of course much of that debt 

is still there. 

 

The circumstance is different now, Mr. Speaker. The revenues 

of the province are much greater. The financial books of the 

government were left in good order. There was a surplus in 

place. And people were asking, people were asking, if there’s a 

boom in the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s clear that 

there’s a boom in the province of Saskatchewan if you look at a 

number of the indicators, Mr. Speaker, and the government 

members like to point to the ones that look the best. There was 

a boom in the province, but people weren’t feeling it, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would argue that many people are still not 

feeling it today. Mr. Speaker, I quoted some of those people in 

question period today, just are not feeling the boom. It is not 

getting to them. 

 

And so the government had to respond. They’ve responded in 

part, in large part I would say, Mr. Speaker, with this income 

tax cut set out in this Bill that we’re debating this afternoon, and 

as I said, it’s the least they could have done. And I think they 

took the political temperature and they had to do this. I think 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

they would have liked to have put the tax cuts off until they got 

closer to an election, but in the context of the province — what 

people’s understanding of the circumstances actually are and 

people’s understanding of what their own personal 

circumstances are by comparison — this they had to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But to call this tax cut, as members of the government call it, 

historic, I think is a little incredible, Mr. Speaker. It is not 

historic in any sense. It is not historic in the sense of the amount 

of money being returned to the Saskatchewan people by the tax 

cut. It is not historic in that sense. Nor is it historic in the 

confidence it expresses in the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 

Speaker. And if I may contrast it with the record of the previous 

NDP government and particularly of the last term of that 

government, as the member from Regina Dewdney pointed out, 

the amount returned to citizens by this tax cut is not equal to, is 

not as great as the amount that was returned to the people of 

Saskatchewan by the sales tax cut of the previous NDP 

government. 

 

But it is not an historic tax cut, Mr. Speaker. And if you add 

together, if you add together the income tax cuts, the property 

tax rebates, the business tax cuts, and the sales tax cuts that 

were done by the previous NDP government only in the last 

term of government, they dwarf, they dwarf this so-called 

historic tax cut, Mr. Speaker. It’s not historic by the amount 

returned to the Saskatchewan people, and it is not historic in the 

ability of the government to make a tax cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was extensive income tax reform and income tax 

reductions after this province’s books were restored to order by 

an NDP minister of Finance, previous to the last term of 

government, Mr. Speaker, that were done when the surplus, the 

surplus to the budget was less than $100 million. Here we have 

a surplus now in excess of 2, maybe in excess of $3 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, and these cuts in proportion are not historic. These 

cuts in proportion are dwarfed by the income tax cuts that were 

made by the NDP government, and in absolute numbers 

dwarfed by the tax cuts in last term of the NDP government 

overall. 

 

These tax cuts are also not historic in the confidence they 

express in the Saskatchewan economy. In fact these tax cuts do 

not express a lot of confidence in the Saskatchewan economy, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the small proportion of the tax cut 

compared to the opportunity of the province, the opportunity of 

the provincial government to provide tax relief. 

 

The NDP cuts were made when the surpluses were much 

smaller, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, and when oil was priced at a 

price even lower than it is today, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 

today’s price is lower than yesterday’s price, but the average 

price of oil while the NDP was in power over those 16 years, 

Mr. Speaker, was $22 a barrel. And every one of those cuts to 

income tax, to business tax, to sales tax, and the property tax 

rebates were done within the context, Mr. Speaker, of oil priced 

at $22 a barrel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well these tax cuts are in the context of a price of oil that 

averages out perhaps at four times that, Mr. Speaker — four or 

five times that, Mr. Speaker — while this government has been 

in power. These tax cuts provide no risk to the government 

revenues whatsoever. If the Saskatchewan economy had not 

grown after the NDP administration had made those tax cuts — 

and I think specifically of the income tax cuts that were made 

two terms ago and of the business tax cuts that were made last 

term — if the economy had not grown as a result of those tax 

cuts, the Saskatchewan government would have been 

hard-pressed to replace the revenues. 

 

Significant revenues in proportion to the revenues of the 

province, significant revenues were given up by the NDP 

government in confidence that the people of Saskatchewan, 

given those revenues themselves, would build an economy that 

would more than replace those revenues, Mr. Speaker. And that 

is indeed what happened. The NDP had faith in the 

Saskatchewan economy, the Saskatchewan people, and the 

effects of what were in fact, Mr. Speaker, not just for the NDP 

but for the province of Saskatchewan, truly historic tax cuts — 

unlike these. 

 

There was a cash cushion kept, Mr. Speaker. There was a cash 

cushion kept by the New Democratic Party government at the 

time. The Saskatchewan Party called it a slush fund. And the 

Minister of Health — who wants to enter the debate and I will 

in a few moments sit down so that he can; he wants to enter the 

debate — he, I’m sure my memory serves me correctly, called it 

a slush fund. The Saskatchewan Party now is keeping a much 

larger proportion of a much larger surplus after these tax cuts 

than was kept by the NDP government after its tax cuts and 

after its investments in the economy. 

 

But now, Mr. Speaker, yesteryear’s slush fund is this year’s 

insurance policy, Mr. Speaker. It is a very large insurance 

policy. And one of two things is true: because the NDP tax cuts 

were much larger than the cash cushion kept; with the 

Saskatchewan Party government, the reverse is true. The 

cushion, now called an insurance policy by the same people 

who once called it a slush fund, is much larger than the tax cuts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean the number that all the members have heard, including 

the Minister of Health, is 10 per cent back to the people, 60 per 

cent staying in what once was called by the members opposite a 

slush fund, and is now called an insurance policy. Ten per cent 

for the people, 60 per cent in the cash cushion — the insurance 

policy, the slush fund, whatever we want to call it, Mr. Speaker 

— exactly the reverse of when the NDP cut taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

and then maintained nearly as large a cushion. Took some risk, 

but that risk was . . . And that faith in the Saskatchewan people 

was returned in a growing economy. 

 

But this money is being held on to for the most part. As I said, 

Mr. Speaker, the government is doing the least it can do and 

taking the most credit that it can for doing the least it can do. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But one of two things is the case, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

amount that’s being retained — the amount that is not being 

used either for the income tax cut being provided for by this 

Bill or being invested in infrastructure or being used to pay 

down debt. The large amount that’s being retained is for one of 

two purposes, Mr. Speaker: either we can expect a major 

pre-election party with the funds retained by the Saskatchewan 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

Party in the so-called insurance policy, or the government 

opposite is not as confident in the Saskatchewan economy and 

is not sure that these tax cuts — politically necessary as they 

may feel them to be — are actually sustainable. It is one or the 

other, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know which it is, and time will 

tell. 

 

And perhaps the members opposite seeing clouds in the horizon 

don’t know if they’re bringing rain or not, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 

they don’t know either. But it’s an insurance policy, I suggest, 

more for the government’s credibility than it is for any other 

purpose. 

 

If a Saskatchewan Party government is confident that 

Saskatchewan is now this year’s country — the language of the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker — then more needs to be done 

than the least the government can do. And more needs to be 

done this year. Real relief needs to be provided in respect to 

housing and home heating so that low-income citizens of 

Saskatchewan are not borrowing against next year’s tax rebates, 

Mr. Speaker. Because the issues that brought forward this tax 

fund — the issues of core inflation in housing and in heating 

our homes — those issues are not addressed, at least this year, 

Mr. Speaker, by this tax cut. 

 

This is a tax cut to everybody that pays taxes, not just the 

low-income taxpayers. We accept that it is a large benefit to 

low-income taxpayers. It is not — or at least most of it is not, 

Mr. Speaker — of any benefit to those who do not file income 

tax because they do not have income and do not appreciate that 

they don’t . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, if 

you file, there are benefits here, whether or not you pay income 

tax. But not everyone appreciates that, Mr. Speaker; not 

everyone takes the benefit of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A cheque for your rent rebate, a credit against or a reduction on 

your natural gas bill does not require you to file income tax, 

perhaps something that many low-income people have never 

done, Mr. Speaker, have never done. Now that’s a gap. That’s a 

loophole that the most vulnerable people will fall through, Mr. 

Speaker. And if you wanted to see some genuine concern about 

them, then the government would be looking at a way of 

addressing that issue, Mr. Speaker. And this Act doesn’t catch 

all those people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that’s not what this Act is about. This Act is about the 

government doing the least they can do, getting the most credit 

they can from it with circumstances that are far, far more happy 

than this government wanted to pretend that they were when 

they first came to power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, we don’t want to — or at least I do not, Mr. Speaker 

— spend a lot of time arguing against these tax cuts. We’re not 

arguing against these tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. We’re saying they 

are not sufficient. They are not enough, and they are not . . . For 

now, Mr. Speaker, more needs to be done, and more needs to be 

done now. I’m sure more of my colleagues will want to speak to 

these issues and therefore I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 58, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

enter into the debate on Bill No. 43 today, An Act respecting 

Trespass to Property. I think that the aim of any legislation like 

this when it’s brought to the legislature is to benefit all the 

people of Saskatchewan. And in that vein it’s the job of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to ensure that it takes into account 

a number of things that may not have been first thought of by 

the government. 

 

And I’ve read through the Bill and read through some of the 

comments provided by members on the Bill, and I have some 

questions regarding the onus placed upon the owner of the land 

that’s in question here. It is stated that signage must be in place 

in order to make this legislation come into play. And so what is 

the onus on the owner to provide signage to that effect? How 

close together do trespassing signs have to be? Do they have to 

be written in both official languages? A number of questions 

regarding what is the onus upon the owner. 

 

Another part of the Bill with regard to the ownership piece of it 

is the definition or interpretation in the Act of enclosed land. 

And it says that enclosed land means that it’s land that is 

surrounded by a fence, a natural boundary, or a combination of 

the two. And it’s enclosed in a manner that indicates the 

occupier’s intention to keep persons off the occupier’s 

premises. 

 

Now a fence isn’t necessarily an intention to omit people from 

entering the property, but it might just be to keep animals in. 

And so just because you have a fence there doesn’t mean you’re 

trying to keep people out. And so it’s up to the interpretation of 

somebody that might trespass to make that judgment. And so I 

don’t know how you enforce a law where somebody can simply 

say, it wasn’t my intention to break in; I just assumed that the 

fence was there to keep animals in and not people out. 

 

It’s interesting to note also who benefits from this Bill. Was 

somebody calling for this? I know I spent a great deal of time 

talking with constituents and canvassing constituents, and in no 

case when I’ve spoken with them have they brought this 

forward to me to bring forward to the legislature. So I’m 

curious as to who was calling for this and for what purpose the 

government brought it forward. 

 

What is the impetus of the Bill? What is the Bill intended to 

stop? What is it intended to keep from happening? Are there 

specific examples that the government could provide for that 

purpose? 

 

It appears that because trespassing is prohibited, there may be 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

unintended consequences of this Bill, including protests. I know 

a number of agriculture rallies that have taken place on the 

legislature, and they certainly drive on Crown land and in 

roadways to get here. Now is it an unintended consequence of 

this legislation that enables the government to stop a protest like 

that, peaceful or otherwise? And so is that an unintended 

consequence or is that the intended consequence? And so I 

think if it’s the intended consequence, the government ought to 

come out and say it. They don’t define Crown land in this Bill 

in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So does it include highways in the province? And so if there’s a 

demonstration, peaceful or otherwise, or if there’s a fundraiser 

that seems to bother one person that drives down the highway, 

can that be stopped arbitrarily and can the person be fined under 

the legislation? 

 

Are sidewalks included? Is there a case where you’ll have folks 

protesting in the front of the legislature or downtown Saskatoon 

or Prince Albert in a peaceful demonstration where this Bill can 

now come into play and those people be forced to leave or 

consequently fined? And is that an intended consequence of this 

Bill, or is that an unintended consequence? 

 

Is this government so afraid of the decisions they might make in 

the future and the ones that they’ve made now, where they’ve 

seen over 2,000 people gather at a peaceful demonstration in 

Saskatoon to oppose their policies, did that frighten them so 

much that they brought this Bill forward in order to stop 

something like that? 

 

Why is it that they don’t define what Crown land is? And can 

we look forward to a definition of Crown land by this 

government? 

 

Now the members over there laugh and think this is funny, and 

it’s unfortunate that they bring a Bill forward that has possible 

consequences like this and laugh at what might be the outcome. 

I think people see through what the intended consequences of 

this Bill are. It’s transparent and it’s a little unfortunate. 

 

Additionally it would be interesting to note who was consulted 

in regard to this Bill. Did the government consult with property 

owners that frequently have hunters on their land? It says 

specifically that the Bill doesn’t apply to hunters, trappers, 

fishers, but it says nothing about people who like to take a hike. 

So if at the end of your hike you shoot an animal, you’re 

allowed to trespass. But it’s not the case if you’re simply out 

walking. So if you go out for a walk with a gun and shoot 

something, it’s okay. But if you go out for a walk without the 

intention of killing an animal, it’s not okay under this Act. 

 

So interesting to note who was consulted. Were peace officers 

consulted? And do they foresee issues with the enforcement of 

a Bill like this? How will they enforce a Bill that has 200 

peaceful demonstrators on Crown land and the government 

decides that they don’t want them any more and so they invoke 

Bill 43? Have they consulted with peace officers who’d 

effectively have to issue tickets to 200 people at a peaceful 

demonstration? 

 

And so there are a number of questions that we’ve got in 

reference to this Act that either wasn’t well written or wasn’t 

well presented in second reading. So we’ll take some of these 

questions or all of these questions to the people in this province 

and ask them what their views are and to the stakeholders. And 

we’ll bring it back and try and make improvements as is our job 

as the loyal opposition. With that, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 43, The Trespass 

to Property Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 57 — The 

Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to speak to the second reading of Bill No. 

57, An Act to amend The Land Titles Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to rise to speak to this 

Bill and, Mr. Speaker, I also appreciate the comments of 

members that have been made prior to my speaking on this Bill. 

 

[15:30] 

 

By and large, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the government 

for taking certain steps within this legislation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in doing that, I think I should point out some of those 

measures. 

 

But first of all before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind 

members in the Chamber and the folks at home who are 

watching about what the minister responsible for the land titles 

Bill in front of us said during his introductory remarks in this 

regard. The minister’s remarks which appear on page 1680 of 

Hansard for November 17, Mr. Speaker — that was just 

yesterday — the minister stated, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan’s land registry system is known nationwide 

for innovation, reliability, and customer service. The 

amendments contained in the Bill will enhance the 

reliability and security of Saskatchewan’s land registry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in my opening remarks to this Bill, I want to 

congratulate the minister for his words. But more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, for his acknowledgement that indeed the system 

that is land titles in this province that has been developed over 

many years, Mr. Speaker, by some very hard-working people 

within the land titles system, within the legal community, and 

within the legislature here with a number of different ministers, 

Mr. Speaker — primarily New Democratic Party ministers, Mr. 

Speaker — I thank the minister opposite for his 

acknowledgement that indeed this system is known nationwide 

for its innovation, reliability, and customer service. 

 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge as 

well that some people in Saskatchewan have experienced some 

difficulties with the land title system over the years. And, Mr. 

Speaker, many of those difficulties were dealt with over the last 

five or six years, Mr. Speaker, as the land titles system moved 

from a paper-based system to a digital or electronic system, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think those who are dealing with land issues in 

the legal community, Mr. Speaker, speak volumes of good 

things about the changes, that how more efficient and more 

effective the new system is at managing the intricacies of land 

titles. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think the public is 

going to be pleased about with this legislation is that it tries to 

settle concerns that people have with regards to losing their 

homes as a result of fraudulent activity. Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t 

happened very often in Saskatchewan, but there’s always the 

fear that it could happen. 

 

One of our — in fact not one of our, Mr. Speaker — our most 

important possession is our home, Mr. Speaker, what we refer 

to as, what is our shelter. And when we have invested in that 

piece of property, Mr. Speaker, and in many cases as we age, 

the value that is in that piece of property, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s farm land or a single house or, in some cases, the business 

that we own as individuals or in partnership with friends, 

families, or acquaintances, Mr. Speaker, these properties are 

indeed our most valuable possessions. Therefore we are often 

worried about how easy it is to lose that possession if there is 

someone out there who is determined to take it. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this legislation attempts to relieve some of those 

concerns and, Mr. Speaker, that is very important. 

 

Also speaking before I spoke, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Regina Lakeview had a number of interesting and very astute 

comments with regards to this Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, in that 

regard let me quote from the member of Regina Lakeview who 

spoke yesterday in the Legislative Assembly here, November 

17. And I quote from the member, Regina Lakeview, this 

corporation, meaning ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], Mr. Speaker, the new land titles group, ISC: 

 

This corporation was an attempt, and I think it’s been a 

very successful attempt, to modernize the land registry in 

Saskatchewan because what everybody knows is that the 

ability to have a chance to borrow money against land or 

to know for sure that you have the use of land in 

developing business, in providing security for your home, 

making sure that you’ve provided for your family — 

whether it’s a farming operation, ranching, mining, or an 

industry — is absolutely crucial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview certainly puts 

the whole picture in context, that land titles register is not just 

personal property but business property, farming property, and, 

Mr. Speaker, the critical importance of that registry to the 

security of the property. 

 

He also indicated, Mr. Speaker, how successful ISC has been. 

The efficiency and customer satisfaction has certainly increased 

over the years. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, he acknowledged that this legislation 

is one more step. There have been many steps in building the 

efficiencies into The Land Titles Act. This legislation is just one 

more step, another step along the road to making sure that 

businesses can rely on the land titles system we have in 

Saskatchewan, run by ISC, so that further development of 

business in Saskatchewan can continue without any restrictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is indeed fairly complicated. It’s 

complicated in the sense that it deals with title insurance. It 

deals with the oil and gas sector and what they call . . . I’m just 

looking for the language in here now, Mr. Speaker, as it applies 

to the oil and gas sector. It has something to do with fractured 

titles whereby there are numerous titles relating to minerals, Mr. 

Speaker, along specific surface titles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a fairly complicated piece of legislation 

that’s going to require a little bit of work in committee, some 

consultation work prior to going to committee. And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, knowing that we still have some consultation to 

do, knowing that we have some questions that we need 

answered before sending the Bill to committee, I would move, 

Mr. Speaker, that debate on Bill No. 57, An Act to amend The 

Land Titles Act, 2000 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

certainly nice to be able to stand up in the Assembly here and 

speak to the Assembly here today on Bill 9, An Act to amend 

the Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. There’s 

some parts of this Bill that certainly we’re agreeable in the 

terms to. We as an opposition always want to ensure that we’re 

looking at these with a co-operative and constructive mind as 

possible, and there are a couple of pieces that we certainly have 

no major problem with or are agreeable as I said. 

 

And I think that we can certainly agree that annual reports do 

not disclose personal information. And the kind of personal 

information that we believe should be protected, as this Bill 

describes, are names of individuals who have retired or died 

during a period covered, as well the names of superannuation or 

other allowances or benefits granted in individual cases — any 

other personal information respecting any of those individuals. 

So with the element within this Bill that protects protection of 

information, protects the identity of individuals, we certainly 

support that aspect. 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

We can certainly also agree on the proposed minor amendment 

regarding the calculation of pension benefits for a spouse. We 

will be co-operative there. But as I said, part of our role as 

opposition is to both be co-operative but also to be constructive. 

And the thrust of this Bill just isn’t sellable with the voters of 

Saskatchewan; thus it’s not appropriate that it’s being put 

forward. In fact it’s offside with my constituents. It’s offside 

with people across Saskatchewan. 

 

And the piece that’s very contentious is the amendment that 

would allow for an individual to collect a salary and a pension 

at the same time for the same work. And this is what we have 

referred to as the double-dipping Bill. This is the thrust of this 

Bill, the main purpose of this Bill, and we simply don’t support 

this principle nor do the people of Saskatchewan.  

 

We’re talking about individuals here, Mr. Speaker, who are 

employed in a senior role within government for many years 

and that are simply one day retiring and sitting in the same 

desk, now being rehired, receiving now a paycheque on top of 

the paycheque they’re already receiving through the defined 

benefit pension. And that pension plan of course is funded 

directly from the GRF, from the General Revenue Fund, as is 

their salary. They haven’t had a change in employment, a 

change in role, and it’s just not healthy within an organization. 

 

 I think it’s really important that we get this point across that 

this part just really doesn’t sit well with the Saskatchewan 

public and certainly not my constituents. I know that the Sask 

Party brought forward legislation last spring. Many pieces were 

very debatable and of concern for Saskatchewan people, maybe 

no more so on a couple that weren’t maybe seen in a broader 

debate. 

 

But I know from spring session until now, I hear time and time 

again and have had so many phone calls from individuals who 

are really concerned about the unaccountability Act that was 

brought forward in the spring, that being the Bill that allowed 

ministers to authorize or to cut cheques for up to $350,000 

without any scrutiny, without responsibility. And this Bill was 

pulled. I know that the government were rather embarrassed 

when they put this Bill out so they chose to pull it, which was a 

good choice for them. They should have never had the audacity 

to put that Bill out in the first place. But they pulled it, and the 

Saskatchewan public has certainly had concerns since. 

 

And many times you’ll bump into somebody and say, you 

know, I think one of the biggest concerns is when they point to 

that Bill and say, you know, that tends to point to the direction 

that this government will go at some point. And that’s from an 

accountability perspective. 

 

I know the Minister from Environment’s asking kind of how 

many phone calls did we receive there. And the answer would 

be numerous, numerous. 

 

And I can talk about here in Regina. In fact as MLAs we attend 

many events, whether it’s in the business community or social 

organizations. And so many individuals who have a good strong 

memory in this province, who lived through the ’80s and 

watched government at that time, a least accountable time for 

government, arguably in North America, occurred right here in 

Saskatchewan with their cousins and our Premier working for 

them. 

 

And this is the kind of reminder that just makes them feel 

uncomfortable with the direction or potential direction of this 

new government. But the reason I bring this piece of legislation 

up is because what we’re seeing here today is a reintroduction 

of a piece of legislation that brings equal contempt from the 

Saskatchewan public. This was brought forward again by the 

Saskatchewan Party, and I’m incredibly surprised, rather 

appalled, that this legislation’s been brought forward again, this 

double-dipping Bill that simply is completely offside with the 

Saskatchewan public. 

 

To go straight to the General Revenue Fund which is supplied 

by taxpayers across this province — hard-working families, 

hard-working business people putting those dollars into those 

coffers — are now going to be used in a way that just isn’t 

appropriate, and putting exorbitant salaries into the hands of a 

select few, and not healthy in the end for our public service as a 

whole. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s a question that we have to ask. 

Is this double-dipping legislation simply a very costly but 

simple solution to something that’s a little bit more complex? 

When I’m talking about something that’s more complex, that 

might be succession planning in the public service or it 

certainly is closing some loopholes that have been identified by 

auditors. 

 

I think that it’s a shame that Saskatchewan taxpayers are going 

to be on the hook for a poor policy of our current government 

here as opposed to fixing the loopholes, the challenges that are 

occurring where there’s a circumstance where someone’s 

double-dipped when they shouldn’t. Because the thing is, Mr. 

Speaker, that rules and regulations are put in place in society for 

a reason and with best interests. Now not everybody abides 

them, Mr. Speaker. We can always do better to make sure that 

those rules and regulations make sense, but that they also can be 

adapted to close those gaps. 

 

I think we can look at a speeding limit as an example that’s put 

in place for public safety. Not everybody abides it and there’s a 

consequence for which one pays, but you’re not always caught 

speeding as well, Mr. Speaker. And just the same as this 

double-dipping, certainly there’s been some circumstances of 

double-dipping over the years that have been inappropriate. But 

instead of addressing the issue through legislation and changing 

the policy, we’re seeing simply the rules and regulations being 

tossed out the window and saying, go ahead and do it. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the answer to individual speeding on the roads 

isn’t to simply say, well let’s take the speed limits off the roads. 

Safety is too important. 

 

I think we could liken this as well to if we look at some of the 

RMs across Saskatchewan. And they have value for rules and 

restrictions within their domain there. And I guess we can look 

at some of the economic activity we have. And if we’re looking 

at the heavy haul truck routes that are established and the big 

trucks, the B-trains, I believe a B-train, Mr. Speaker, is equal to 

almost 10,000 passes of a pickup truck — one pass of a B-train 

equivalent to almost 10,000 of a pickup truck. And this is a 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

concern for RMs on the note that they have heavy-haul routes 

laid out, but that they’re not always followed by truck drivers. 

And I know that RMs work their best to try to address this 

solution. Some have even gone into different ways of enforcing. 

They’ve been very resourceful in this, and they look for 

solutions from other levels of government and other levels of 

support. 

 

But the reason this is a very similar circumstance is that what 

RMs aren’t saying is, get rid of the heavy-haul roads and let 

them drive wherever, because that would simply be eroding the 

public road infrastructure at a huge cost to taxpayers, simply 

eroding that infrastructure at a huge cost. And it just shouldn’t, 

shouldn’t be allowed. So the answer isn’t to say, oh, get rid of 

those heavy-haul routes; get rid of speed limits. The answer is 

to work your best to fix the problems. 

 

And so when we are looking at this legislation here that protects 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer and makes sure we have a healthy 

public service, and that where there is opportunity for vertical 

movement and succession within that, that this just doesn’t 

work for Saskatchewan people. It doesn’t protect their dollars 

that they place into government coffers. It doesn’t offer them 

trust in their government. And it’s offside with the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we have questions I guess about, you know, why was this 

brought forward; why wasn’t there more thoughtful debate as to 

how they could have fixed the problem that actually existed and 

how individuals can double-dip right now. And you know, 

there’s fundamental questions about who was consulted in this 

process. And you know, I wonder if there was other alternatives 

that were explored before this amendment was brought forward 

again, because it was incredibly offside with the people in the 

spring session when it was brought forward. It’s equally offside 

now. And it’s a simple response that comes at a huge cost to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

When we talk about allowing or creating an environment for an 

individual to draw a pension from their position, the next day be 

drawing that salary, we’re talking about creating environments 

where someone’s immediately taking almost 170 per cent 

increase in their salary. This isn’t in line with the kind of 

increases Saskatchewan people across the board are seeing. 

 

What is something that Saskatchewan people are facing across 

the board are costs. And Saskatchewan people are really 

concerned about costs and affordability, and I know it’s a big 

concern to my constituents. I know it’s a concern across 

communities across Saskatchewan, whether that be housing, 

whether that be transportation, whether that be food, whether 

that be their property taxes. And we need to make sure our 

government’s aware of those costs and are working towards 

those. But this completely displays a complete disconnect 

between this government and Saskatchewan people and, in 

effect, it could create a real bottleneck within our public service 

as well. By allowing individuals to exercise this right that 

would be allowed through this legislation, we could really 

prevent vertical movement within our public service. 

 

And I know that there’s likely challenges within the Public 

Service Commission or within the public service just the same 

way as there is across labour markets across Saskatchewan. We 

are in a hot economy and we do need to plan for the succession 

beyond the baby boomer generation that we have employed. 

But we can do this in a more thoughtful way than bringing 

forward the double-dipping policy such as we see here today. 

 

I think it’s really important to recognize that when we’re 

looking at this double-dipping, it’s only for a select few 

individuals that this would be built into, but at a huge cost. 

These are individuals with defined-benefit pensions, which 

means they’re assured their exact percentage for the rest of their 

life. Well I think this shows again what a disconnect and how 

offside this legislation is with Saskatchewan people as so many 

people have been affected by this global economic turmoil, this 

historic market drop. 

 

I know I have so many constituents who are putting off, 

postponing their retirements right now as they’re concerned 

looking at their defined contribution funds or looking at their 

RRSPs [registered retirement savings plan] or their pooled 

investments that they have because they’ve taken such a hit. 

And at the same time, while these individuals are postponing 

retirement, they’re continuing to pay taxes. And they’re pushing 

off being able to move out of their business, and they’re 

continuing to work and pay taxes. The very taxes that they’re 

paying at the same time are going to these double-dippers who 

have the Cadillac of a pension — being defined-benefit pension 

— and then are drawing this salary again. And we’re talking 

about senior-level positions that will be exercising this 

opportunity here. 

 

It’s just, as I’ve said, it’s offside with the Saskatchewan people. 

It’s offside with what’s going on in our global economic 

challenges. And this side just really doesn’t support it. You 

know, I think it’s important that we realize that there’s many 

financial ramifications that this legislation could bear, even far 

beyond what we’re talking about here today. And whether 

that’s severe congestion in the public service or the actual 

financial costs that are going to be borne through this and at the 

expense of hard-working Saskatchewan people and ratepayers, 

it’s just not appropriate. We need to stand up for the public. We 

need more transparency, more accountability than we’re getting 

here right now, and that’s simply what we’re calling for. 

 

For all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the legislation must have a 

much longer, much broader, much wider consultation than it’s 

had to this point. I’m appalled in fact that we are debating in 

this House again, because I thought the right decision was made 

back in the spring not to move forward with this Bill. I hope to 

continue to hear from constituents and people across the 

province who are concerned by this legislation. Certainly I 

invite anybody with a different perspective on this as well to 

contact me. 

 

But on that note there needs to be more debate, more thoughtful 

consideration of this Bill. So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

will move adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved to 

adjourn debate on this Bill. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s good to have the opportunity to be able to rise and make a 

number of comments on this Act that will amend the Labour 

Market Commission. Mr. Speaker, often before we can truly 

understand where we’re going with some of these things, we 

really need to understand where we have come and the process 

that has been building over many years to get to the point where 

the Labour Market Commission was put in place and has been 

doing its work, just really getting going over the last couple of 

years. 

 

Many years ago and long before I was in politics, I remember a 

great deal of discussion talking about the enacting of the Labour 

Force Development Board. And really what it did — and we 

have to be going back about at least 15 years, 14 to 15 years 

when the Labour Force Development Board was put in place — 

and what it was doing at that time, even then people realized 

that to have a better coordination, to have a real focus on our 

labour market and labour force and be able to develop the areas 

that were needed and areas where there may be gaps, that there 

needed to be a committee in place. This Labour Force 

Development Board that would look at big picture overview 

and work towards making sure that our labour market in 

Saskatchewan fit the needs that were there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of the areas that were looked at really 

tried to draw in a lot of the advantages and resources that we 

have in the province, mainly utilizing our regional colleges in a 

more appropriate way, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], along with the universities, 

making sure that students came out of high school with the 

appropriate skills that they needed and were able to move into 

the fields of their choice, had the appropriate support so they 

could be well-prepared for the labour market here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over a number of years . . . And I believe the initial funding for 

the Labour Force Development Board came from the federal 

government. And I’m not certain on this, but I believe that’s 

where some of the focus came from on the initial board as it 

was set up. But as we moved along, you looked at other 

provinces, their labour force development boards fell by the 

wayside. So it came to the point in time when Saskatchewan’s 

Labour Force Development Board was the only one that was 

still in operation. 

 

But we realized then that there needed to be some changes 

made, the structure needed to be changed, and also the focus 

needed to be changed and be a little more all-encompassing. 

Hence we moved from the Labour Force Development Board 

into the Labour Market Commission — its expanded and 

enhanced vision that it had for the province bringing together 

all partners to work towards labour market issues and solutions 

for those labour market issues and what needed to be there. 

 

I don’t think there’s anything more frustrating, and I think when 

we look at any issue — when we talk about dealing with 

governments or whether it’s dealing with different sectors — 

we all realize that there needs to be a point in time and a spot 

for all of us to come together, do some networking, do some 

comparisons, and work together to provide solutions that fit the 

best for our province. And that’s really what the Labour Market 

Commission put in place. 

 

I know there was a huge amount of work that went into the 

structure, making sure that we had appropriate representation, 

the best people that we could find to provide the direction and 

the input into the commission. And really, when we look at just 

some general points about the Labour Market Commission and 

the Labour Market Partnership, and it was created under 

legislation and it was formed on a basis that labour market 

planning and coordination is best achieved through a 

partnership between labour, business, education and training 

institutes, government, and other stakeholders to essentially 

connect the dots within Saskatchewan’s labour market. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Labour Market Commission will have an industry focus on 

providing advice on Saskatchewan’s key labour market issues. 

It sounds pretty straightforward, but I know it took a great deal 

of work to put in place and was off and running and providing 

some good advice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now we see that the Labour Market 

Commission is being changed, downsized, and this strikes me 

as being very odd when we’ve seen just today some of the 

sector committees put in place for Enterprise Saskatchewan — 

huge number of people brought together to give advice to the 

government, but yet they’re cutting the Labour Market 

Commission to a smaller size, downsizing it. 

 

A great deal of effort was put into making sure that all sectors 

were represented, that there was fair representation and advice 

from all sectors that were necessary were being brought into the 

Labour Market Commission. So we all recognize that that’s 

important that you have the appropriate balance and the 

appropriate voices at the table when you are making decisions 

that affect the province as a whole. 

 

So I’m not sure why the government is looking at changing the 

Labour Market Commission, downsizing the number of board 

members that are on there. Maybe they feel that some sectors 

aren’t important; maybe they feel that some sectors’ voices 

aren’t worth hearing on the board and on the commission. I’m 

not sure. But like I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a great 

deal of work that went into making sure we had the appropriate 

balance on this commission. 

 

So it’s somewhat of a disappointment to see the changes being 

made, when the government has talked about hearing from 

stakeholders, building our economy, and making sure that 

Saskatchewan’s prepared for the future, to see some steps being 

taken that are regressive in many people’s views. 

 

One area that I see is being changed . . . And I haven’t gone 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

through all of the background information; I’ve been working 

my way through. But I see that one of the existing provisions 

that is being changed is the social economy, which it’s a 

definition that refers to the non-for-profit sector that seeks to 

enhance the social, economic, and environmental conditions of 

communities and includes the voluntary sector. And I see when 

we look at the explanatory notes that, throughout the piece on 

the amendments to The Labour Market Commission Act, the 

social economy definition is being removed from the Act 

throughout the whole Labour Market Commission Act. 

Anything referring to the social economy is being removed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the big advantages that 

Saskatchewan has is its quality of life. One of the big 

determinants for young people that are coming out of university 

and moving into the workforce, looking to establish careers, 

looking to settle down and build a family, is quality of life. And 

a social economy leads into that. The social economy enhances 

those priorities within the province of Saskatchewan so that 

young people and families will find what they are looking for in 

our province. 

 

We often take for granted the things that are closest to us. We 

don’t take advantage or don’t talk enough about the advantages 

that we have here in Saskatchewan. We don’t talk about the 

clean environment. We don’t talk about the lots of wide open 

spaces, the reasonable housing, the reasonable distances in most 

of our communities that we have to travel to and from work, 

short commute times. These are all part of the social aspect of 

our jobs which is becoming more and more important to young 

people. So why all of a sudden do we go strictly to, I would 

assume, a business model that the social economy and the social 

economy that’s important to our communities is no longer being 

given any type of visibility in this Act? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it raises many questions, and there’s a number of 

questions that need to be asked when we look at this Bill when 

we get into committee. I mean really there’s more of an 

obligation on behalf of government to make sure that 

Saskatchewan meets the challenges for economic growth. It 

isn’t just the bottom line of dollars and cents. There’s much 

more to it when we look at quality of life and our social and 

economic development, but the social economy needs to be part 

of the considerations when we are looking at the big picture. 

 

We are experiencing a labour shortage in many areas, and there 

is a large gap between what the government is doing and what 

actually needs to be done to address that. The changes in this 

Bill, does it enhance what’s being done or does it really move 

us backwards and take away many of the aspects that are 

important to many people? 

 

We — and I mean many of us who have been involved, whether 

it’s the Labour Force Development Board in its early stages, 

whether it’s the new generation of the Labour Market 

Commission — have a great deal of respect for the work that 

these people have done over many years to build the networks, 

to build the connections. 

 

And in many cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to build the trust. To 

build the trust between different sectors that while we may 

speak somewhat different of a language, we may use 

terminology somewhat different, our goals are the same. That 

trust that’s been built and the work that’s been done is 

invaluable to the success of the Labour Market Commission, 

and you cannot underestimate the value of the work that’s been 

done. 

 

And that’s what I’m afraid these changes do is shift the 

direction, change the people that have been involved, change a 

lot of the networking, the relationships, and the trust that’s been 

built over a number of years, and shift it in a totally different 

direction. Are we starting from zero? Are we building on those 

good relationships that have been established? 

 

And that’s an important point because does it move us forward 

or, like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does it put us backwards? 

Does it move us back a number of years especially at a time 

when the economy of the province of Saskatchewan is moving 

ahead? There is lots of demands. There are many shortages in 

many sectors that are out there. We need to be moving ahead. 

This is not a time for the Government of Saskatchewan to be 

moving the Labour Market Commission backwards and making 

it start again from the beginning, to redo work, good 

relationships, the networking, the trust that has been built to this 

point. We should be moving ahead, not backwards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the current boom it’s clearly evident 

and I think the Saskatchewan Party has made it clear that it 

believes labour to be an impediment to growth. Not only when 

we look at the changes that are made to the Labour Market 

Commission but when we look at the committees that have 

been released, the sector committees that have been released 

from Enterprise Saskatchewan to date. A huge amount of 

people — huge amount of people — from all over the province 

that were appointed to boards and sector committees that will 

meet on a regular basis, but there is no committees that deal 

with labour or labour market. 

 

t seems to be viewed that we will carry on and Saskatchewan’s 

economy will do well in spite of ignoring a whole sector of the 

population, a whole sector of the taxpaying population in the 

province of Saskatchewan, ignoring a whole sector of the 

taxpaying, very mobile portion of the population. And that I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, is a mistake. 

 

So who did the Saskatchewan Party consult with before drafting 

this legislation? And when we talk about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan being given a seat on the commission or taking 

over a seat on the commission, however you want to put it, it’s 

very much an unknown entity. While the Saskatchewan Party 

has talked about it, Enterprise Saskatchewan is still an unknown 

entity. And what direction are they going to take, what direction 

are they going to move the Labour Market Commission? And 

it’s really, really a huge unknown at this point in time. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there would be many people across the 

province that would say quite clearly that they disagree with the 

Labour Market Commission being folded into a new entity that 

we’re not sure where it’s going. 

 

And I can’t express strongly enough the concern that all the 

work that has gone into the Labour Market Commission, all of 

the consultation, and I just can’t stress enough that the good 

working relationships, the trust that has been built, the comfort 

and understanding that has been built between the parties, 

between the sectors that are represented on the Labour Market 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

Commission, that is truly too valuable to be tossed aside. And it 

will really put the Labour Market Commission back years in the 

work that it has done and is on the verge of doing in this 

exciting time for the province of Saskatchewan. I have to say, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it truly is not a time to be moving 

backwards. It is not a time to be moving backwards. 

 

So while there is a bit of consultation, or a fair bit of 

consultation actually, and a number of questions that still need 

to be asked on the changes that are being put forward to the 

Labour Market Commission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point 

in time to give myself and my colleagues time to do more 

consultation and ask questions and seek advice from 

stakeholders across the province who have a great deal to say 

about the Labour Market Commission — because there isn’t a 

sector in the province that isn’t struggling with labour shortage; 

that isn’t looking at retraining for workers that they may 

currently have; that isn’t looking for improvements in their 

sector and in their area — so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 

adjourn debate on this Bill so that my colleagues and I will be 

able to do the research that’s needed. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adjourn debate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It’s been agreed. 

Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise on second reading of the Bill 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, and I wish to acknowledge all those who are 

obviously listening, but as well as who had made comments on 

the Bill. And we would under this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under 

this Bill, the minister outlined that there were . . . was repealing 

some obsolete sections under the Act and with those we have, 

we’re not overly concerned with those. We agree with those. 

 

I want to say at this time as well that our side of the House is 

also very grateful for the work that our ambulance operators and 

the personnel who operate those ambulances perform. I know in 

my own city of Saskatoon, many times the residents of 

Saskatoon witness the work that these people do. They work 

very much in the public eye and their work is very much 

appreciated. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of questions I think that we 

will need to be asked about this Bill, but one of the other things 

the minister also talked about, the paramedics and having them 

be self-regulating, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is overdue. 

And we’re also quite pleased that with the expanded role of 

paramedics, not only with the ambulance system but as well 

with the health care system. 

 

There are a lot of these . . . I would say that these moves are 

heading in the right direction and are positive for health care. 

And however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being in Saskatchewan 

there’s obviously a lot of distances that need to be travelled, the 

expansion or the rural areas, and the coverage, and we all know 

the challenges that this poses for the carriers. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Other changes, and that the minister said that he was having 

ongoing discussions with Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 

Services Association, that hopefully will help to develop the 

roles and improve health care quality in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in Saskatchewan . . . 

Saskatchewan has a history of rising to challenges that we have 

in health care, provision of health care services, particularly in 

transportation and in dealing with the health care needs of 

Saskatchewan people. And our party believes that there should 

be more consultation, more consultations to deal with issues 

and we should be out talking to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As I mentioned, I know the minister has said he has had 

ongoing discussions with Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 

Services Association. I know our side, when we were in 

government those discussions were held, but it is never a bad 

idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to continue those discussions. And if 

an Act such as The Ambulance Amendment Act is opened up, it 

is always appropriate that perhaps it gives us an opportunity to 

look further and determine the other needs and talk to people in 

rural areas — not only rural, but in the cities — to find out what 

other decisions or changes that can be made. It gives us an 

opportunity to discuss further our health care system which is 

always evolving and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also is a benefit to 

those operators and personnel which I spoke of earlier. 

 

I just want to further add that the work that they do, and the 

personnel and operators that are continually open to 

discussions, they are eager to put forward ideas. And it is times 

like these when we have an Act that we should take that 

opportunity, take the time, as many of the people who my 

colleagues have spoken on this have suggested, and I would say 

to you that I support that idea. 

 

There are many stakeholder groups that perhaps that we should 

be talking to before we rush headlong into making these 

amendments. Again I have said that some of the more 

housekeeping amendments, I think everyone can agree to those, 

and I think those we can move on. And those are not necessarily 

the problem. But in our ever-changing world that we have, there 

are many other issues that come forward. We have looked at . . . 

And perhaps in the issues of larger regional boards, that that has 

to be taken into account, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we want to 

move in an area such as Bill 49, The Ambulance Amendment 

Act. 

 

It is good news, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of 

Health has gone forward and proposed changes. He has 

indicated that he has discussed in his . . . In Hansard here I see, 

and has “. . . discussed these amendments with representatives 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

of the regional health authorities and with SEMSA, the 

Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services . . .” He says that: 

“These groups support the changes.” And he hopes that, I quote 

here: “I am confident that this spirit of co-operation will move 

us forward as . . . [the] emergency medical services sector 

continues to evolve to meet the need of patients.” 

 

And I think that’s important for all of us to take account of — 

that the sector is evolving — and it is important that we 

continue, that we continue to strive to meet the needs of the 

patients. And I would just suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that, as 

many who have spoken, that these types of situations that 

because it is evolving, that when we take the opportunity to 

open up the Act and make changes, that we should go further, 

hold consultations, talk to all the stakeholder groups, talk to our 

city and rural residents, and take a wider approach perhaps than 

what is being taken here. And I would perhaps suggest to the 

minister that he would pause for a second, look at this, take 

some time and do the things that are necessary for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What minister is that? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — That’s the Minister of Health. And so 

knowing that the Minister of Health would be open and hoping 

that he does agree with a consultative type of approach, I would 

make those suggestions to him. As he said, the sector continues 

to evolve and to meet and he would like to make changes to 

meet the need of patients. And I think it is important to, first of 

all, not assume that he knows the needs of those patients, that I 

think it’s important that he consult those patients and determine 

what those needs are. 

 

One of the others and other than just consulting, perhaps this is 

an opportunity for us to expand this legislation before it is 

passed. We can always strive to improve ambulance services, 

improve delivery of emergency health care. It would be positive 

for the province to take this on, to hold discussions, to listen to 

people. And I am concerned somewhat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that perhaps . . . that in fact this was not done; that this might be 

a missed opportunity for us here, for the people of 

Saskatchewan to deal with some very, very serious issues. 

 

And as I mentioned previous, the operators and the personnel 

who do this work, the dangers that they face, perhaps there are 

other issues that we should be looking at that are important. 

And I did mention that they are in the public eye. Perhaps if I 

could put it this way, in our own Saskatoon experience, many 

times, whether it be family members, neighbours, other citizens 

have all been part of, have used this service, or in fact have had 

family members use this service, have had neighbours. So this 

is the type of service, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we all come in 

contact with, that we all rely on. 

 

And I again mention that the Minister of Health’s . . . that there 

is an evolving system; that we always have to keep an eye on 

this. And this would be a great opportunity when we have 

opened the Act up to have a close look at all these, at all the 

possible variables that exist, do the necessary due diligence on 

this, and so that we can meet. 

 

And I would just like to make a few comments also on the rural 

areas which pose their own particular concerns, and to have a 

look and perhaps look closer at the needs. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have all . . . in the cities here are in closer contact 

but the rural areas pose a special concern especially in the 

delivery of this service. And I think that we should always be 

looking at this, always looking at the service that needs to be 

provided. 

 

Again it is much like the profession now being self-regulated — 

the paramedics profession. And that’s an evolving profession 

too. And that took many years to do, but it was also under sort 

of constant review and that brought that sort of policy forward. 

 

These paramedics in our system who are expanding their roles 

and perhaps see expanded roles in the ambulance system and in 

the health care systems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to be 

aware of these. We have to understand and perhaps we should 

be talking to them more to understand how they see their 

system evolving with the new technologies that are out there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It would be well worthwhile to pause and 

to say to them, what more can you suggest that we should be 

doing? Mr. Deputy Speaker, it never hurts to talk to people. We 

can never lose when we do that. 

 

And I, just for the bit of work that’s been done here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would offer kudos to those who have gone 

out and done this work. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can do 

more. We can always do more here. And in health care 

particularly — being the prime concern in this province — we 

should be, we should be concerned with doing more and doing 

better, doing better. So what better time than, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with Bill 49, The Ambulance Amendment Act to start 

doing that good work that is necessary. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that some of my colleagues wish 

to make further comments, and on this Bill there are more 

questions that we should have. We would like to see those 

consultations move forward. We would like to see the due 

diligence done on this Bill, the careful study of it. There’s many 

questions we have. And with that, I would move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

that we adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 53 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 

The Medical Profession Act . . . I wanted to say a few things 

before I actually talk about the Bill. 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

We support the College of Physicians and Surgeons as the 

self-regulatory body of physicians and surgeons in 

Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Medical Association as 

the organization that represents the physicians and the doctors. 

Everybody agrees that the important contribution that doctors 

make to the system . . . and they are of course continually and 

every year the most respected and trusted profession when 

people are polled. 

 

The amendment that’s proposed in The Medical Profession Act 

allows the College of Physicians and Surgeons to share 

information regarding certain investigations — example, quality 

of care issues like patient death. They can share them with the 

appropriate stakeholders who are doing similar investigations or 

reviews. Of note is the limitation of only sharing information 

regarding investigations and issues surrounding patient care, 

including patient death. 

 

It does not allow any information sharing around physician 

discipline issues, investigations, or competency hearings of 

physicians. It is limited to investigations that are ongoing, that 

perhaps are being done by another organization. And, for 

example, if the competency committee of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons or the complaints investigation 

committee of the College of Physicians and Surgeons is doing 

an investigation and so is a health region, then they can share 

their information. This will optimally improve the quality of 

care for Saskatchewan residents by encouraging co-operation in 

investigations and information sharing. And it will reduce the 

overlap or the replication in these times. 

 

We need to be assured that the Bill does only do what it has 

been specified and in no way jeopardizes the confidentiality of 

the . . . or the patient confidentiality or the physician 

confidentiality or in any way the integrity of an investigation 

into physician conduct. 

 

There are many stakeholders who the minister mentioned in his 

second reading speech. I’ve spoken to several of them and still 

awaiting conversations with many others. Our work will 

continue on this Bill and talking to these stakeholders, but I do 

now . . . In our opinion, we can let it go to committee. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister for Liquor and Gaming. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This Bill will be referred to the Human Services Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: —This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am extremely pleased today to stand and enter into the debate 

on Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 1998, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation makes 

amendments that will result in the makeup in the board of the 

Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation changing to be 

more in keeping with current governance principles of similar 

organizations and corporations around the world, Mr. Speaker. 

The governance change in the Credit Union Deposit 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, is in keeping with those principles of 

other corporations and banks, Mr. Speaker, in ensuring that the 

members on the board are able to deliver, without any negative 

influence or interference, Mr. Speaker, the responsibilities of 

the board. 

 

But given the recent turmoil in the financial sector, Mr. 

Speaker, this is even more important than it would have been 

previously. Providing the additional stability to the credit union 

system that is providing good service to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is to be applauded. It is a good 

change. We thank the members opposite for bringing forward 

this change. We understand it is supported by the credit union 

board itself as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in this particular time these types of changes are more 

important than ever. We’ve seen the impact of poor governance 

and poor regulation in the US [United States] economy, Mr. 

Speaker, and its impact upon the entire world economy. So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s prudent that at this time that these changes 

are coming forward. And so once again, as I said earlier, we do 

applaud the members opposite for bringing forward this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

As people may not know that are watching this throughout the 

province, but I hope you all would, credit unions play a very 

integral part in our communities and in our province. They are 

very large financial lenders in our communities. Many, many 

Saskatchewan citizens use the credit union as their primary 

institution to obtain loans and credit from, Mr. Speaker, so this 

helps and stabilizes and ensures that those who are using the 

credit union system in our province have that little extra step of 

guarantee, a little extra level of guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Because they’re such important institutions both financially and 

socially in our communities and across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, the impact that credit unions would have in a province 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

like Saskatchewan is far greater than it would in other parts of 

the country and parts of the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consultation on these matters is important, and we are pleased 

that the Credit Union Central and the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation have been consulted on this matter. 

Again, the members opposite have taken the time to consult 

with the appropriate officials within both Credit Union Central 

and the Deposit Guarantee Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And once 

again that’s good for the province of Saskatchewan and good 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, there are still issues that we will 

want to take some time to consult with some others, and there 

are some issues that we would like to take a little further 

investigation on prior to moving this piece of legislation onto 

committee, Mr. Speaker. We are somewhat concerned though 

that any time a government starts to concern itself with the 

numbers of people on boards, and who gets to be on those 

boards, and what the criteria of those boards are, and what their 

actions are, there’s going to be a number of questions we’re 

going to want to ask when we do get this Bill to committee. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Dewdney 

has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 44 — The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to rise and add to some of the comments that have been 

made by other members in the legislature regarding Bill 44, The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act. The Minister 

of Justice and the member from Battlefords have provided some 

comment on this item already. 

 

And the amendments proposed in this Act add a definition of a 

contract agreement for sale of land that limits the application of 

the Act to proceeding brought by sellers of land who provide 

financing or accept instalment payments for land over a period 

of time of more than six months. Now I guess that leaves a 

question initially with the time period. And I believe that the 

Act is good and does a bit of housekeeping and actually aids in 

the clarification of three other Acts additionally, and that’s 

helpful. 

 

But the time period, I think, draws into question whether or not 

there can be some abuse prior to the six-month period. Does it 

leave a situation where you enter into an agreement with a 

person to purchase their cottage or their home, where it’s a 

rent-to-own type of situation, and at the five-month period, the 

owner who sees a rapid increase in the property value in that 

time — which has happened in Saskatchewan very recently — 

who would seek to end that contract and enter into another one 

because the property value has increased? And so I have some 

concerns, and we’ll do some consultation regarding whether or 

not that time period is sufficient. 

 

Essentially the Act, the intent is to clarify for users and avoid 

unnecessary court applications where the cancellation of an 

agreement doesn’t fall within the scope of the Act. Now we 

appreciate clarity for users and believe that the government’s on 

the right track there. 

 

The Act defines agreement for sale in a number of Acts, 

including the land contracts Act, The Limitation of Civil Rights 

Act, and Saskatchewan farm securities Act. It’s intended to 

ensure that the agreement for sale is given the same meaning for 

all types of land, and we appreciate the fact that it combines and 

clearly defines rules for this Act in addition to three others. 

 

As the Bill is being looked at, I just want to mention the type of 

person and effects, and it’s small in its scope, but it would 

affect a contract where you were in a rent-to-own situation 

where a landowner offers and is essentially the financier for a 

person he’s selling it to. In addition to being the owner, he also 

finances the place for you, so it’s a rent-to-own type of 

situation. And so this helps to clarify the definition of the 

contract between those two parties where it aims to end an 

opportunity for the person making the purchase to tie up land 

with small instalment payments. Say they purchase a cottage at 

Emma Lake and they want to continue with the contract, but 

they tell the original owner that, you know, I can’t make the 

entire payment this month but we’ll make a portion of that 

payment. And so it leaves the owner to wonder whether or not 

there’s a situation where they can actually end the contract 

because there is a small payment being made. 

 

This Bill appears to be small in its scope, but there are some 

applications that we have to question and ensure that it’s been 

thought of by the government. Another opportunity for abuse 

past the six-month stage would be a situation where you own a 

property at Candle Lake and you put it up for sale and finance it 

as the owner of the property in the same type of contract. And a 

person enters into that contract as a purchaser, makes their 

payments in a timely fashion and for the proper amount over a 

period of time, but the owner of the property then says, well my 

property value has doubled since I sold it you to you 14 months 

ago so I’d like to cancel this contract and enter into a new one 

with you that would see you pay twice as much. And so we 

appreciate that this Bill aims to end that sort of possibility for 

abuse. 

 

And because of those examples and some of the questions that 

I’ve raised about the application of time and whether or not 

that’s sufficient, I would move to adjourn debate to give the 

opposition time to scrutinize this Bill appropriately. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? Question before the Assembly is a motion that Bill 

No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Did he 

say adjourn? Okay, sorry, I didn’t hear the member adjourn 

debate. I will back that up and I will ask, is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion to adjourn debate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. That motion is carried. 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Sometimes you rise in this House and talk about amendments to 

current legislation that’s largely housecleaning in nature. I’m 

tempted to say that this is largely pipe cleaning in nature, but 

perhaps I’ll not go any further down that line. 

 

I think this is a fairly useful Act. It’s actually quite symbolic, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the changes that have come in the 

industry around . . . where before it used to be oil or natural gas 

was largely the contents of pipelines and the focus of, you 

know, Acts like the 1998 pipeline Act. But of course over the 

past decade, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen great advances in the use 

of carbon dioxide, or CO2 and particularly as it relates to 

enhanced oil recovery. But this legislation expands on the good 

work that’s been done around enhanced oil recovery using CO2 

and I think foresees the day when we might be able to be 

storing underground, taking the CO2 from things like the 

emissions at a plant say like the newly named Evraz steel plant 

out northwest of the city here, or from say the various power 

generation stations, and transporting that CO2 for storage or for 

sequestration for the long term. 

 

So again taking the CO2 from the environment and either 

storing it for use or storing it for taking it out of the 

environment to improve the environmental situation — this 

works very well with a solid foundation that certainly members 

on this side were very happy to lay in partnership with groups 

like EnCana or Apache. 

 

You think of the EnCana play around Weyburn or the Apache 

play in Midale — and not just pioneering for Canada, but the 

pioneering work globally that’s been done in terms of enhanced 

oil recovery for CO2 — and again you think of the expression 

win-win propositions, Mr. Speaker. What could be more 

win-win about taking CO2 out of the environment — you know, 

a harmful greenhouse gas, injecting it into the ground to 

increase and enhance the potential for oil recovery, extending 

the lifetime of fields like the Apache by many years, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[16:45] 

And again, it’s good to see that there’s some possibility here in 

terms of building on good past work, work pioneered by not 

just EnCana and Apache, not just the good folks in the Midale, 

Weyburn regions, but by the good folks at the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre and the kind of value-added, 

innovative work that very much on this side of the House we 

believe in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly, we put our money where our mouths were in 

terms of making the strategic investments to make sure that the 

PTRC [Petroleum Technology Research Centre] was able to not 

just get off the ground, but to carry on the work. And of course 

the attention that’s been given to the PTRC globally and 

perhaps even some of the jealousy that’s emerged in other 

places in Canada . . . I know that there was some question back 

and forth with the federal government around should they be 

investing in Alberta technology and work under way then, or 

should they build on the already pioneering work of the PTRC. 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, we were very proud of the work being 

done at the PTRC and supported that down the line as 

government. 

 

We certainly know that the members opposite have paid some 

lip service to that. They’re quite happy to tour people from 

around the world to it. We hope that indicates a solid 

commitment to the work done at the PTRC, and we hope that 

that commitment bears fruit. 

 

We’d like to think that the legislation today provides, you 

know, another avenue for the great work at the PTRC to be 

expanded upon. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll see how this 

plays out. But for the meantime, we think this is a good step 

forward — good, good progress being made. And I guess, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen in the remarks from the minister 

that there is certainly support in the industry for this. I believe 

this lives up to what we’re hearing from the industry as well. 

 

But of course we want to do the due diligence on our part as the 

official opposition to make sure that this is the best possible 

piece of legislation, to make sure that what we think is the case 

is actually the case. So in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we’re going to take a bit more time to make sure they’re getting 

it right, to see if there isn’t something we can suggest in terms 

of improvement. But the early assessment would be 

encouraging, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So in that vein, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved a motion to adjourn debate. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Just before we read the next 

Bill, there is some conversation going on. I’m having kind of 

trouble hearing some of the members. I would ask to keep the 

level of conversation down a little bit in the House. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now read a 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2008 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

stand today and enter the debate and the discussion on Bill 50 

and that is The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a new Act, a new Act that’s being brought 

in in order to provide more clarity to a situation, more direction 

to a situation when a person is missing and then later on 

presumed dead. Mr. Speaker, whenever bringing in new 

legislation, whenever bringing in a new Act, it’s important to 

examine the Act closely. It’s important to look at the Act and 

ensure that it is in fact accomplishing everything that it needs to 

accomplish. 

 

It’s true that over time legislation can evolve, legislation can 

develop, and legislation can be improved, but it’s always best, 

it’s always ideal to be able to introduce the Bill, introduce the 

legislation as close to perfect, as close to ideal the first time 

round, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we’re looking at a new Act, we’re certainly going to 

be spending time to ensure that it is accomplishing exactly what 

we need it to accomplish as opposition, that the government 

also needs — and most importantly, why we’re all here, Mr. 

Speaker — to ensure that it’s accomplishing the needs for the 

people of Saskatchewan and the broader community. 

 

New Acts and legislation can come about in a variety of ways, 

Mr. Speaker. This Act or this Bill, Bill 50, has come about 

through previous work done through the provincial partnership 

committee. And this was a committee, Mr. Speaker, that was 

established to look at how best to deal with the situation when a 

person goes missing and then later on is presumed dead because 

they’ve been missing for a period of time. 

 

It’s always a positive thing, Mr. Speaker, when a group of 

people can come together, people that have an interest in how 

this process goes on, on a regular basis, whether they are from 

the legal end, whether they’re from the family end, or whether 

they’re from law enforcement. 

 

It’s through a committee, and I believe it was through the 

provincial partnership committee, Mr. Speaker, that was present 

. . . or that was established, and the recommendations came 

forward under the previous NDP government. It’s important to 

look at these recommendations seriously, to consider them, and 

to act upon them because when you have a broad group of 

people coming together with a lot of expertise, Mr. Speaker, 

one is able to truly get the important aspects to a Bill that are 

needed. And as I said earlier, with a new Bill, it’s essential to 

get it right the first time. It’s essential to have the Bill speak to 

the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve personally never been in a situation where 

someone in my family or close friends have gone missing. I 

can’t imagine, Mr. Speaker, the emotions and the state that that 

puts family and friends into when someone is gone, without 

knowing why that person is absent. There are so many 

questions a family, loved ones would face when someone is 

missing. And when you’re facing all those emotions, I would 

expect that it would also be difficult to be dealing with all the 

day-to-day matters that are ongoing, that occur regardless of 

whether or not the person is found. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, we live in a very advanced society 

with complicated banking, with taxes that need to be paid to 

various levels of government on an ongoing basis. So it’s 

important that, I think, that we have the provisions in place that 

when someone is missing and later on presumed dead, that 

things are as easy for the family as possible so that the family is 

not put under any greater stress than what they’re already 

experiencing going through the heartache, wrestling with the 

questions as to why their loved one is not coming home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have to believe that the provincial 

partnership committee, with their expertise and with their 

know-how from a broad group of people, took that into 

consideration when they made their recommendations. They 

understood the strain and the pressure on families, and their 

recommendations would have taken that into account. 

 

Estate matters are very complicated. I’ve never personally had 

to deal with settling an estate. But having watched some family 

members and friends go through that process for loved ones 

who have passed on, I know it’s a lengthy process, and I know 

it can be a complicated process too. That varies according to the 

finances of each person, but it’s certainly something that takes 

some effort. So anything that we can do as a province, Mr. 

Speaker, to make that process easier for families again, easier 

for friends, loved ones, it’s important that we do that. 

 

It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to clearly lay out how the 

process from going from a missing person to a person presumed 

to be dead, how that process occurs. The timelines need to be 

clearly laid out, so it’s important that this legislation doesn’t 

leave any question marks for families. 

 

Involved with any case, Mr. Speaker, with missing people, we 

also face . . . or not face, but there’s also a very important role 

for police and for law enforcement officers who’d be playing a 

role in this process. So it’s important that the legislation clearly 

outlines what is required of law enforcement officials. When a 

person is declared missing and later presumed dead, there’s also 

an important role for a public guardian or a trustee. It’s 

important that the duties and the responsibilities of a public 

guardian and trustee are clearly laid out so that they don’t have 

doubts and questions as to what they should be doing. The more 

clearly we can lay it out in plain English for individuals with 

rights and responsibilities, then that is a positive thing. 

 

It’s obviously a delicate and a complicated matter when dealing 

with someone who is missing, so it’s important that we strike 

the right balance, the balance of safeguarding information, 

safeguarding the finances of an individual who might be 

missing, but also ensuring that law enforcement officers and 

families have the tools at their hands and the rules clearly laid 

out for them to proceed to best deal with a difficult situation for 

everyone involved. 

 

So having made these comments, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s 

other members on this side of the House who would like to 

enter discussion on this Bill, so at this time I would move to 



November 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

order to accommodate the work of the committees, I do move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has made 

a motion that the House now adjourn so committees may carry 

on later this evening. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1701 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1701 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1701 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1701 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1701 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1701 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1701 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Philanthropist Supports Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1702 

 One Step at a Time Campaign in Moose Jaw 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1702 

 Rescue at Atton’s Lake 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1702 

 Saskatchewan Party Convention 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1702 

 Ogema Wins International Recognition 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1703 

 Diabetes Awareness Walk 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1703 

 Saskatchewan Exports Hit All-Time High 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1703 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Decline of the Forest Industry 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1704 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1704 

 Corrections Issues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1705 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1705 

 Support for Renters 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1706 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1706 

 Relocation Costs 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1707 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1707 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1709 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1709 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1709 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1710 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1710 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1710 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1710 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1712 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1713 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1715 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1715 

 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58 —- The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1716 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1718 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1719 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1720 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1723 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1725 

 Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1726 

  D’Autremont (referral to committee).................................................................................................................................... 1727 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1727 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1728 

 Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1729 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1730 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


