




















































Hansard: May 01, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 36A  THURSDAY, MAY 1, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1157 

 May 1, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Absolutely. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure to welcome through you and 

to you to all the members the following prominent northern 

municipal leaders here in our legislature today, for a meeting of 

the northern round table: Their Worships Georgina Jolibois, 

mayor of La Loche; Gordon Stomp, mayor of Air Ronge; Bruce 

Fidler, mayor of Creighton; Alex Maurice, mayor of Beauval; 

and Councillor Doris McDonald from Stony Rapids. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these northern leaders are here to participate 

in today’s northern municipal round table and we look forward 

to discussing a wide variety of issues of interest to our northern 

municipal sector partners. I urge all members to welcome our 

honoured guests in their Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition and as the 

Municipal Affairs critic, I too would like to welcome all of the 

representatives from northern Saskatchewan here to attend the 

northern round table. This is an important process that has a 

great importance to northern Saskatchewan. And I know that 

these leaders have travelled a great distance to be here today 

and, Mr. Speaker, I hope that they have a very productive day. 

And I would ask all members to join them here to the 

legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we proceed, I would ask members — 

and I actually did hear a number of members on the government 

side of the House — to respect the right of individuals to 

introduce their guests without interference. I recognize the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you Michael 

McCafferty. Michael was an aide to the former Prime Minister 

John Diefenbaker. He was a writer for Grant Devine’s 

government. He was and still is a great collector of political 

memorabilia. He’s currently fighting a battle with cancer, and I 

ask all MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to join 

and wish him well. Those accompanying him are Helen 

McCafferty, his mother; Frank McCafferty, his brother; and 

John MacGowan. So please welcome them to our House. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the legislature a 

group of elementary school students in the east gallery. They 

are from St. Anne School, which is in my constituency of 

Saskatoon Meewasin. I can’t introduce all the students by name, 

unfortunately, but I can introduce their teachers and chaperones 

to you: Mr. Sanche, Mrs. Johnson are the teachers with them; 

chaperones, Ms. Stephen, Ms. Canaday, Ms. Thompson, Ms. 

Kudryck, and Corrine Sparling. I hope that all members will 

join me in welcoming these students from Saskatoon Meewasin 

to their Legislative Assembly. I hope they have an enjoyable 

and interesting visit. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of the 

House today Dave Marit, who is no stranger to this House. But 

Dave is from Fife Lake, president of SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities], but I think equally as 

important this morning, played a big part in the water program 

for farmers and ranchers out there that we’re going to announce 

later this morning. So really appreciate his part he’s played in 

designing that program and ask all members to welcome him 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the Minister of Agriculture in welcoming Dave 

Marit to the legislature. I’m looking forward to see how this 

program rolls out in the southwest part of the province, and I 

know that Mr. Marit will have a great deal to do with that. So 

welcome on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the legislature, in your east gallery, being that it is May 

Day — and I understand there’ll be a bit of a gathering outside 

on the steps of the legislature later on — we have been joined 

by some trade unionists in the east gallery. I just acknowledge, I 

see Dave Winters there, Paul Meinema, Tom Graham, 

Marianne Hladun. I see Patti Gieni has joined us. Marlene 

Brown. 

 

I ask all members to welcome these people — who have, some 

have travelled far and some come from the city here — to our 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition on behalf of Moose Jaw residents and my constituents 

that would greatly improve the access to health care delivery in 

our region of Five Hills. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my constituents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 

number of pages of a petition in support of Station 20 West in 

Saskatoon — petitioners who are concerned about the 

withdrawal of funding from that project. And the petition reads, 

or at least the prayer of relief does, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon and every 

neighbourhood of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 

to present petitions. This time it’s for affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan, one of the major, major issues facing many 

people in Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions today in 

opposition to government’s Bill 5 and 6, essential services Act 

and the Act to amend The Trade Union Act. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Leroy, Spalding, 

Watson, Englefeld, Quill Lake, St. Gregor, Meadow Lake, 

Rapid View, Dorintosh, Moose Jaw, Flying Dust, Battleford, 

North Battleford, Gallivan, Edam, Cut Knife, Loon Lake, 

Livelong, Turtleford, Cochin, Maymont, Meota, Speers, Vawn, 

Pierceland, Goodsoil, Saskatoon, Colonsay, Allan, Elstow, 

Aberdeen, Grenfell, Wolseley . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Prud’homme, Vonda, Davidson, Prince 

Albert, Dalmeny, Ituna, Shellbrook, Meath Park, Wakaw, 

Paddockwood, Christopher Lake, St. Louis, Lanigan, Jansen, 

St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, Spruce Lake, Wadena, Margo, 

Bruno, Cando, Frenchman Butte, Lloydminster, Maidstone, 

Marshall, Marsden, Debden, Shell Lake, Muskoday, Weldon, 

Canwood, Spruce Home, Kindersley, Milden, Watrous, St. 

Benedict, Regina, Biggar, Estevan, Kipling, Corning, Simpson, 

Young, Birch Hills, Kinistino, La Ronge, Vanscoy, Humboldt, 

Domremy, Yellow Creek, Guernsey, Drake, Viscount, 

Coppersands, Hafford, Borden, Theodore, Sheho, Sturgis, 

Canora, Endeavour, Preeceville, Norquay, Weyburn, Stoughton, 

Yellow Grass, Wawota, Redvers, Kennedy, Swift Current, 

Cadillac, Wymark, Stewart Valley, Wynyard, Clavet, Warman, 

Martensville, Melville, Duck Lake, Dundurn, Osler, Mervin, 

Glaslyn, Ruddell, Delmas, Sonningdale, Denholm, Silton, 

Cabri, Waldeck, Shaunavon, Success, Lancer, Maple Creek, 

Bienfait, Zelma, Coronach, Nipawin, Tisdale, and Waldheim. I 

so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

President and Vice-Chancellor Named 

at University of Regina 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as we sit in the legislature this 

morning, a significant announcement is taking place at the 

University of Regina. As a member of the U of R [University of 

Regina] alumni, I am pleased to have been given the 

opportunity to inform the members of the Assembly that the 

university is at this hour naming the seventh president and 

vice-chancellor in its history, Dr. Vianne Timmons. 

 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

Dr. Timmons comes to the U of R with a wealth of academic 

and administrative experience, as well as a history of 

community engagement. She is currently the vice-president of 

academic development at the University of Prince Edward 

Island. A professor of education, she has also served as Chair of 

the Education department at St. Francis Xavier University and 

dean of Education at the UPEI [University of Prince Edward 

Island]. 

 

Through the teaching, research, and service to the community 

that takes place at the U of R, the university has an increasingly 

important role to play in the social, cultural, and economic 

development of the province. 

 

Dr. Timmons’s academic accomplishments and exemplary 

record of senior administrative leadership make her the ideal 

choice to lead the university at this important time in the 

institution’s history. 

 

Dr. Timmons will begin her tenure as U of R president on July 

1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to join me in 

welcoming Dr. Timmons to our province and wishing her all 

the best as president of the great University of Regina. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Canadian Team Qualifies for 2008 Summer Olympics 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to share news that Canada’s senior 

men’s water polo team have qualified for the 2008 Summer 

Olympics in Beijing. 

 

This is the first time that the Canadian men’s team has qualified 

in water polo. Canada beat Romania 9 to 8 in the quarter final 

of the last qualification tournament and this was a huge upset as 

the win occurred in Romania’s pool. And the win was hard 

fought, but especially sweet, Mr. Speaker, because Romania 

had soundly beaten Canada in a game the week before. Canada 

finished fourth in the tournament and thereby clinched a ticket 

to Beijing. 

 

Now there is a Moose Jaw connection in all this, Mr. Speaker. 

Sophia and Kasper Randall will be watching closely from 

Moose Jaw as their grandson Robin serves as Canada’s 

goaltender. Robin’s parents call Drinkwater home. Robin still 

calls Drinkwater home and that’s where his parents still reside, 

but he divides his time between Drinkwater, the national team 

training centre in Calgary, and Sydney, Australia where he 

plays in a semi-professional water polo league at Sydney 

university. Robin summed up the experience so far by saying, 

“No longer would we be training for a faint glimmer of hope. 

Now that hope is an Olympic flame.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the Canadian senior men’s water polo team — I know there’ll 

be some avid fans in Moose Jaw — and wishing them all the 

best in their quest for Olympic success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Remembering the Holocaust 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the eve of 

Yom Hashoah or Holocaust Memorial Day. This day is set 

aside for remembrance and contemplation to look back on the 

horrific events of the Holocaust and to resolve never to forget 

the suffering and strength of an entire people. Not only do we 

mourn the many victims of the Holocaust, we also mourn what 

could have been. Six million futures disappeared in the cattle 

cars and concentration camps of the Nazis. We will never know 

what kind of a world we would be living in now if their voices 

had not been silenced. 

 

Saskatchewan is a province of many cultures, built on a 

foundation of tolerance and diversity. Our vitality comes from 

that diversity. Hence our provincial motto, “from many peoples, 

strength.” 

 

Yom Hashoah compels us to remember the tremendous price 

we pay when we forget the source of our strength. We 

remember because the lives and the futures of millions of 

people were ground down and destroyed in the Holocaust. We 

remember because intolerance and brutality continue because 

innocent people around the world suffer for no reason but for 

their birth. We remember because for the survivors and their 

children and grandchildren, the Holocaust has never truly 

ended. We remember because those events sprang from the 

worst impulses of human beings. 

 

We must take the terrible lessons of the Holocaust and 

remember that the perpetrators, the resisters, and the victims 

were all ordinary people, Mr. Speaker, just like us. 

 

Never again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

100th Anniversary of Saskatoon Institution 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleague the 

MLA from Saskatoon Massey Place and I had the pleasure to 

attend a very special 100th Saskatoon YMCA [Young Men’s 

Christian Association] AGM [annual general meeting] and 

volunteer recognition banquet last night. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the YMCAs across Canada can 

often be seen as one of the first gateways for so many, including 

youth, newcomers, and immigrants to healthy and strong 

communities. Saskatoon YMCA is very much one of these 

gateways and has done so for the past 100 years. 

 

Last night, Katie Dueck was recognized as Volunteer of the 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Year. As she was introduced, it was clear her commitment to 

the YMCA and her work is second to none. Michael Weil, 

president and CEO [chief executive officer] of YMCA Canada 

said to the group that meeting the Y’s mandate of supporting 

strong, healthy communities simply could not happen without 

the volunteers. 

 

I also want to congratulate Terry Gibson as the incoming 

president as the Y begins its 100th year of operations and to 

recognize the strong leadership of Jeff Leaper, now past 

president, for his many contributions to the YMCA. It should be 

noted that just a few short years ago, the YMCA had a 

membership of 1,100 and now boasts a membership of over 

2,500. Truly, Mr. Speaker, this is all about strong and healthy 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

volunteers and staff at Saskatoon YMCA for their outstanding 

work over the past century, and we are looking forward to the 

next 100 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Public Servant Retires After Distinguished Career 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan has had a long and storied history of innovation 

and leadership within the public service. Today is a special day 

in the life of David James as he retires, a contemporary example 

of vision, leadership, and dedication within the federal public 

service here in Saskatchewan. 

 

David James is the acting assistant deputy minister at Western 

Economic Diversification, WD, a federal department that has 

helped change the economic face of Western Canada to the 

benefit of all. 

 

Prior to launching western diversification, David worked with 

the Department of Regional Economic Expansion, DREE, in 

Ottawa and Saskatchewan. David worked hand in hand with 

federal cabinet ministers like Bill McKnight, Charlie Mayer, 

Larry Schneider, Ralph Goodale, and Carol Skelton, enabling 

them to implement leading-edge public policy. I can recall 

several initiatives that David has been involved with. One that 

stands out in my mind is the Moose Jaw revitalization projects. 

David consulted, listened, and worked proactively with 

community leaders to turn Moose Jaw into a Saskatchewan 

tourism jewel. The results speak for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, David James led by example. His skills and 

consensus building and his dedication to partnerships have 

provided an example for all. His advocacy and promotion of 

service to his country and province through a career in the 

public service have convinced many to follow in his footsteps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a chance to learn from David first-hand 

as I started my career in the public service under David’s 

guidance. Today I am proud to call him a friend and truly one 

of Saskatchewan’s good guys. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to join me in wishing David James and his wife Susan all the 

best in his future endeavours and thank him for his commitment 

to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

New Wingate Hotel and Tim Hortons in Regina 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday I 

had the privilege of attending the grand opening for Wingate by 

Wyndham Hotel in lovely downtown Regina. I understand a 

number of MLAs attended to this opening, including members 

for Walsh Acres, Lakeview, Wascana Plains, and I was able to 

attend a part of the proceedings with the members for Regina 

Douglas Park and Regina Rosemont. 

 

It’s a beautiful new hotel, Mr. Speaker, with seven storeys, 118 

rooms, and approximately 40 employees. We were treated to 

some heartland hospitality by general manager Laura Armitage 

and staff and had the opportunity to tour some of the brand new 

suites that have been welcoming guests to Regina since March 

of this year. 

 

One of those rooms, Mr. Speaker, is the Tommy Douglas 

boardroom and I and my colleagues were very pleased to 

present Ms. Armitage with a limited edition print of a portrait of 

Tommy Douglas by Richard Widdifield. 

 

Our congratulations to host, Laura Armitage; owner, Regwin 

Hotels; president, Harold Rotstein; developer, Anthony 

Marquart; CEO and blues harp player, balladeer extraordinaire, 

Ian McDougall, and everyone else who helped to get this new 

venture of to a great start. 

 

After the opening of the Wingate I had the pleasure of stopping 

by the neighbouring establishment which just happens to be the 

largest Tim Hortons in all of Western Canada. I had an 

opportunity to say hello to owner/operators Pat and Pam Doyle. 

The Doyles and their staff have been serving out the piping hot 

double doubles since Monday. 

 

The launch of this remarkable venture has served as something 

of a homecoming for the Doyles as they are Regina born and 

bred, but have been living and working in Saskatoon for the 

past 10 years. So welcome home to the Doyles and 

congratulations to them and their staff on being the people that 

make the magic happen in making my wife, myself, and others 

very happy. 

 

Congratulations to Wingate by Wyndham and to the folks at the 

Doyles’ Tim Hortons. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Oil and Gas Royalties 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP might not have a clear 

position on much these days, but on Tuesday night we learned 

their true position on the issue of royalty review, namely that 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

they’re in favour of one. 

 

The NDP Energy and Resources critic, the member for 

Battlefords, made clear not only the NDP’s [New Democratic 

Party] continued inspiration by the Regina Manifesto, a 

document calling for the eradication of capitalism, but also said, 

and I quote, “I’m definitely supportive of an ongoing review of 

royalties.” Perhaps not an unrelated positions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government believes that this is an incredibly irresponsible 

decision. The member should know that the amazing growth in 

our oil and gas industry is precisely because of this 

government’s clear commitment to maintain the current royalty 

structure. 

 

The party opposite has formed government in the past, and 

although they’ll probably never get there, aspires to again in the 

future. Industry’s watching what goes on in this place, and they 

don’t like what they’re seeing from the party opposite. It seems 

even in opposition the NDP are doing all they can to slow the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — It seems even in opposition the NDP are 

doing all they can to slow the growth of our great province. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe in the future of the oil and gas industry in 

Saskatchewan. We believe that an important part of securing 

this future is sending a clear message to industry that our 

royalty structure will be stable into the long term. Perhaps it’s 

time the NDP dropped its 1930s radical socialism and got on 

board with the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, in response to the 

drought, the Minister of Agriculture said that he was going out 

to the southwest part of Saskatchewan after seeding. One year 

ago, just about to the day, the minister — then the Sask Party 

Ag critic — asked what aid farmers could expect as they are 

planning seeding intentions right now and need to know very 

quickly what will happen. 

 

Well the Sask Party is now the government. Before producers 

put in their crop, can the minister tell us what exactly the 

farmers in the southwest part of Saskatchewan and the cattle 

producers, what can they expect from your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to 

the member, the first thing they can expect today is rain in the 

Southwest — a good sign for everybody, I’d say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Now unlike the NDP I won’t take 

credit for the rain out there, but I think the member, Mr. 

Speaker, should very well remember this drought did not start 

this year. We’ve had a 16-year NDP government in this 

province that did absolutely nothing for agriculture in rural 

Saskatchewan. The drought in the Southwest, this is going on 

the fourth year. And maybe the member wouldn’t mind in her 

next response telling us all the great things they did for 

agriculture. 

 

Later this morning we’re announcing a water program for the 

Southwest that’s long overdue, long needed — the group in the 

gallery today that are going to have helped with that program. 

We’re actually doing things for the Southwest, unlike the 

former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it turns out that everything the 

Minister of Agriculture has said since coming into this 

Assembly needs to be taken with a grain of salt. Quoting from 

his scrum yesterday he said, and I quote, “In opposition I could 

say just about anything I wanted and I did on a lot of occasions 

for 12 years.” The problem is when the Sask Party toured rural 

Saskatchewan making promises, people actually made the 

mistake of listening and believing, Mr. Speaker. What other 

promises did the Sask Party make over the past 12 years that 

they have no intentions of keeping? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, to the 

member, what I was saying yesterday is that, yes for 12 years in 

opposition you can say just about anything. When you’re in 

government, you’re responsible. What I was saying, you can 

say just about anything, like the member from Nutana is saying 

— totally ignoring their record for 16 years. You ignored rural 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they paid no attention to rural 

Saskatchewan. Where was their water program? Southwest 

Saskatchewan just didn’t run out of water this year. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize there’s heated passion in 

the debate, but it would be appropriate to allow the members 

answering and placing the question to be heard. The Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess all I 

have to do is look across, Mr. Speaker, and see how many rural 

members are on that side of the House, and that tells me what 

rural Saskatchewan thinks of the NDP. 

 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we are, as I said, we’re 

very close to going back down there again and touring the area. 

And I might add that’s something the former minister on the 

NDP side would never do even though he had the invitation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, rural people believed the Sask 

Party when they said they wouldn’t close rural schools, and 

rural schools are closing. Rural people in the southwest drought 

region believed the Sask Party when they said they would do 

something to help. Rural people believed the Sask Party that 

there’d be additional training seats in rural Saskatchewan 

through our regional colleges. Not much help there. Rural 

people believed the Sask Party when they said that they 

wouldn’t take services out of the Humboldt Court House. When 

did that say-anything Sask Party become the do-nothing 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that 

question. The member talks about closing schools. How quickly 

they forget their track record. Wasn’t it last year — 23 rural 

schools under their leadership? You were in government for 16 

years. You ignored rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, no 

wonder they’re not getting any votes in rural Saskatchewan. 

And now the member has the nerve to get on her feet and say, 

solve all the problems. Clean up our mess for the last 16 years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I make this commitment today. We are 

starting to clean up that mess, but the problem is it’s very, very 

big because 16 years, they did a lot of neglect to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Email and Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we heard two days ago how the 

Minister of Labour and his colleagues don’t respect their 

constituents enough to actually meet with them. And we heard 

yesterday how this minister doesn’t have much respect for their 

privacy either. 

 

Many people contact minister’s offices through email — in this 

case, 1,300 people. And let’s not forget that many people use 

their entire name as part of their email address. The last thing 

they expect is to see their name on a public document. The last 

thing they expect is to see their name on a list of people who 

disagree with the government. 

The minister has had a whole day to look into the matter. Can 

he now explain why he violated their privacy? And more 

importantly, will he apologize to the 1,300 people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate this 

opportunity to turn and say how much we regret the oversight. 

Obviously what we’ve done is we put in place within our office 

. . . It was a clerical error. As soon as the individual involved 

made that mistake . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No. But I 

want to just clarify for the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Please allow the minister to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The great, the great question here, Mr. 

Speaker, if there is a concern about privacy, it’s for the single 

mother who works in my office whose name was not deleted as 

they sent that to the media, Mr. Speaker. That’s the problem, 

Mr. Speaker. So we have regrets, and obviously I will take steps 

to extend that. But the question remains on that side of the aisle, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure regret is apology. 

But this incident does raise serious and troubling questions. It 

seems that this minister’s emails keep coming back to haunt 

him. First we heard about the email made . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place should have the privilege of being able to place the 

question without having to raise his voice to be heard above the 

roar in the Assembly. Member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — First we heard about the email made in the 

middle of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] labour 

dispute, and now we hear about an email breaching privacy. 

 

Since the minister has a tough time with more complicated 

questions, like who is actually included in his Bills, maybe he’ll 

answer a simple one. If the minister can’t get the small things 

right, like email, why should we expect him to get the big 

things right, like his legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan got a big thing right on November 7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously as we move 

forward with these two pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, we 

see that there’s a new labour relations environment coming to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is important, the essential service Bill, Mr. Speaker. It 

ensures the people of this province that they’ll have public 

safety balanced with the right to strike during labour 

disruptions, Mr. Speaker. And as far as the amendments to The 

Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, it has something as radical in it 

that we should have the LRB [Labour Relations Board] produce 

an annual report to this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are some steps, Mr. Speaker, that will allow greater, 

greater accountability, Mr. Speaker, and transparency, Mr. 

Speaker. And obviously this is part of a new era in 

Saskatchewan — an era of growth and optimism, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport knows that 45 of 

her department staff are considered essential under the 

legislation. Two groups that the Sask Party has not talked a lot 

about in regards to Bill 5 are social workers and CBO 

[community-based organization] employees. I know that the 

Minister of Social Services has been fairly busy in recent 

weeks, first learning about, then rewriting, her first budget. But 

I’m hoping she’s had time to figure out who within her ministry 

will be covered by Bill 5. 

 

To the minister: how many workers will the Sask Party deem 

essential within the Ministry of Social Services, and what about 

the CBO sector? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the significance of the 

essential service Bill is that it’s actually meant to empower and 

ensure that the parties actually agree to come to a consensus on 

who will be deemed essential, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first 

significant point. That is, it’s a different paradigm than 

unilaterally declaring any individual essential from a 

government vantage point. This is about the individuals coming 

together. As far as the scope of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

addressed within the legislation. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, what we have said is based on 

consultations. Again we met with nearly 100 individuals as well 

as individuals from various communities. And what we saw, 

Mr. Speaker, is people coming forward as they did at the NSBA 

[North Saskatoon Business Association] lunch. There were 

members from opposite. They came forward and said, could we 

please be included. Mr. Speaker, obviously that’s under 

consideration. That would be part of the regulations. The groups 

that are covered, Mr. Speaker, are actually embedded in the 

legislation. Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two of the Sask 

Party’s favourite examples for why essential services was 

necessary are corrections workers and police officers. Now we 

know that the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing hasn’t been busy trying to keep the mill in Prince 

Albert open, because he’s had nothing to do with keeping his 

promise. Surely he’s had time to figure out how the legislation 

will impact the areas of his responsibility. To the minister: what 

percentage of corrections workers, youth workers, and police 

officers will be impacted or deemed essential under this Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we can see, Mr. 

Speaker, is actually, despite over 20 hours in committee, there 

still seems to be a gap, a knowledge gap, on the other side, and 

perhaps it’s the same person writing the questions, Mr. Speaker. 

The paradigm, Mr. Speaker, is one where the units come 

together, Mr. Speaker, and there’s agreement between the 

employers in the bargaining unit about who would be deemed 

essential, Mr. Speaker. That’s, that’s the key element here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now how significant is this? Well the significance is that this 

negotiation is consistent with other jurisdictions in Canada. So 

we see the federal government, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, 

New Brunswick and Newfoundland require similar 

negotiations, Mr. Speaker. These are some of the best practices 

drawn from across the country, Mr. Speaker, and that, that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a key part of why we’re moving forward with the 

essential service legislation that we are. Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 5 specifies that workers in 

any of the courts of Saskatchewan will have their right to strike 

stripped away as the Sask Party will deem them essential. We 

know that at least one court worker in Humboldt who doesn’t 

have to worry about being deemed essential, but others are 

worrying and wondering about whether they’ll be covered. 

 

The Sask Party has done a lot of fearmongering with respect to 

essential services. But, Mr. Speaker, they have no explanation 

for how preventing the delay of court dates for parking tickets is 

a public safety issue. My question is for the Minister of Justice, 

not his seatmate: how many people under the auspices of the 

Ministry of Justice will he deem essential? 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we see the same 

author, the same question, the same philosophy, the same 

approach, same paradigm. That is, after 20 hours of committee 

work, they don’t understand that there’s negotiations between 

the public employer and, Mr. Speaker, obviously the bargaining 

unit. They’ve reached their own agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s a 90-day window. There’s a 30-day window. The list is 

then offered, Mr. Speaker. It can then be accessed by the 

bargaining unit. It can be referred to the Labour Relations 

Board, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, they could have 

spent a little more time in committee because the quality of the 

questions are quite puzzling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when still in opposition 

the Minister of Education certainly spoke as if he thought 

teachers and education workers provided an essential service. 

The Sask Party broke their promises to save schools from 

closing and to keep teachers and workers within rural 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 5 may not name education 

specifically, but no one, including the Minister of Labour, 

knows if education workers and teachers will be specified in 

regulations. Because of how the Sask Party operates, the people 

of Saskatchewan aren’t likely to know what will happen until it 

does. Besides, as the Sask Association of Community Living 

will attest, the Minister of Education isn’t exactly fond of 

consultations. 

 

My minister is not to the Minister of Labour; it’s to the Minister 

of Education. How many teachers and how many workers 

within education will be deemed essential? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I wish we could say, I wish we could say 

there was a surprise here, Mr. Speaker. You know, in the recent 

Commonwealth, it was from December ’07, what we see, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the commentary relates to a certain — what 

would you say? — opinion about how the NDP has approached 

the labour policy issue. That is the quote: “Rather than create a 

new labour policy of its own, the government instead chose to 

reach back into the 1990’s . . .” That’s a former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the easy answer is I can offer reassurance to this 

House that obviously what we’ve done is we’ve identified four 

key criteria — that is life, property, environment, and the 

courts, Mr. Speaker. And I can offer you this reassurance that 

schoolteachers are not included, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No one knew that 

essential services legislation was coming under a Sask Party 

government, including the Minister of Health. Only a short 

month before the election he said the Sask Party would not 

legislate essential services, but a month after the election, the 

Minister of Labour announced it had been in the works for over 

a year. 

 

My question now to the Minister of Health is, how many 

nurses, doctors, therapists, medical technicians, paramedics, and 

support staff will be deemed essential under the sweeping 

power of Bill 5? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, maybe what we could do 

next time is I could ask special permission and that way we 

could have a PowerPoint set up so we could actually walk 

through this all at once. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about one of your $14,000 videos? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the key to this, Mr. Speaker, 

is to actually understand the paradigm. The paradigm, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the bargaining unit and the public sector 

employer would come together. They would then reach their 

own agreement, Mr. Speaker. That’s the key of this. That’s the 

key of this initiative and enterprise. It’s common practice across 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to that comment there, I think you should check your math 

again, ma’am. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Legislation and Workers’ Benefits 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell you about a 

paradigm, the word we use over here. Mr. Speaker, the gap is 

growing. We know the gap between the haves and the have-nots 

is widening, and it’s clear the members opposite have no plans 

to make this better. In fact their only plan so far have been to 

cut programs that help low-income earners and introduce 

legislation that will limit how working people can negotiate 

better wages. 

 

To the Premier: evidence shows that the gap between the rich 

and poor is widening, so why on earth is he trying to hurt 

instead of help Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as our government came 

into power, there was a strike going on that affected working 

families right across this province, but especially in Saskatoon. 

 

One of the questions that was raised during committee is where 

did we come up with the 400 people per day that were being 

affected by that strike regarding medical services, Mr. Speaker. 

We went through that last night in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

Four hundred people per day were being affected by that strike, 

Mr. Speaker. The key question remains, Mr. Speaker, will the 

members of the official opposition . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Actually what we see, Mr. Speaker, is the 

key question is will the members be standing on a free vote on 

the essential service piece, Mr. Speaker. That’s the key 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite 

are doing nothing to address affordability in our province, they 

are actively working to undermine the ability of people to earn 

better wages and improve their quality of life. Saskatchewan 

people are feeling the pinch of skyrocketing rents, gas prices 

and now — thanks to the members opposite — rising utility 

rents. Yet this minister wants to even be more difficult for 

Saskatchewan workers and that is in their ability to negotiate 

wages. 

 

To the Premier: what does he have against working people and 

why is he so opposed to making life better for Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen March 

over March, 14,000 new full-time jobs for the working people 

of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — What we’ve seen, over 16,000 people 

coming back to or to Saskatchewan for the first time, Mr. 

Speaker. What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity to 

grow the economy so that there’s more money to make 

reinvestments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two labour Bills in question, first of all, what 

they do is provide an opportunity so that the people of this 

province can be assured that during labour disruptions they can 

have access to medical care, that they can have chemotherapy, 

Mr. Speaker, that their highways can be plowed, Mr. Speaker. 

And they do something as radical as offer a free, secret ballot, 

Mr. Speaker, so that someone can consult their own conscience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re delighted with the work that’s under way 

for the working people of the province. We just wish the 

official opposition could understand it’s with those people in 

mind that we continue our efforts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the question was about 

affordability for the working people of this province. That was 

the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this Premier is 

unwilling to extend to low-income workers the same benefits he 

and his friends are accustomed to. With all the talk of rising 

costs of living — increased costs of gas, food, and shelter — 

this Premier’s refusal to implement a minimum wage 

indexation, all this points to, is he is mean or incompetent or 

maybe both? 

 

Otherwise how could he look minimum wage earners in the eye 

and tell them they aren’t entitled to the same increases he 

receives. While his minister continues to study indexation, 

minimum wage earners are struggling to make ends meet. 

 

To the Premier: why is he deserving of a better wage, one that 

addresses cost of living, but other Saskatchewan workers 

aren’t? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that as it 

stands under the former government, what we could see was 

that Saskatchewan was only fair to middling regarding 

minimum wage. It’s going up today, Mr. Speaker. It’s going up 

again next May 1, Mr. Speaker. That will place Saskatchewan 

as the second highest minimum wage in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’ve said, Mr. Speaker, is that it makes sense to actually 

take some time and study this issue. After 16 years of being in 

government, those members opposite certainly didn’t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — After 16 years in power, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite didn’t touch that one. What we can report on, 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, is a 20 per cent decrease in EI [employment 

insurance] insurance claims, Mr. Speaker, within Saskatchewan 

— leading the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the challenges of growth are obvious, but they are 

challenges of growth, and we will address them appropriately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Silver 

Springs sitting over there looking smugly — he was the one that 

agreed to indexation before the election. He agreed. Mr. 

Speaker, just as the Premier promised, the members opposite 

have gone to war against the working people of Saskatchewan. 

They cut the Station 20, the cancelling of the dental sealant 

program . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Their axing of the vulnerable workers 

benefits program are clear examples of their contempt for the 

working people. And now they want to make changes to 

Saskatchewan’s labour laws, which will make it harder for 

employees to negotiate a better wage. In stark contrast, they 

have handed massive wage hikes to their political friends and 

advisers without hesitation. All the while the Minister of 

Labour, who should be on the side of working people, he’s just 

gone along for the ride, Mr. Speaker, bungling his file all the 

way. 

 

To the Premier: will he finally admit that his minister is not able 

to meet the needs of Saskatchewan workers and ask him to step 

down? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I know the ride on the other 

side is a little bumpy. I know that it’s driven through the 

rear-view mirror, Mr. Speaker, but the rest of us are actually 

moving forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — For example, Mr. Speaker, for example, 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement, Mr. Speaker, the 

largest increase since the introduction of this program, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s evidence, Mr. Speaker. Today minimum wage 

goes up, Mr. Speaker. What we see is economic growth across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. So with that, we see increased 

opportunities for reinvestments within communities. That’s why 

we created 5,500 new training spots, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’re addressing the needs of regional colleges, Mr. Speaker. 

And what we see from the official opposition is an inability to 

frame questions that are relevant to the people of this province. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, talk about relevant questions. 

We’re asking relevant questions to the working people. It’s the 

answers, I think, we’re concerned about that we’re getting here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, like many of the minister’s 

answers, that one again was inadequate. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

Labour minister who should stand for workers is now 

contemplating again whether the minimum wage earners should 

be entitled to the same cost of living as he himself gets. And he 

is actively engaged in undermining employees’ ability to earn a 

better wage. It is clear, it is clear, Mr. Speaker, that this minister 

has lost his way. He cannot be trusted to do . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members can either come to order, and 

we’ll have one more question. Or the members can proceed 

with their interference, and we will move on. That goes for all 

members. The member from Saskatoon Fairview can place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

clear to this side and the people of Saskatchewan that this 

minister has lost his way and cannot be trusted to do the right 

thing for Saskatchewan workers. To the Premier: will he ask the 

minister to do the honourable thing and resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate all the 

attention, and what I can say, Mr. Speaker, is I’m happy to hear 

there’s a new motto, and that is, we were going to get to that. 

That’s the motto of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, and on 

that we’re happy to be moving forward labour legislation. 

We’re happy to be moving forward with a growth agenda 

whether it’s in the budget or whether it’s in every policy that 

we’re moving forward for the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The House will come to order. The House 

will come to order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing Committee on 

Human Services to report Bill No. 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 5, 

The Public Service Essential Services Act, and that the Bill and 

its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Oh, pardon me. 

We’re just on leave here. We’re just on leave. So we have to 

vote. We can get to the question afterwards. 

 

Is leave granted? Leave has been agreed. We need leave, and 

then we can get into debate on the first reading. Okay. Right. 

Leave wasn’t granted. Pardon me. Right. 

 

And when will the Assembly now be able to proceed to first 

and second readings of the amendments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. I recognize the 

Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask for leave to move a motion of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Wesley Albert Robbins 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this morning on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan I would like to propose the motion, and to read 

into the record information about the passing of Wesley Albert 

Robbins. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Wesley Albert Robbins, who passed away on March 12, 

2008, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 

1964 until 1967, and from 1971 until 1982. He represented 

the constituencies of Saskatoon City for the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation and the constituencies of 

Saskatoon Nutana Centre and Saskatoon Nutana for the 

New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Robbins was born on August 14, 1916 on his family’s 

farm near Laura, Saskatchewan. He attended local schools 

before pursuing his studies at the Saskatoon Teachers’ 

College. Mr. Robbins was a lifelong learner and continued 

to take classes at the University of Saskatchewan for 

decades after he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree. 

Mr. Robbins married Marion Nicol on June 14, 1946. He 

is survived by his wife, three children, and six 

grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Robbins’s professional career encompassed many 

fields. He was first employed as a teacher in rural 

communities. Later he pursued his interest in the 

co-operative movement by assuming positions with a 

number of organizations. Mr. Robbins served as an 

accounting clerk and publicity director with the 

Saskatchewan Co-operative Wholesale Society. His tenure 

as secretary-manager of the Co-operative Superannuation 

Society extended over 16 years and initiated his advocacy 

for defined contribution pension plans. The Saskatoon 

Credit Union and the Co-op Trust Company also benefited 

from his contributions. 

 

In his personal life Mr. Robbins was an active participant 

in a number of community and sport organizations. He 

continued to participate in tennis competitions into his 80s. 

Mr. Robbins retained a passionate interest in his family’s 

farm and would participate in the operations as time 

permitted. 

 

Mr. Robbins was first elected to this Assembly in 1964 

and served one term representing the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation in opposition. In 1971 he was 

elected as a member of the New Democratic Party and 

successfully retained his seat in the following two general 

elections. Mr. Robbins was appointed to cabinet in 1973 

and remained in the executive until his retirement from 

elected office. He held a number of portfolios over this 

period, notably Finance, Health, Consumer Affairs, 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Co-operation and Co-operative Development, and 

Revenue. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that this 

Assembly recognize with sorrow and regret the passing of a 

former member of the Assembly, Mr. Wes Robbins. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think it 

is traditional, but I would be very happy to second this 

condolence motion and in this case particularly happy to be able 

to say a few words about a man who was a great friend to the 

people of Saskatchewan, not only his home community of 

Laura and the constituencies that he represented, but a great 

friend to the people of Saskatchewan. A lifelong social 

democrat was Wes Robbins — a great friend to working people 

and a great friend of rural people in this province. 

 

Many of us will have memories, Mr. Speaker, of Wes Robbins, 

and I’m sure that those of us that have these very happy 

memories will all remember a very, very, quick mind, a very, 

very, sharp intellect particularly when it came to the issues and 

the subject of mathematics and numbers. I don’t know if in my 

life I’ve ever met anyone as able with numbers, calculations, 

mathematics, which understandably led him to study the subject 

of economics while at university and then earning a major in 

economics, which made Wes Robbins an extremely able 

Minister of Finance when he served in the portfolio of Finance, 

and a man who brought to that portfolio his own passion for 

balanced budgets, for solid, financial stability, and for the 

ability of the treasury to provide those programs and services 

that people need and deserve. 

 

Wes was, as we’ve heard, a very strong member of the 

co-operative movement and gave many years to the question of 

superannuation in the co-operative movement and then took 

that passion, if I may say, Mr. Speaker, and shared it with a 

province and shared it with a nation. 

 

Again I’m not sure I have ever encountered anyone with a 

deeper commitment to the right of working people, all people, 

to have security in retirement, to have security in their pensions. 

Wes laboured and changed this province’s pension plans to 

ensure they were vested and locked in and that includes those of 

us who today sit in this legislature. And interestingly enough, 

Mr. Speaker, it also included the church to which both Wes and 

I belonged. I think my first encounter and experience with Wes 

Robbins was not in public life or in politics but was in the 

church when he was helping us to understand what we needed 

to do to ensure a secure retirement for clergy. 

 

He brought to this House as an elected member his passions, his 

skills and abilities, his very, very sharp wit on occasion. Now 

Wes Robbins was always, always in my experience — and I 

think in the experience of those who worked with him in this 

House and have known him in political circles — always and 

always a gentleman. But that should not be confused with any 

lack of a competitive nature and determination. And on 

occasion that competitive nature and determination . . . well ask 

Mr. Dick Collver about Wes’s determination. 

 

We’ve lost a great friend — a great friend of the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], the New 

Democratic Party, a great friend of the people of Saskatchewan, 

and a great friend particularly of those who today have a much 

more secure retirement because of Wes Robbins. 

 

And I just want to conclude by saying this, Mr. Speaker: this 

man could serve up a budget like none other. He could serve up 

pension legislation and pension understanding like none other. 

He could serve up a witty comment like none other. But I tell 

you what else he could do, Mr. Speaker. He could serve a tennis 

ball. He could serve a tennis ball like none other. 

 

The very last . . . maybe not the last, but clearly one of the last 

conversations that I had with Wes Robbins, and that’s some 

years ago, was about his experience as a senior playing tennis, 

well over the age of 80. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: I 

would not have wanted to have been on the other side of the 

court when Wes Robbins was serving. He won two titles after 

the age of 80. 

 

That kind of passion that he had on the courts was the passion 

that he brought to public life and to making this province and its 

people a little better because of his work. And so we extend, on 

behalf of the opposition, deep condolences to Wes’s family and 

encourage them, in now its third generation, to keep the passion 

of Wes Robbins. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well it 

is indeed an honour for myself as the member of the legislature 

for Saskatoon Nutana to pay tribute to Wesley Robbins this 

morning in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

My first memories of Wes Robbins as an MLA was when I was 

a young person in university when I was a member of the 

Saskatoon Nutana executive. And, Mr. Speaker, this was at a 

time when Wes Robbins was very much an active cabinet 

minister in the Blakeney government. He had held a number of 

portfolios. But one of the first memories of my experience at 

the Saskatoon Nutana executive meeting was Wes Robbins 

giving us a lecture on why it was important, as young people, 

that we have a pension. 

 

And he always used the example of a young woman, I think her 

name was Susie Brown, starting work at the age of 21 — and 

that was about how old I was — and the importance of getting 

into a pension plan that allowed you to have an income when 

you retired. And there were several young people on our 

executive, and I have to tell you that every one of those young 

people who are now middle-aged people or postwar baby 

boomers, we made it our business to have a decent pension plan 

so that when we retired, we would have a lifestyle that was not 

sort of leading one to the poorhouse, Mr. Speaker. 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

Wes Robbins can take full credit for the kinds of pension plans 

that people have throughout the public service, throughout the 

Crown corporations in our province, and throughout the health 

care system, where the money we put in is matched, it is 

allowed to grow and, Mr. Speaker, we can’t take it with us. If 

we are leaving to go to another workplace, we have to leave it 

there or we can take it someplace else, but it has to be put in a 

fund that will allow us income when we reach the age of 

retirement. And I think Wes Robbins can take full credit for the 

work that was done in this province in the ’70s to allow people 

such as myself and other members of this Legislative Assembly 

to have a pension plan that will meet our needs in our old age. 

 

The other thing I remember about Wes Robbins was this. You 

know, when you’re a young person you’re wanting government 

to do everything — to introduce new programs, to improve 

programs — and his view was that you only do what you can do 

within the confines of the revenues that come into the 

provincial treasury. He was a firm believer, Mr. Speaker, in 

having balanced budgets, that if budgets weren’t balanced it 

was because you met a situation that was unforeseen, but you 

had to make it up in future years. He did not believe in the 

province having long-term GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt. 

 

And after 1982 when Grant Devine came to power and he 

watched the province go to rack and ruin with mounting debt 

that was not associated with Crown debt, but debt that was 

associated with ongoing operations of the provincial 

government, he found this unbelievable because he knew at the 

end of the day that the next generation was going to have to pay 

that debt back. And he was so proud when our government was 

the first government in Canada to balance the budget, because 

he was telling us, make sure you balance that budget as soon as 

you can and then you start paying down that debt, Mr. Speaker. 

And we knew that it would take decades to pay off that debt, 

and we certainly contributed as we could to the reduction of the 

long-term debt of our province. 

 

The other thing that people spoke about earlier was his 

competitive nature. He was an athlete and he was a tennis 

player, and often he would come into the constituency office to 

share with Judy Gossen, who is my constituency assistant, and 

myself, how many games of tennis he had played up until that 

point. And there were years when Wes Robbins played literally 

hundreds of games of tennis, and, Mr. Speaker, he also let us 

know when he won. And he won quite often when he was over 

at the Riverside tennis courts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Wes Robbins leaves behind a family: his wife, 

Marion Robbins; his son, Jim Robbins and his wife, Nettie 

Wiebe; along with Barbara Scott and her husband, Peter Scott; 

and his daughter Janis Robbins. In addition to that, he leaves 

behind six very talented grandchildren who loved their 

grandfather deeply. We have Elizabeth and James Scott, who 

are young adults, along with Martha, Katie, Will, and Margaret 

Robbins. 

 

And his granddaughter was named one of the 100 young people 

in this country to watch. And Wes brought in the Maclean’s 

magazine to tell us that his granddaughter, Martha Robbins, was 

one of the 100 young Canadians that we should pay attention to. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we’re wise, we will, because I think 

Martha Robbins some ay will follow in her grandfather’s 

footsteps. 

 

In addition to his immediate family, he also leaves behind his 

sister Norma, Norma Hymers. And Norma loved her brother 

deeply. And I think it’s fair to say that Norma was proud of her 

brother and all that he was able to do on behalf of the people of 

our province. Mr. Speaker, this is a day where we pass on our 

condolences to Wes Robbins’s family, immediate family, his 

grandchildren, and his sister Norma. I’m very pleased that 

we’ve had this opportunity. 

 

It’s been an honour for me to speak to Wes Robbins’s 

condolence motion this morning, but it’s also been a real 

honour for me to have been the representative of his 

constituency for the last 21 and a half years. And I have to say 

that it doesn’t matter where I go, over the years people have 

spoken about Wes Robbins. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

members on both sides of the House to pay respects and 

condolences to Wes Robbins. I’m a long-time resident of 

Saskatoon and we both attended Grace-Westminster United 

Church for a number of years. And my family certainly didn’t 

share Mr. Robbins’s political views, but we certainly shared and 

respected his values and his commitment to the church. 

 

My late father in the 1980s served on a building committee with 

Mr. Robbins. And he came home after the meeting and said, I 

might not agree with Mr. Robbins, with Wes’s politics, but he 

certainly knows how to read a balance sheet and knows how to 

look at a bank account. And the member from Nutana would 

know my father and will certainly know that that would be an 

ultimate compliment. 

 

During my university years I met his son Jim and 

daughter-in-law Nettie. And while I may not necessarily agree 

with their politics, I certainly can’t deny Mr. Robbins’s passion 

and commitment to the province, his church, and to his family. 

And his sister, Norma, is a good friend of my mother’s. And I 

certainly want to wish the very best to the family and my 

sympathy and condolence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 

it’s also with some humility that I rise to speak to the example 

set by Wes Robbins. I didn’t know Wes when he was an MLA 

very well, and moved to Saskatoon about 1980 and not to his 

constituency. So I got to know him more after his retirement 

from politics, at least on a personal basis. 

 

And after that time, after he had retired from politics and the 

current member from Saskatoon Nutana had, after a short 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

interregnum, had taken over that constituency, Wes would tell 

me stories about his life. And some of the stories were about his 

public life and some of his stories were about his personal life 

and about the adversities and challenges that shaped him and 

perhaps shaped the values and principles that those people of 

that generation brought to public life in Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And it’s always tempting to look back, Mr. Speaker, and say 

there was a golden age and the people who preceded us were so 

much better. But it’s hard not to have that view when you think 

of gentlemen like Wes Robbins and the values and the 

principles that he brought to every aspect of his life, including 

to this Chamber, Mr. Speaker — values of frugality, of 

conservatism in a sense, fiscal conservatism, and a concern 

about the environment that usually is given to my generation 

and the generations that follow me. But Wes once said to me 

that it was one of his goals to live simply so others could simply 

live. And he also brought values of integrity and of decency and 

civility. Perhaps only one notable example of him ever losing 

his temper, Mr. Speaker, and I would admit that that was 

probably fairly notable. 

 

He was also a temperate man in many ways, and even in the 

literal sense that I don’t believe he ever had a sip of alcohol. 

And he, as a rule — with only one exception that I know about 

— always refused to pay for it. 

 

Someone who attended family dinners told me that Wes would 

always generously pay for the entire meal — and it’s not a 

small family, Mr. Speaker, and with, you know, with their 

boyfriends and girlfriends and then later on spouses and then 

grandchildren; it’s not a small dinner bill — that Wes would 

always agree to pay the dinner bill, but the bar bill was to be 

divided up and paid for by those who drank it. 

 

But Wes told me of one exception and it speaks to his strong 

belief that public money is to benefit the public. When he was a 

minister of the Crown here in Saskatchewan, a fellow named 

Jean Chrétien — who I think was Minister of Indian and 

Northern Affairs — was coming to visit our province. And the 

provincial government wanted to put on a banquet for him, and 

at this banquet they wanted to serve wine. But because of the 

cost of the banquet, whatever role Wes Robbins was playing at 

that time — it may have been Minister of Finance, it may have 

been Minister of Revenue — he had to sign off on the expense 

of this banquet. And he wouldn’t do it because he wasn’t going 

to have public money buy wine at this banquet. 

 

Two other cabinet ministers — well known to people in this 

legislature, but who I will not name because it’s not relevant to 

the story — pressed upon Wes to sign off on buying this wine 

for this banquet for the Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs. 

They said to him, Wes reported to me: he’s from Quebec; he 

won’t understand why there’s no wine at the banquet. He 

refused to sign off. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, he said, I will buy the wine. And that is 

the one instance of Wes Robbins ever buying alcohol because 

he refused to let the people of Saskatchewan buy it. 

 

Now that story may seem a little quaint now. We’ve moved on 

and some of the positions that Wes Robbins took in public life 

seem a little quaint, irrelevant to the current circumstances. But 

I think the values and the principles that were behind his strong 

feelings on matters like that, those endure, Mr. Speaker. And I 

hope they endure in the hearts and minds of all whoever sit 

here. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of Mr. Wesley Albert Robbins and expresses its 

grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion of transmittal. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to move a 

motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I move: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I 

would ask that we go to motions for return (debatable). 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move to motions for returns (debatable). Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Return No. 33 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the question that was asked was 

to the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority, and the request was: 

 

The percentage of spillage and breakage over the last 20 

years or since the location was opened, on a store-by-store 

basis. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

question from the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow that: 

 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming: the percentage of spillage and breakage over the 

last 20 years or since the location was opened on a 

store-by-store basis. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I find this question and the series of questions that the 

former minister of Liquor and Gaming asked on these particular 

issues interesting. I would have expected that a former minister 

would have been aware of the spillage that had taken place 

while under her tenure. I would have expected she would have 

been familiar, Mr. Speaker, with all of the procedures that took 

place in dealing with spillage at Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming. 

 

Obviously she hadn’t been paying attention to her portfolio in 

not knowing what was taking place there and not understanding 

what the procedures were like at Liquor and Gaming and 

dealing with issues like spillage and breaking. There have been 

no changes, Mr. Speaker, on the procedures there so these 

procedures have been in place for some number of years under 

her ministry at that particular point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues about this particular question that 

the former minister was asking about involves going back 20 

years and dealing with items that have been archived. Those 

records are now under the provincial Archives Board, in the 

provincial archives. 

 

And I should point out, Mr. Speaker, unlike her ministerial 

documents from the time when she was the minister, those have 

not yet been archived, Mr. Speaker, even though under The 

Archives Act those documents are to be returned to the 

provincial government and to be archived. And that former 

minister has not done so, Mr. Speaker. She’s in contravention of 

the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the point prior to 1999 going back, that 

information about spillage and breakage is in a hard copy form 

in the archives, Mr. Speaker. It would take considerable amount 

of work, cost, to retrieve those particular documents. And I 

don’t believe that the opposition caucus has offered to pay, Mr. 

Speaker, for the work necessary to retrieve those particular 

documents. 

 

I would have expected that she would have known — because 

she kept her own files, Mr. Speaker, instead of archiving them 

— what the spillage and breakage would have been, particularly 

under her tenure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spillage and breakage is extremely low at 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] about two 

one-hundredths of a per cent, Mr. Speaker. You know, the issue 

that somebody said, we’re not talking about the 1990s. Well the 

question was, go back for every store for 20 years, Mr. Speaker, 

20 years. And everything has been archived in particular prior 

to 1999, Mr. Speaker. It’s archived in a hard paper form that 

would have to be gone back into the provincial archives to find 

those particular documents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support providing those 

answers to the former minister opposite when she should have 

been aware of the procedures in place under her tenure, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I would advise that the ministry is 

not prepared to provide those answers. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I think I may have spoke out of 

place here, but I would actually like to make some comments to 

the question not being responded to. 

 

The Speaker: — I have to advise the member that the member 

has already spoken to the issue and therefore is not allowed to 

speak. The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sad 

day in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, when a minister will stand 

up and say that he won’t answer a question. Now this was a 

relatively simple question, Mr. Speaker. The member asked to 

know the spillage over a number of years, Mr. Speaker, and that 

question was being asked for a reason, Mr. Speaker. And the 

reason for asking that question, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. 

 

We wanted to establish the baseline of what the spillage was 

over a number of years, Mr. Speaker, and then compare it to the 

future because, Mr. Speaker, we have a concern. During the 

1980s we had a period of time where we saw alcohol from the 

Liquor and Gaming Authority delivered to this building, Mr. 

Speaker, along with things like 60 pounds of ice, Mr. Speaker 

— 60 pounds of ice, Mr. Speaker. So that should give you some 

idea, Mr. Speaker, of what was going on in this building during 

some of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that was a lot of spillage during those years, Mr. Speaker, 

and so we wanted to establish a baseline, Mr. Speaker, to find 

out just what’s going to happen over the next few years, Mr. 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Speaker, which we’ll be monitoring very carefully, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that the current minister or some official 

or some staffer doesn’t order up again alcohol, 60 pounds of ice 

at a time, Mr. Speaker, cups, and . . . We don’t know quite what 

happened with all that, Mr. Speaker, but in the future we want 

to make sure that we have a mechanism of checking that the 

spillage doesn’t go up as it did in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would not normally enter 

into debate about a question of spillage at the liquor store or any 

liquor stores in Saskatchewan and for me that’s not really the 

issue here. I think the issue here is the fact that the minister is 

refusing to supply the information. 

 

He’s taking the point of view that, because the information is in 

fact in some archives and therefore is hard to retrieve, therefore 

we should not retrieve the information. Now if that’s the 

precedent that this government wants to set, if that is now the 

benchmark, Mr. Speaker, for the government answering 

questions — that it may be difficult to get the information so 

therefore we don’t want to provide the information — that then, 

Mr. Speaker, is a 180 per cent change from the practice of this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I think this government needs to rethink this before they 

get branded as being secretive and not forthcoming in terms of 

the information that belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. We 

have a right to ask for it, and they should be supplying it, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I too would normally not be 

entering into the fray around spillage of liquor in 

Saskatchewan’s liquor stores. This should be a very, very 

straightforward question. This is not a question of where those 

records are maintained. This is a question about a minister of 

the Crown refusing to ask a question that was written, put in 

written form to give the department all kinds of time to 

establish what that answer is. 

 

This is a question of accountability. As has been pointed out, 

what we want, Mr. Speaker, is to establish a baseline. Because 

there is some history with members opposite around liquor and 

liquor coming from the liquor commission to this very building, 

liquor that . . . We need for those reasons, and others — the 

primary one, as my seatmate said, is the opposition has a right 

to ask the question . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Debate might proceed much smoother 

and quicker if members would at least allow the member on 

their feet to respond. There’ll be lots of ample opportunity for 

other members to respond. Member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It astounds me to hear a 

member from the now government today, like 30 seconds ago, 

say that they have better things to do than answer questions 

from the opposition. Well what a difference a day makes, Mr. 

Speaker, especially when that day is an election day for a Sask 

Party government. Shame. 

 

This is about the ability of the opposition to ask questions and it 

is surprising . . . My final comments, my final theme, unless, 

unless they keep feeding me with ideas, my final theme, Mr. 

Speaker, is the now, in opposition the now minister responsible 

and colleagues made demands, asked questions, many of which 

on the surface seemed totally, totally unreasonable, seemed to 

demand huge effort and huge resources from various 

departments. We provided answers. That’s the job of the 

departments and of the government in a democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. Our job is to get the answers, particularly when it’s 

answers to eminently reasonable written questions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 

the members opposite are fully aware of what the opposition’s 

role is. And the opposition’s role is to scrutinize the goings-on 

of the government and what happens in the legislature. That 

means we have to ask questions and that means we have the 

right to have those questions answered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is absolutely unconscionable, absolutely unconscionable that 

they refuse to answer questions that are posed to them. And 

clearly there are good reasons, as the member for Regina 

Dewdney already stated, that there is a history to that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, there is a history that we’re still not 

comfortable with. 

 

Because since they’ve come into government, Mr. Speaker, I as 

a newly elected member in 2003 have seen more faces from the 

Devine government show up in this building than I have in the 

last four years. Only in the last few months, Mr. Speaker, am I 

seeing those faces reappear. So am I comfortable with the 

goings-on of the current government? Not in the least. As the 

member for Regina Coronation Park said, it seems that they are 

too busy to answer this question. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to another Bill that they have 

already tried introducing, which is Bill No. 31. They were too 

busy to have to deal with any expenses that were over $50,000. 

They wanted to increase that, Mr. Speaker, to $350,000 — 

seven times the amount that this government, the NDP 

government reported its spendings on. So this is just another 

example of how this new government is too busy to be open 

and accountable to the citizens of Saskatchewan. It is absolutely 

unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would suggest, I would suggest that they go back to the 

platform document that they gave to the Saskatchewan public 

during the election that took place on November 7, 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. I suggest they go back and read their platform 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

document because their platform document claimed — and I 

use the word claimed — that they were going to be open and 

accountable. 

 

They were trying to shed the skin of the Devine Conservative 

years. They were trying to shed the skin of the debt that they 

left this province in. I was a young person at that time who 

thought, good Lord, I’m going to have to leave this province 

because this province was left with a $15 billion debt when they 

lost government in 1991 — $15 billion debt. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question is a simple question in 

regards to breakage and spillage. I believe we’re deviating far, 

exceedingly wide in our debate. I bring the member back to the 

question. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I concur. It is a simple question. 

It’s a simple question of simply, what is the amount of breakage 

that occurred? The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

presented the question. She has the right to have the question 

answered. 

 

And if they are true to their word, Mr. Speaker, they will 

answer the question that has been presented to them and not 

hide behind the fact that they’re too busy or whatever else it is 

that they have reasons for not wanting to answer the question 

and be open and accountable to the public of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Kelvington-Wadena has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s a great pleasure to introduce 30 students from 

Robert Melrose Elementary School from my hometown of 

Kelvington. With them is Tracy Ziola and Val Anderson and 11 

parent chaperones. But I know they don’t need 11 parent 

chaperones because these children are very well-behaved. But 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

Kelvington is a great hockey town and a great football town and 

a great place to live. But I’m really pleased you have a chance 

to visit us here in the legislature. 

 

I look forward to talking to you later on. And welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 33 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

That the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority record the percentage of 

spillage and breakage over the last 20 years. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — On division. 

 

The Speaker: — On division. 

 

Return No. 35 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have asked by written 

question in the House on April 15 and in the Human Services 

Committee, April 17, a specific question that I will read into the 

record at the end of my remarks. It is now May 1, and no 

answer is being presented to this House. Mr. Speaker, given that 

the Minister of Labour . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Eastview 

has been recognized. Allow the member to place her question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now May 1, and 

there’s no answer to my question is being provided to this 

House. Mr. Speaker, given that the Minister of Labour has used 

the fearmongering tactic of saying that 400 patients were turned 

away per day, were turned away from medical care — and 

that’s in Hansard of March 17 — he says they’ve been turned 

away from RUH [Royal University Hospital] during the CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] strike at the two 

universities in ’07. It is strange that there’s no evidence of that 

assertion being provided. He simply can’t back it up. 

 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health should know if this 

is the case in the health system that he oversees. Such a 

remarkable number of patients a day would surely be known to 

the Minister of Health who would provide those numbers to this 

Assembly when asked. There is obviously no substantiating 

evidence for the wild allegations. Quotes from the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, the Leader-Post, and CJWW are not evidence. 

Even those quotes, when used, use the words affected rather 

than turned away. 

 

These allegations are being used to justify the need for essential 

services legislation that has been in the works, as the Minister 

of Labour has said, for over a year. Surely if you’re going to 

allege a circumstance that can so quickly turn to inspiring fear 

in the public, you would thereby try to justify the serious 

erosion of workers’ rights to bargain. You must be able to 

provide solid evidence for those allegations. 

 

So far, after all these days looking for the answer and coming 

forward with none, we have to assume that you can’t back up 

your statements. As usual the Sask Party will say anything and 

be accountable for nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion reads, I move that an order of this 

Assembly do issue for return no. 35 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Health: (1) the number of patients who 

were turned away per service or department from Royal 

University Hospital for each day of the 2007 University of 

Saskatchewan labour strike; (2) the services or 

departments that were affected; and (3) the services or 

departments that were not affected. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question placed by the member from Saskatoon Eastview. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I wish to table the answers to question 555. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would like to remind the 

members that we have a question on the floor that has to be 

voted on and it might be appropriate for the minister to even 

read into Hansard the answer to the questions. 

 

The question before the Assembly is the question placed by the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview that . . . I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in on this discussion about the motion that’s return (debatable). 

It is a little puzzling, if the answers were at hand, if the 

information was known, why that information was not provided 

earlier and why that information would not be read into 

Hansard for the permanent record for the benefit of the people 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and for the benefit of the people 

in the gallery, and the people at home watching on television. 

 

The question that was asked by the member from Eastview, 

there were three components to the question. The first part of 

the question was a concrete number of the number of patients 

who were turned away per service or department from Royal 

University Hospital. So the number of patients who were turned 

away. The second component of the question was what services 

or departments were affected. And the third area was what 

services or departments that were not affected. 

 

So there were three components and when looking at these 

three components, three questions came to my mind concerning 

the motion and concerning the information that we haven’t been 

receiving from the government and why they would choose not 

to do so. 

 

The first question is, why are these questions important? We 

know they’re important because the government has used this 

information, this claim, as a justification for things that they 

have been doing, namely Bill 5. So they’ve used it as evidence, 

and then they’ve used it as the underpinning of why they 

needed to proceed with a certain course of action. 

 

Another reason why this question is important is that it is 

necessary for the Assembly and the public to have a full 

understanding. It’s not enough simply to have one raw number, 

but it’s important to have a full understanding of the details of 

the question. A full understanding allows the people in 

Saskatchewan to know the facts and to judge a claim as to if it’s 

a claim with merit or if it’s a claim that does not have merit. 

 

It’s also an important question because it determines or 

indicates how open and transparent a government is. It’s again 

related to the previous question that was asked and which the 

government wasn’t willing to provide a reply. 

 

The role of opposition is to ask questions. The role of 

opposition is to look into matters and seek answers. So it is 

concerning when the government is not prepared to act in an 

open and transparent manner. It actually has many similarities 

to the notion of consultation and how consultation should be 

conducted, whether it’s consultation with a select few that are 

chosen or whether it’s broad consultation that is open to all. 

 

So the first question that we just touched on was, why are these 

questions important? The second question that came to mind to 

me was, what have we seen so far? And so far when we asked 

the question, we saw a refusal to go on record. We saw a refusal 

to put it down on paper as to what the breakdown was during 

the labour dispute, how departments were affected. We saw a 

refusal, and to me that’s puzzling, and it’s puzzling for one of 

two reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When thinking about it, I was led to believe, well there’s really 

two things going on here why they’re refusing not to provide 

this information in written form. The first is, well maybe they 

don’t know, and that is a problem and quite concerning because 

if they’ve used this for the justification, they surely ought to 

know what the breakdown of the numbers are and whether or 

not these numbers are correct. 

 

The second option, maybe they do know but they don’t actually 

like what they know. They don’t like the numbers and they 

don’t like the breakdown. And that’s another reason for not 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

willing to go on record and be public and open and transparent 

with the numbers. What we’ve seen by members of the 

government concerning this question about how many people 

were affected, we’ve seen a muddying of the waters. We’ve 

seen a situation where they have twisted and changed the 

language of the question. 

 

The first part of the question that the member from Eastview 

asked was, how many patients were turned away? The question 

was not how many were affected, but the question was, how 

many were turned away? There’s a clear difference between 

those two aspects. So the first question that came to my mind 

was, why are these questions important? The second one was, 

what have we seen? And the third question, after touching on 

one and two was, what should the minister now do? 

 

Well to me it’s a simple question. The minister should be open, 

transparent, and forthright with the answer. 

 

And what should this answer look like, Mr. Speaker? Well first 

of all the answer should be detailed. It should have concrete 

numbers with dates, with departments, with areas. It should be 

very detailed in the type of information it provides. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The second characteristic of how this answer should look like, 

what it should look like, is that it should be comprehensive, Mr. 

Speaker. It should include all of the areas — not just areas that 

they want to state, but it should be comprehensive with all the 

information. 

 

And the third characteristic of what this answer should look 

like, Mr. Speaker: it should actually address the question. Not 

their preferred question, not the perhaps affected question, but it 

should address the very specific question of turned away. That’s 

what it should look like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with these comments . . . Again it would have been nice if 

the minister had taken the time to share this information 

beforehand, to answer the question when it was first asked. It 

would have been nice if the minister had chosen to take the time 

and read it into the public record in Hansard, but I guess that 

does speak to his willingness to be open and transparent about 

the process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are arguably many things about Saskatchewan 

that are different than other jurisdictions in Canada. As an 

example, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we tend to rely on 

Crown corporations, corporations that are owned by the public, 

to deliver various services to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is different than many other jurisdictions in Canada. To be 

sure, we have other jurisdictions that also have publicly owned 

corporations that deliver electrical service to customers in their 

jurisdictions, but I don’t believe that there are any others now 

— maybe there’s one — that have publicly owned corporations 

that deliver natural gas to customers. 

 

Certainly there are none now that have provincially owned 

Crown corporations to deliver telephone services and related 

services to their publics. There are only a few other jurisdictions 

in Canada that have publicly owned corporations deliver public 

auto insurance for the people in their jurisdictions. 

 

So it might be said that on those grounds we are different than 

most, maybe the same as some, but on the whole we are 

different than most because of our reliance on Crown 

corporations. That doesn’t necessarily mean that we have an 

inferior product or that somehow we need to change what’s 

taking place in Saskatchewan to approach the same level of 

service that’s produced in other jurisdictions. In fact with 

respect to Crowns, we pride ourselves . . . and the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation said yesterday 

that we in fact were able to provide good services at a lower 

rate, when you take all those Crown services into account, than 

any other jurisdictions in Canada. So we have an advantage 

there. 

 

We are also different, for example, when it comes to health care 

premiums. We do not have health care premiums in 

Saskatchewan. Other jurisdictions may well have health care 

premiums. We don’t. That doesn’t necessarily mean that we 

should be changing in Saskatchewan to have health care 

premiums as they do in some other jurisdictions. Similarly, in 

terms of municipalities, we have far more municipalities, as it 

reflects settlement patterns in Saskatchewan, than they do in 

many other jurisdictions. 

 

The point, Mr. Speaker, that I’m making, the point that I am 

making is that when it comes to essential services legislation, 

when it comes to essential services legislation, which this 

question tries to get at, we have operated in a different way than 

many other jurisdictions in Canada, but does that necessarily 

mean that we should be changing the pattern or the system that 

we have had for 103 years to simply reflect what the 

government wants today? Should we be changing something 

that has arguably worked over 103 years? 

 

What we have had, Mr. Speaker, is a system where, voluntarily, 

workers represented by their organizations, their unions, sitting 

down with management, determining what essential services 

need to be provided in the case of a withdrawal of services. So 

that’s been done on a voluntary basis. Unions have known that 

if you don’t do that then, you know, if there’s a problem it’ll 

come back on them and therefore they have sought to provide 

that kind of voluntary, on a voluntary basis, to ensure that 

essential services are covered. 

 

Now that’s the way it has worked in Saskatchewan and we 

know that there’s always the ultimate hammer that if it doesn’t 

work, the legislature of Saskatchewan can be recalled in a 

matter of hours to deal with that situation. But in the main it has 

worked over 103 years. Essential services have been provided, 

have been provided on a voluntary basis for 103 years in 

Saskatchewan. Now the government says it has to change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Getting to the motion that’s before us, they didn’t campaign on 

this during the election campaign. To the contrary, they in fact 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

made assurances that no, no, no, that no essential services 

legislation was required. They were going to continue with the 

system that we have. Why change it? 

 

Now they’re pointing to the Royal University Hospital, the 

question that services weren’t being provided, essential services 

weren’t being provided, in their view, during a withdrawal of 

services during the course of last fall. They point to that and 

say, see that’s the reason now we need essential services 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And now when we ask them, can you 

provide us the details, can you provide us the details about 

services not being provided, essential services not being 

provided to the public, now they’re not so forthcoming in terms 

of their answer. 

 

It seems to me that if you want to have or see change in policy, 

if you want to see change in terms of legislation such as this, 

then it seems to me that you need to come up with some good 

solid concrete facts so that there can be a real discussion about 

why there should be a change. And now in this particular case, 

they’re not, if you like, they’re not able to produce the smoking 

gun, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, if there’s a major shift in policies, it requires clear and 

good reasons to change if it is to be supported. Otherwise, we 

would say that this is an ideological change, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

driven by their arrogance as a government. They’re . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

There is a motion before the House and the member is not even 

anywhere close to the motion. I would ask that you direct him 

to respond to the motion before the House. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I know this House has a long 

tradition of allowing debate to address and to ramble a little bit, 

but I also will caution the members to stick close to it. This is a 

kind of a question does range a little bit, but stick with the 

health issues and the question. I would ask the members . . . I’d 

like to allow the debate to carry on. I’d like to allow some 

free-flowing debate, but I’d also like to remind the members to, 

you know, address the question too. I recognize the member for 

Regina Douglas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the issue we’re debating is 

a motion for return. What is a motion for return, Mr. Speaker? It 

essentially reflects a written question, a written question that we 

put to the government because we don’t expect the government 

to be able to provide that kind of detailed answer during a 

question period. So therefore we have put in a written question. 

 

The government is given, it’s a specified period of time, I 

believe it’s five sitting days of the Legislative Assembly, to be 

able to provide an answer to the written question. And if it 

cannot then provide the answer, then it has to be converted. The 

question has to be converted to some motion because maybe the 

question wasn’t worded right and therefore needs to be 

redrafted in order to get the information that’s required, or 

maybe they can’t get the information in a timely fashion. That 

is the issue before us. 

We put a written question to the government on the question of 

the number of patients who were turned away from service at 

the Royal University Hospital for each day for the 2007 

University of Saskatchewan labour strike. You’d think that 

given all of the reference that they have made to that, all of the 

reference they have made to that in saying that this is the reason 

that we need a change in essential services, that they would 

have the answer like that. Why is it taking them this length of 

time to come up with an answer, Mr. Speaker? My guess is they 

don’t have a very good, clear answer to provide to people of 

Saskatchewan. This is another case of right wing meddling — if 

it ain’t broke, let’s fix it. That’s what this is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know we have a 

motion for return (debatable) that was put in, in written form on 

April 15 — April 15, more than two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. 

More than two weeks that question . . . and the government puts 

out, they call it information, but we have no idea if it is 

information. 

 

Whenever the question of essential services comes up, the first 

thing they point to is the strike at the University of 

Saskatchewan and how it affected people and health care 

services at the Royal University Hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

our question is designed so we can actually quantify that. You 

know, put up the answer so that the people of Saskatchewan 

and so that the opposition knows exactly what it is we’re 

dealing with because it is overwhelmingly the major, the major 

excuse — and I say that very, very accurately, I think — excuse 

for Bill 5, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today we have a situation where the government can simply 

stand up and issue a written return on a motion for a return. All 

they have to do is at the appropriate time do that. Stand up, give 

it in writing. Instead they wait until it becomes motions for 

returns (debatable), Mr. Speaker, debatable. 

 

Then, then . . . I want to make this point. If toys could pick up 

the energy from the now government, they would be spinning 

with what seems to be perpetual motion. They would spin and 

weave and bob because the minister stands up today, the 

minister stands up today and says, oh here, I’ve got the answer 

now in writing, he says. 

 

Well if it’s good enough to write, Mr. Speaker, it’s good 

enough to stand up and say it once it gets to this point, once it 

gets to the point of orders, motions for return (debatable). They 

had all kinds of opportunity to put it in writing previously, and 

that would have been perfectly acceptable, perfectly within the 

rules of this legislature, but it’s too late for that. Now you can’t 

do by the back door what you should have done by the front 

door. And that’s the shame of where we’re at today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have got to, we have got to somehow, as an opposition, 

bring the government to what they campaigned on — openness 

and accountability, integrity. I think I heard the word integrity 

come from the Premier’s mouth, and I’ve heard others on that 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

side speak to integrity, Mr. Speaker. I hope they mean it. I hope 

this is the last example in this term of this nonsense, of this 

playing fast and furious with the rules of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Shame on the government for not answering the question. 

Shame on the government for not answering it in its proper 

form. And shame on them for now not standing up and reading 

into the record what that answer is so that we can have a proper 

debate and have some intelligent knowledge about what it is 

that happened during that strike. What are the numbers? We 

don’t know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made my point. Thank you for your 

attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m 

pleased to rise to speak to the motion for return (debatable). I 

just want to again emphasize what that question was that the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview had asked. And the question 

was simply this: the number of patients who were turned away 

per service or department from the Royal University for each 

day of the 2007 University of Saskatchewan labour strike — 

very simple question, Mr. Speaker, very simple question that 

could have been answered in a very simple way. 

 

The question was asked weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, and the 

minister would not answer. And we now know it’s a would-not 

answer given that what has just happened a few minutes ago. 

 

The minister has been using these numbers in the House, as 

well as the Minister for Labour. And the Minister for Labour 

has been using the numbers in the House on a constant basis to 

establish as to why the Sask Party government has decided to 

implement essential services legislation. This is their 

substantiation as to why it needs to be implemented. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that they are so willing 

to use numbers that they as of yet have not been able to 

substantiate. And why is that, Mr. Speaker? Is it because they 

don’t know the numbers? Is it because they are just too busy to 

research those numbers, which is clearly what we’ve seen about 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow’s question? They 

don’t want to research those numbers because they’re too busy. 

Or is it the same as Bill 31 — that they’re just too busy to report 

to the public anything that spent more than $50,000? They’d 

rather have to only deal with it if it’s $350,000 or more. 

 

[12:00] 

 

So is it just that they’re too busy, Mr. Speaker? Or is it simply 

because they didn’t want the numbers to be reported, the actual 

numbers? Is that the case, Mr. Speaker? Because so far in all the 

questions that have been asked of the Sask Party government 

about the numbers that the member from Saskatoon Eastview 

has asked, so far each and every single question that’s been 

asked about substantiating that with evidence, each and every 

time the Minister for Labour has quoted from The Globe and 

Mail or the Saskatoon StarPhoenix or whatever other anecdotal 

evidence that he could provide, but nothing, nothing of solid 

evidence when we have asked the question numerous times. 

Matter of fact I dare to say 10 times numerous times, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, since we have just come through 21 hours 

of committee hours on Bill 5. 

 

The minister seems to only be able to answer this question 

when ordered to do so, Mr. Speaker. Well isn’t that a sad day in 

Saskatchewan when the government, who claims to be open 

and accountable and who ran on that in the last provincial 

election, is clearly forgetting all about it now that they’re 

actually sitting in the government chairs, Mr. Speaker, because 

now they’re only doing it if they’re ordered to do so. Only when 

they’re absolutely under the gun will they answer the question 

that has been asked of them. 

 

Clearly so far this has been only used as a fearmongering tactic. 

There is no question about that. There is no question that it’s 

been used as a fearmongering tactic, or else they would have 

answered this question weeks ago. And isn’t it interesting, Mr. 

Speaker? I find it amazingly interesting that after the hours have 

run out in the committee that is scrutinizing the essential 

services legislation, Bill 5, only after the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Bill 5 has nothing to do with the 

question before the Chamber, and I’ve asked the member to 

have her comments relevant to the question regarding the 

numbers of patients at University Hospital. I recognize the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, again I reiterate the question. The 

question, the number of patients who were turned away per 

service or department from the Royal University for each day of 

the 2007 University of Saskatchewan labour strike, these 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, have been used over and over again, 

whether it’s giving answers to question period in the House, 

whether it’s giving answers to the media when asked about 

various issues that the government is putting forward and 

dealing with, or whether it’s been in other committees that have 

been perusing other pieces of legislation. 

 

The answer to this particular question has been used anecdotally 

and has only been used in terms of their information through 

articles that have been in The Globe and Mail and StarPhoenix. 

The answer, the actual solid evidence, the factual evidence from 

this answer is something that the opposition has been asking for 

now for several weeks and, like I said, under scrutiny for many 

hours — 21 hours in a different committee for instance. So the 

essence of the government not answering this question leads 

one to believe that they’re either unable, unwilling, or simply 

too busy to answer the question. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am very shocked, as I said, very 

shocked that only after the evidence that has been provided to 

put forward another Bill, which is the essential services Bill, 

only then do they decide that they will answer the question. 

Only after the scrutiny for that, the essence of this answer for 

this question, only when the scrutiny has been completed are 

they willing to put forward the evidence to that question, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s been posed by the opposition on more than 

numerous, many occasions — so many occasions, quite frankly, 

that I can’t even put numbers to it. 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place. But I encourage 

the government that in the future that they will answer the 

questions as they’ve been asked, and therefore not lead to the 

fearmongering and such that they have caused in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As all 

members of the Assembly will know shortly, all of us will be 

asked to stand in this House and put on record our position 

when it comes to essential services legislation in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I as a private member of this Assembly have 

listened with interest to the discussion in committee and also 

the discussion that has taken place through question period. 

And one of the observations that I make is that the government 

very early on in its mandate let it be known to the public and to 

us that the reason why they had made a decision to change their 

minds on essential services legislation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just like to remind 

members that the question before the Assembly is a question 

posed by the member from Saskatoon Eastview asking specific 

questions regarding the number of patients turned away and 

how departments were impacted. And it’s imperative that 

members be also reminded of the fact or aware of the fact that 

their responses or to the question should be relevant to the 

question presented. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you for that ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the essential questions that we need to have determined, 

given that it has formed a large part of the argument that has 

been advanced by the government, is that during the CUPE 

withdrawal of services in the fall of 2007, during the election, 

that 400 — and the minister has put this on record — 400 

people per day were being turned away from medicare during 

the CUPE strike, Mr. Speaker. And this has really framed the 

argument that the government has advanced — that 400 citizens 

in our province were not receiving medicare during the 

withdrawal of services by the people that work at the University 

of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the question was most relevant to this 

debate, the question that we put in through a notice of motion. 

We wanted to understand day by day how many citizens were 

not receiving medicare in our province during the withdrawal, 

the work stoppage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have not yet been able to obtain an 

answer to that question, which is fundamental to a debate that 

has raged on in this Assembly and a vote that I as a private 

member will soon have to stand in this Assembly and vote on. 

 

So I know that the Minister of Health has an answer apparently 

that he wants to put on the record. But from a private member’s 

point of view, Mr. Speaker, it is a compelling question. And the 

answers will be compelling in terms of helping members 

determine whether or not they support this legislation. 

So I would urge the government to tell us day by day, 

department by department, how many citizens in our province 

went without medicare services, Mr. Speaker? And I believe 

that the government has an obligation, an obligation to the 

members of this Assembly to answer that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a 

question placed by the member from Saskatoon Eastview 

regarding an issue for return debatable. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 37 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise again on this Bill. It was only 

a few hours ago that I spoke last on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, but 

during the course of those hours I’ve had an opportunity to 

review some additional information and consult further with my 

colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier in my remarks I had mentioned about the importance of 

having additional information on which to base decisions in this 

regard, decisions that might affect constituents of mine who 

either use the recreational facilities in The Battlefords 

Provincial Park, or other provincial parks for that matter, and 

business interests, Mr. Speaker, those who lease land within the 

provincial park, lease land for commercial purposes that ensure 

that jobs are created, jobs are provided, and services are 

provided to the users of those parks. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I was most interested 

in in trying to determine how changes in boundaries, those sorts 

of things might affect my constituents, the group that I was 

most interested in, Mr. Speaker, was the Battlefords Tribal 

Council and their lease interests inside the park boundaries. Mr. 

Speaker, the tribal council has been looking at utilizing 

additional space within the park for such things as cottage 

development, expansion of the golf course, and further business 

interests to coincide with the hospitality and convention sector 

attached to the golf course that is leased there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to review in greater 

detail the Bill in front of us. It appears that the Bill is dealing 

primarily with a road allowance, Mr. Speaker, something I 

don’t fully understand yet, but I have been given assurances that 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

this is the type of information that could be provided through 

the committee process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I have the floor I want to indicate to the 

members of the government opposite and in particular the 

Minister of the Environment that there are issues relating to the 

lease arrangements and the expansion of boundaries of the lease 

agreements within the park. Mr. Speaker, I am asking the 

Minister of the Environment and the government opposite to 

review the circumstances with regards to that lease and to 

discuss these matters with the intention of improving the lease, 

therefore improving services to the people of Saskatchewan in 

regards to that specific park. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I realize that the legislation is 

broader than that. It speaks to a number of the parks across the 

province. So, Mr. Speaker, I am at this time prepared to 

acknowledge that the information that I require, the information 

that we will require to review this matter further can be 

obtained through the committee process. And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I say on behalf of the official opposition, we are 

prepared at this time to move this Bill through to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture 

and Sport that Bill No. 37, The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill should be 

directed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill is designated . . . that Bill No. 37, 

The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 stands referred to the 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. Thank you. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

through you and to all members of the legislature here this 

afternoon I’d like to introduce some guests seated in your 

gallery. Mr. Rod Lerner and his wife Terry are seated in the 

gallery. Rod is an old childhood friend from the good 

community of Eston, Saskatchewan. We grew up for a long, 

long time together. 

 

And after we graduated from high school, Rod went on to a 

career of teaching and moved to Medicine Hat, and I’ve kind of 

lost a little bit of track where they’ve wound up at this 

particular time. I’ll look forward to visiting with them this 

afternoon. I remember throughout the years of high school 

driving around town in a little Austin car that he had, had great 

fun — and keep the stories to yourself. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the 

legislature to join with me in welcoming to the legislature here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:15] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 25 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

I’m pleased to stand and talk about The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. This particular piece of legislation 

is important to the environmental protection of our province. It 

in fact is a piece of legislation that moves land into protected 

status, or out of protected status, Mr. Speaker. And in this 

province we have had a long-standing desire to protect our 

natural habitat for our children and for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker, and protect those species which are found in some of 

these protected lands that are at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation moves some 

land out of protected status, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to 

ask questions of clarification through the committee process, 

Mr. Speaker, to understand exactly why some of these pieces 

are being taken out and what usage they will be used for in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. As well, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to 

future Bills that will have in fact additions to that protected land 

status in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, because the very detailed questions 

we need to have answered are best asked in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be moved to committee. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

motion by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 25, The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that this Bill 

be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are on Bill 24, An 

Act to amend the Trade Union Act, and what this particular 

amendment is all about is what right wingers in Saskatchewan 

have long been about, and that is if it ain’t broke, well let’s fix 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where a trade union Act has 

come into effect over a long period of time. Successive 

governments have made some amendments to it. There’s no 

magic to that. Any legislation that’s put into effect this day or 

any other day is legislation that can be amended and changed in 

the future, but what we have is a trade union Act that has a 

Labour Relations Board that works; that works, that we’re very 

proud of, that it works. 

 

Three members — there’s a Chair and then a Vice-Chair that is 

appointed after consultation with specified employer groups, 

and then another Vice-Chair that is appointed after consultation 

with listed labour organizations. There’s no magic to this. We 

had a situation where employers on one hand and employees, 

people working — women and men — in Saskatchewan could 

be confident that they were being represented, that they at least 

had someone whose past would lead them to believe that they 

understood where they’re coming from, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what we’ve had. 

 

Now we have an amendment which I’ve heard referred to as the 

oops amendment, because this is the second trade union Act 

amendment Bill before the legislature this spring. But we have a 

situation where we’re adding three words and it’s “ not more 

than.” And what it in effect is doing is reducing from two 

Vice-Chairs to one Vice-Chair. And that begs all kinds of 

questions. 

 

Is it going to be a Vice-Chair appointed out of labour? Perhaps 

there will be consultations, Mr. Speaker, with the SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour]. Perhaps that’s what the 

government intends ; that there be a Chair of the LRB and that 

the Vice-Chair will come with more of a labour friendly 

background. Perhaps that’s what they mean. 

 

I’m astounded that I’m able to even keep a straight face, 

because that’s not what this government’s intention is, Mr. 

Speaker, that is not where they’re going at all. It’s a Chair of the 

LRB and a Vice-Chair of the LRB and labour background will 

be minimal at best. 

 

What a shame at a time when Saskatchewan’s economy is just 

humming along on all cylinders. What a shame when the 

government is proud of the record number of women and men 

that are working in Saskatchewan today, you know, month over 

month, and this is a continuation of what was going on. 

 

Some of the members opposite actually have the belief that this 

has all happened since November 7 — that businesses have 

made hiring decisions or that people have graduated since 

November 7, Mr. Speaker. And it’s just astounding because 

here we are on Bill 24, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker I know I have colleagues that have things to add to 

this debate. This is my second time on speaking to this 

amendment to The Trade Union Act. It is with significant 

disappointment that I find myself in a position of having to 

speak to it. 

 

Clearly all of my arguments have been that the government is 

not consulting, not consulting with people. I mean, for heaven’s 

sakes, a trade union Act, Mr. Speaker, the very name of it 

speaks to unions. The very name, trade union Act, speaks to, 

this is legislation and this is a way to proceed to resolve 

disputes involving unionized members, involving unionized 

members. And what’s the first thing or one of the early things 

this government does? Cut off all communications. Cut off all 

connection, and just make it a trade union Act for employers 

only. And I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day. 

 

This is a very sad day for the people of Saskatchewan when we 

have such an amendment, such a draconian amendment, to 

reduce from three — the members of the board — to two. And 

the government’s main argument or one of the major arguments 

is somehow this is going to speed up hearings. Instead of 

having three simultaneous hearings, you can now only have 

two. 

 

They argue it’s going to somehow enhance the written, the 

written rulings that members of the Labour Relations Board 

make, these thoughtful — at least till now — thoughtful written 

rulings. Well how is it if three people are having some difficulty 

keeping up, how is it that you’re going to have better hearings 

and genuinely hear the employers’ side and the working women 

and men’s side, working persons’ side? How is it that you’re 

going to accomplish more with two people than you could with 

three? 

 



May 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Well, Mr. Speaker, of course the answer is you can’t do it. It’s 

simply defies logic. This Bill is only about cutting out 

organized women and men, cutting out organized labour from 

The Trade Union Act. I say shame. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When in 

opposition, the Saskatchewan Party on a number of occasions 

complained that Saskatchewan’s Labour Relations Board was 

unfairly biased against business, despite the fact that in one 

fairly famous case in Saskatchewan, former chief justice Frank 

Gerein concluded that there is no evidence, quote: 

 

. . . to conclude that bias exists within the Saskatchewan 

Labour Relations Board or that there is justification for a 

reasonable apprehension of bias. To conclude otherwise, 

this court would be acting on pure conjecture or fantasy. 

That is not good enough. 

 

Now I suppose if chief justice Frank Gerein was as biased as 

the Labour Relations Board, then that would be the natural 

conclusion if there was indeed bias on the part of Saskatchewan 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now chief justice Frank Gerein had a career before, a 

distinguished career on the bench as a federally appointed 

judge. Of course that career would be a distinguished legal 

career. And he had a short, I happen to know, Mr. Speaker, a 

short political career. He ran for this Assembly one time. He did 

not run as a member of the CCF or as a New Democrat. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party also raised the spectre of political 

interference in 2006 when one of the Labour Relations Board 

Vice-Chair’s term was not renewed upon expiry. They alleged 

that this Vice-Chair’s term was not renewed because the NDP 

and labour saw him as too, quote, “pro-business.” Now quite a 

fuss was made — as members opposite I’m sure will agree, 

quite a fuss was made — because this was not, this term was 

not renewed, Mr. Speaker. Imagine the fuss if this individual 

had been fired in mid-term. 

 

That being said, at no point leading up to or during the election 

did the Saskatchewan Party mention any change to the Labour 

Relations Board, much like their complete denial that they saw 

any need whatsoever for essential services legislation up to and 

including the election campaign. The Saskatchewan Party was 

elected November 7, 2007, and as the members across the way 

have said, that was the end of consultation. Or at least as the 

Minister of Justice would say, the end of any consultation 

where they might get a negative response. 

 

In their first legislative session one month later, they introduced 

Bills 5 and 6 to bring what they call balance to Saskatchewan’s 

labour environment. Bill 5 is the essential services Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, though the Sask Party had told reporters in the days 

leading up to the election that this would not be legislated. And 

Bill 6 includes a number of amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. Both Bills are expected to be passed during the spring 

legislative session. 

 

Bill 6 is, I take it, to bring about the competitive labour 

environment that members opposite talked about when they 

were in opposition. Members opposite rise on numerous 

occasions and talk about how Saskatchewan is leading the 

economy of Canada, and I on occasion — only on occasion, 

Mr. Speaker — point out that that is all true and that is under 

this labour environment. 

 

But to return to the changes to the Labour Relations Board as 

set out in the Bill under discussion, on March 6 reports surfaced 

that in the middle of a Labour Relations Board hearing — in the 

middle of a hearing, not the expiration of somebody’s term, Mr. 

Speaker, but in the middle of a hearing — the Chair and 

Vice-Chairs were fired, all three of them. In the weeks that 

follow, there’s still quite a bit of confusion as to how cases 

currently incomplete before the board would eventually be 

settled. The government initially claimed that outgoing 

members were instructed to continue on with the current cases 

but not to start any new ones. 

 

This of course is the biased board that the government was so 

worried about. They wanted to conclude all these cases, and not 

so concerned about their bias on those ongoing cases 

apparently, Mr. Speaker. But there have been conflicting stories 

and opinions as to whether these members have any legal 

authority or obligation to do so, and I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that in fact they do not. 

 

The following circumstances around the Labour Relations 

Board or the appointment of a Saskatchewan Party supporter — 

active supporter, I think involved in the transition team for the 

government — as the Chair of the Labour Relations Board with 

a $60,000 increase in salary, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour stated on March 10, 2008 

that, quote, “Obviously there’s a connection between the new 

Chair and the Saskatchewan Party. There has been a connection 

with our party,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

This new Chair was provided with a 50 per cent increase in 

salary, Mr. Speaker, by a government that is now rejecting 

walking away from the commitment of the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs to index minimum wage. It provides a 

50 per cent increase to the Chair of the Labour Relations Board 

once it is one of their party’s supporters in that position. But 

that’s okay, Mr. Speaker, they say, because we’re going to cut 

the size of the board. We’re only going to have one Vice-Chair, 

so actually it will cost less. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, having brought in Bill 6 to amend 

The Trade Union Act and to bring about what they call 

balanced labour legislation and what they would call a 

competitive labour environment, Mr. Speaker, having drafted 

this ominous Bill which was to change the landscape of labour 

relations in the province, they forgot to make an amendment in 

that Bill to amend The Trade Union Act to reduce the size of 

the board by one Vice-Chair, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

some of my colleagues refer to this as the oops Bill or one of 

the oops Bills. There’s also Bill 31, Mr. Speaker, maybe a 

couple of others as a matter of fact. 

 

They forgot that they actually had to change the law and that 

you actually have to change the law in here, Mr. Speaker. And 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2008 

there are some attempts by not proclaiming sections or 

repealing proclamations of already proclaimed legislation to try 

and change the law without coming into here, Mr. Speaker, but 

I would, I would put forward the position that those are of no 

force and effect. 

 

So realizing that in this case they had to come here, they 

brought forward this Bill to go from a not more than two. So 

they can now try to save their money so they can pay their Sask 

Party connection, who’s now been appointed Chair, an 

increased amount. They can try to save that money legally by 

reducing the one position, which they thought they could do just 

by directive of the minister but they have since figured out they 

can’t do because it would be unlawful. And this Bill is to make 

what would’ve been unlawful, and which the government 

attempted to do, lawful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this change is to actually as well as save the money that 

they want to pay their political appointment from being, you 

know, being taken from another Vice-Chair, they also want to 

argue that the reduction that this Bill allows — a reduction by 

one Vice-Chair or, I guess, two Vice-Chairs, Mr. Speaker, 

because a zero is not more than two — the reduction by a 

Vice-Chair or two will speed up, will speed up the actions of 

this board. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have now an attempt to — well it will 

be a successful attempt — to make lawful what would’ve been 

the unlawful actions of the Saskatchewan Labour minister, 

which is unfortunate, but typical of the kind of bumbling we 

have seen on the part of the government and particularly on the 

part of that minister who seems to be resisting learning what’s 

in his legislation in committee, which I guess was his 

opportunity to final figure out what was in this legislation. He 

seems to be resisting that education as hard as he can. 

 

But on the issue of bias, Mr. Speaker, we will soon see bias. We 

will soon see bias. It’s being entrenched in the Labour Relations 

Board. But was there bias, was there bias being corrected, Mr. 

Speaker? No, there was not. 

 

Between April of 1998 and March of 2006, that’s an eight year 

period, Mr. Speaker — a period in which the members opposite 

were very concerned about bias and very concerned about the 

uncompetitive labour market — the board decided over 1,300 

cases. Of these 1,300 cases only six have been overturned by 

the courts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had a Labour Relations Board — one Chair, two 

Vice-Chairs — chosen by an open and competitive process. 

And their record upheld by the courts, exemplary, Mr. Speaker 

— exemplary record, Mr. Speaker, an exemplary record of 

providing unbiased decisions in accordance with the law, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is what now, that is what now we are clearly 

going to lose. 

 

I mean, as I said, all three of these individuals were chosen by 

open competition. The current Chair of the Labour Relations 

Board was not. And the Vice-Chair, the Vice-Chair was not 

going to be, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s pretty clear. The 

Minister of Labour asked if the Vice-Chair would be chosen by 

open competition. He refused to answer the question. The next 

day he says to the press, well yes, but the reason I couldn’t 

answer the question was because I had to tweak the ad last 

night. Essentially that’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have a Minister of Labour who doesn’t read his 

legislation, doesn’t understand the effects of his legislation, but 

we’re supposed to believe he’s working on the advertisement 

for an open competition the government never intended to have 

until they were forced by this opposition to have it. They 

certainly didn’t have it for the Chair. They weren’t planning on 

having it for the Vice-Chair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have other comments to make in respect to this legislation, 

this legislation that will make lawful what would have been and 

was the unlawful actions of the Minister of Labour, 

retroactively will make them lawful, but they won’t make them 

proper, Mr. Speaker. But I will save those remarks for another 

day. And so therefore I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order for 

members to return to their constituencies and meet with the 

citizens, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. Have a good weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:35.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1157 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1157 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1157 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1173 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1179 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1158 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 President and Vice-Chancellor Named at University of Regina 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

 Canadian Team Qualifies for 2008 Summer Olympics 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

 Remembering the Holocaust 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

 100th Anniversary of Saskatoon Institution 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

 Public Servant Retires after Distinguished Career 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1160 

 New Wingate Hotel and Tim Hortons in Regina 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1160 

 Oil and Gas Royalties 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1160 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1161 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1161 

 Email and Labour Legislation 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1162 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1162 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1163 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1163 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1163 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1163 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1164 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1164 

 Labour Legislation and Workers’ Benefits 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1164 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1165 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1167 

  Norris (Bill No. 5) .................................................................................................................................................................... 1167 

CONDOLENCES 

 Wesley Albert Robbins 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1167 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1168 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1168 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1169 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1169 

  Gantefoer (transmittal motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 1170 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 



 

 Return No. 33 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1172 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1172 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1172 

 Return No. 35 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1173 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1174 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1174 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1175 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 1176 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1176 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1177 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1178 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1179 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1179 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1180 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1180 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1181 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


