




















































Hansard: November 06, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1607 

 November 6, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as we can see in the gallery today, we have an awful lot of 

guests from the cadet organizations. And although too many to 

introduce all by name, I would just like to introduce them by 

their squadrons and corps and where they’re from. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have Air Cadet squadrons from Yorkton, Estevan, 

Regina, Nipawin, Swift Current, Oxbow, Indian Head, 

Saskatoon, Carlyle, and Melville. We also have Army Cadet 

corps from Regina, Moose Jaw, and Weyburn; Sea Cadet corps 

from Regina, Moose Jaw, and Swift Current; and Navy League 

Cadets from Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the cadet organization there’s a partnership 

between the Department of National Defence and the leagues, 

and I would like to introduce the league representatives here. 

Representing the Navy League is Mr. Don Landree. The Army 

League is Ms. Eddie Matthew. The Air Cadet League is 

represented by Gary Winkleman. 

 

And there’s some special introductions I would like to make, 

Mr. Speaker, and welcome to Rhonda Notschaele, who is 

basically the OPI [officer prime importance] for this — she had 

done a lot of work in organizing this whole event — and Major 

Peter Garton who is the detachment commander of the cadet 

detachment in Regina, a long-time friend and acquaintance of 

mine. 

 

I have a couple of special introductions I’d like to make. One is 

to Flight Corporal Keith Putz of 702 Lynx Squadron in 

Saskatoon who’s a nephew of our Clerk of the Assembly, Mr. 

Greg Putz. In addition I would also like to introduce Flight 

Corporal Beau Duckarmie. And Beau is from Estevan and Beau 

is the grandson of our member from Estevan. 

 

So I’d ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to give a warm welcome 

to all of the cadet organization representation represented here 

today and to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, very briefly I want to 

echo the welcomes that we’ve just heard from the member for 

Wood River for our very, very special guests who are here 

today, and extend those welcomes on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m not sure about the debate that’s going to ensue here later 

this day, whether it’ll be inspired or not, but if it isn’t we have 

no one to blame but ourselves, because this is an inspiring 

group of young people that have joined us today who have 

committed themselves to service and, frankly, in terms of 

organization, something and some ideals and principles a little 

bigger than themselves. And we want to salute them today, 

welcome them to their legislature, and also acknowledge the 

cadet leaders who put hours of work into making sure there are 

these great programs right across our province. We welcome 

them all to this Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to join with my colleagues opposite and the 

Premier and really welcome the cadets here to the legislature 

today — and not only the cadets themselves, but the leaders and 

the league representatives that are here. 

 

This is an extensive organization, and often one of the issues we 

deal with in Saskatchewan is a large province with our 

population from one end to the other. And this is one 

organization that covers the province and that has a huge impact 

on people and young people right across the width and breadth 

of our province. So it’s a pleasure on behalf of the official 

opposition to welcome each and every one of you here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly and other guests somebody who probably remembers 

when he was a cadet, but that’s a fair time ago. I’m talking 

about Mr. Ken Simpkins. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour and a 

privilege for me to introduce this gentleman to the Assembly 

today as a special guest. 

 

Mr. Simpkins is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. He’s a veteran 

of World War II, and he grew up and still resides in the city of 

Moose Jaw and was a member of the 19th Field Regiment out 

of Kitchener, Ontario. The 19th Field Regiment, as you might 

recall, Mr. Speaker, was one of the first Canadian regiments 

that came ashore in the 1944 invasion of Normandy, better 

known as D-Day. And it’s a pleasure for me to welcome him 

here today, and I ask all colleagues to extend that same warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I as well would like to welcome our cadets 

and our guests who have joined us today, and just out of 

courtesy to remind you that guests are not to participate in the 

debate in any form, whether clapping . . . And that’s just the 

protocol. But I would suggest that the members on the floor, 

who are your voice and who represent you, may give their 

approvals later on as we enter into the debate. 

 

So I just thank you for your recognition in honouring the 

tradition of the Assembly. 

 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Again I rise in support of public safety and 

security in Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders — including the 

policing community, the corrections community, and 

community agencies, organizations, and educators that 

interface with gangs — and understand the risks and 

challenges that gangs present to our communities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of 

Saskatchewan families who are finding it difficult and often a 

struggle to be able to access or afford child care. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by citizens from Langham, 

Biggar, Perdue, Regina, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

on behalf of people opposing the cuts to Station 20 in 

Saskatoon, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents and business 

owners in support of a reduction in the education portion of 

property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by good folks and concerned citizens here 

in Regina. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Remembrance Day 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to give 

thanks to generations of brave Canadian souls who have fought 

for our freedom and the freedoms of those abroad. While 

Remembrance Day is to recall the brave deeds of generations 

past, we must also take this opportunity to support our sons and 

daughters who are fighting for peace in Afghanistan and those 

in peacekeeping operations around the globe. 

 

The heroic actions of Canadian troops today show us that the 

spirit of service and sacrifice lives on in our soldiers. It is said 

that our nation came into its own through our actions in the 

Great War. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to see that Canada 

continues to serve with those same values when it comes to 

helping people around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2008 represents the 90th anniversary of the end of 

World War I. To help us remember the war to end all wars, the 

Legislative Building is participating in a tribute honouring 

Canada’s First World War dead. The names of tens of 

thousands of soldiers who died serving Canada in the war will 

be displayed on the front of the Legislative Building. Similar 

vigils are taking place all across Canada and even at Trafalgar 

Square in London. 

 

I would like to invite people from all around our great province 

to take a trip to visit their local war memorial and solemnly 

remember those who gave their lives in the service of our 

values of peace and freedom. We shall never forget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Tuesday, November 11 will 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

mark the 90th anniversary at the end of the Great War, called by 

some at the time the war to end all wars. It was not. It was the 

prelude to another great war which left the world in uneasy 

peace with many citizens still dreaming of freedom. But our 

freedoms and the freedoms of many others, including the 

freedom of many of our foes, were secured. As time passes, 

many thousands who fought and died in these conflicts are 

always at risk of being reduced to mere statistics. 

 

As children in school learning “In Flanders Fields,” those 

struggles, hardships, and sacrifices could seem foreign and 

distant in the comfort and security that they brought us. 

 

Wars were for other countries or for other times. How many of 

us could imagine that we could actually be called upon to 

provide such service, to hold the torch high, to keep the faith? 

How many of us could foresee that we could become the 

parents of veterans? But today and on Remembrance Day, the 

mothers who lay wreaths are not of our grandmothers’ 

generation but of our own. 

 

There is no end of history. Today our young people are still 

called upon to take up the greatest responsibilities and make the 

greatest sacrifices. There is no end to history and there can be 

no end to remembrance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Honouring Canadian Cadet Corps 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize a program that has played a key role in the lives of 

many young Canadians, myself included — the cadets. Mr. 

Speaker, this morning we have more than 360 young people in 

this building, many of them in this Chamber. They are shining 

examples of what it means to be a Canadian. They are members 

of the Air, Army, Sea, and Navy League Cadets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The cadet corps has played an important role in the lives of 

thousands of young people in Saskatchewan and Canada for 

close to 150 years. Mr. Speaker, by the end of World War I, 

there were 64,000 boys enrolled in the Army Cadet Corps. In 

1940 the Air Cadets was formed. The cadet corps served 

proudly in World War II. And, Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that 

230,000 cadets served in World War II. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the core values of the cadet program are loyalty, 

professionalism, mutual respect, and dignity. Through these 

values the young men and women in the cadet corps learn 

teamwork, citizenship, and leadership skills that last a lifetime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate and thank all past and 

present cadets for their dedication and commitment to their 

home communities, Saskatchewan, and Canada. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

2008 Prince Albert Women of Distinction 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 

October 22, the Prince Albert YWCA [Young Women’s 

Christian Association] held its Women of Distinction Banquet 

and honoured 12 deserving women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the following women are the recipients of the 

2008 Prince Albert Women of Distinction Award: in the arts 

category, Judy McNaughton; recreation, sport, and active 

living, Heather Bravo; business and entrepreneurship, Pat 

Chuey. In the professional category, the recipient was Shona 

McArthur; in community enhancement, Jackie Packett; cultural 

enrichment, Vicky Wilson; science, technology and the 

environment, Lorette Bannerman; lifetime achievement, Marie 

Mathers-Ross. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three young women received the Young Women 

in Volunteerism Award. They were Elizabeth Smyth, Megan 

Surkan, and Kaylee Lam. The 2008 SaskPower Roberta Bondar 

young women’s scholarship was presented to Lauren Ullyolt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these women are most deserving of this 

recognition and are true women of distinction. I ask that all 

members join with me in congratulating recipients of the 2008 

Prince Albert Women of Distinction Award. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Sale of Agricultural Crown Lands 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

this week there was welcome news here in Saskatchewan with 

the announcement of a new five-year program that will help put 

agricultural Crown land back in the hands of producers. 1.6 

million acres will be eligible for sale under this program — 

nearly the size of Prince Edward Island — beginning on the 

15th of this month. Mr. Speaker, agricultural lessees of Crown 

land have been asking for this kind of program for a very long 

time, but they were not heard by the previous government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we listened and we have taken action. 

 

Dave Marit, the president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities], reflected, and I quote, “You’re looking 

after that property anyway, so now if you can retain ownership 

of it, it’s good news.” 

 

And Jack Hextall of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association 

said quote “. . . it gives the producers the ability to add to the 

long-term stability of their land holdings . . .” 

 

You heard it here, Mr. Speaker. It’s good news, and it adds to 

the long-term stability of producers. This program will help put 

the direction of agricultural economy back in the hands of 

producers. We committed to this in our first Throne Speech, 

and we are delivering on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to ensuring all 

Saskatchewan people share in the province’s new-found 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

prosperity. Through measures such as this, combined with 

historic tax cuts and debt reduction and the largest ever 

investment in infrastructure, we are working to make 

Saskatchewan stronger, and a strong Saskatchewan means a 

better life for everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Wings Over Wascana Festival Receives Award 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I was able 

to inform members about the Wings Over Wascana festival 

organized in Regina by the Friends of Wascana Marsh. Wings 

Over Wascana provides an opportunity each year for more than 

200 students from grades 4 to 6 to participate in the festival and 

to get up close and personal with nature. For those children, 

nature becomes a real experience as opposed to a virtual 

experience. It is because of this work the Wings over Wascana 

festival has received the Lieutenant Governor’s Greenwing 

Conservation Award. 

 

The Greenwing Conservation Award recognizes individuals or 

groups who have demonstrated leadership in a project or 

activity that has raised awareness about wetland conservation in 

Saskatchewan. It is awarded annually and sponsored by Ducks 

Unlimited. In commenting on the award, Ducks Unlimited 

Canada Chairman Peter Carton said, “We chose the Wings 

Over Wascana Festival for this award because it gets young 

people right out into the marsh versus reading about it in a 

book.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, preserving what is left of our wetlands is a major 

challenge for our society. Wings Over Wascana, by educating 

our young people in the importance of nature, is helping to 

educate future generations to meet this challenge. Please join 

me in congratulating Friends of Wascana for the Wings Over 

Wascana festival and this significant achievement and for the 

good works they do every year to preserve our natural 

environment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Implementation of Summit Recommendations 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, history 

teaches us that a society is measured by how it treats its most 

vulnerable. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be part of a government 

that also believes in this. This week our government is taking 

measures that will benefit low-income individuals and families 

as we move to implement the recommendations that came out 

of the most recent CBO [community-based organization] 

summits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we announced the historic $76.9 million 

investment in programs and services for peoples with 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker, and we have committed to the 

creation of a separate income support program for them. 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the income tax refunds created by our 

historic tax cut will not be clawed back for recipients that are on 

social assistance. We are also increasing the mileage rate for 

people on social assistance, and also we are increasing the 

heating allowance to help offset the increased costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CBOs also identified a need to better 

coordinate their services. To that end, we are assisting them 

with the establishment of a province-wide 211 telephone system 

and the creation of a website directory. We will also enter into a 

long-term funding arrangement with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we were elected we promised to listen to 

and not just talk to the CBOs. Mr. Speaker, we listened and now 

we are acting. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has put up the for 

sale sign offering our 30 per cent stake in MRM [Muskeg River 

mine] cogeneration station. To the Minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]: is the MRM 

cogeneration station a profitable investment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, to the hon. member for the question. MRM cogen is a 

partnership that was entered into with the private sector by the 

previous government. 

 

SaskPower has been operating that partnership at mostly a 

break-even basis. It’s been marginally profitable in the past. 

And in light of our decision to make a Saskatchewan-first 

policy, I consulted with senior management in SaskPower and 

asked if this facility is necessary for the ongoing development 

of SaskPower in Saskatchewan, and have been told that really 

there is nothing more to be gained from ongoing relationships 

with that partnership. So at some point that will be divested of.  

 

And money from investments like that and others across the 

Crowns will be invested back in Saskatchewan so SaskPower 

can meet the demands of a growing economy here in the 

province, one that will see the need for some 2,000 extra 

megawatts right here in our province. And it will ensure that 

SaskPower is able to deliver safe, securable, reliable power for 

Saskatchewan residents. That’s what our Crowns will do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, from SaskPower’s third 

quarter report of September 30 this year, and I quote, “In the 

first nine months of 2007, $8 million in equity distributions 

have been received from the MRM Cogeneration Station.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this investment is generating almost $1 million a 

month for the people of Saskatchewan. If the minister sells this 

investment, where is he going to get that $12 million a year 

from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is a 

multi-billion dollar operation with many needs going forward, 

many capital needs, many infrastructure needs. It’s well known 

in Saskatchewan that we have an infrastructure deficit as far as 

schools, as far as hospitals, as far as highways, but it maybe is 

not as well known that this government left an infrastructure 

deficit in the Crown corporations, the very corporations that 

they speak about in this House. 

 

We have an infrastructure deficit in SaskTel. We have an 

infrastructure deficit in SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 

this government will work hard to ensure that those 

corporations have the capital they need to go forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer 

because I submit he has no answer for that question, where is he 

going to get the $12 million from? 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of CIC’s very own report quote 

“Revenues were $53.4 million higher than the budget of . . . 

[1.4 billion], as a result of increased sales volumes.” The quote 

goes on: “Other revenue was also up due to better than expected 

MRM Cogeneration Station equity investment earnings.” 

 

This report has the signature of that very minister on the front 

of it — his own report is telling us that MRM cogeneration 

project is doing quote “better than expected.” 

 

To the minister: why is he selling an investment that is 

performing better than expected, and how is he going to make 

up for that lost $12 million revenue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t going to go 

here because it will be embarrassing for the members opposite: 

$12 million is substantial, but more substantial is $465 million 

that were invested by that government outside this province for 

a negative return, Mr. Speaker, a negative 22 per cent return. 

 

People across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are asking 

themselves, what if that $465 million — if you use that 

SaskPower example — what if that was invested in hydro 

development in northern Saskatchewan? We would have hydro 

development today that would be in excess of . . . We wouldn’t 

be envious of what Manitoba has done. Instead of investing 

outside the province, that money could have been used in this 

province, and that’s a lesson that the members opposite should 

have learned by now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to refer to 

the KPMG study. Well he should actually read that quarter of a 

million dollar study. The KPMG study says on page 7 that the 

MRM cogeneration station has a 13.6 per cent return on 

investment, which is even above the target SaskPower had set. 

 

So to the minister: this investment is not only meeting 

expectations, but it’s beating expectations — the rate of return 

is 13.6. My question to the minister is simple. He considers 

himself a captain of industry. Does he have any personal 

investments that have a 13 per cent rate of return right now, and 

if he does, is he willing to sell them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister today just admit that the bottom 

line means nothing to him and his colleagues? He is determined 

to sell off the profitable investments of the Crowns just to fulfill 

his ideological agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to talk 

about the personal returns of my RRSP [Registered Retirement 

Savings Plan] certainly on the floor of this legislature. Trying to 

just put that to the side for this month and for a while — as I’m 

sure all people are in Saskatchewan — but we know that those 

returns and those investments will come back, and there is some 

very, very strong investments to be made here in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the upgrader that the members 

opposite privatized, had a positive return for the people of 

Saskatchewan. They saw fit to make sure that that investment 

was monetized, that money is redeployed for use here in the 

province. And I would suggest it’s the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another investment that was made in the province 

of Saskatchewan, Saskferco. We don’t hear much about that 

from members opposite. That was sold back in June. And 

giving . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask members to allow the minister to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When 

you make investments and they’ve reached their useful life, you 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

can monetize those investments and use that money to further 

develop the infrastructure in Saskatchewan, infrastructure that 

has been so lacking because of 16 years of NDP [New 

Democratic Party] neglect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Seniors 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday the 

Minister of Social Services was forced to apologize for what 

she called, and I quote, “a small clerical error that we corrected 

very quickly.” 

 

She also called the opposition petty for pointing out that her 

news release of October 29 had been quietly altered without 

notice of that change being sent to the media. Mr. Speaker, the 

seniors we’ve talked to don’t think this is a petty matter. And 

the fact is she did not correct her error, instead she tried to 

rewrite history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if this whole mess is truly just a 

small clerical error, why did the minister try to cover up her 

mistake by revising history? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the minister, I 

would also like to remind members to be careful in how they 

phrase their responses or words, to respect the integrity of 

members. I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s with 

pleasure that I stand today to answer the member’s question 

because each and every time I get to re-announce one of the 

greatest announcements that we made in this government. 

 

What we’ve done, Mr. Speaker — and I want to assure 

everyone — is we’ve doubled the benefit that is available for 

seniors in the SIP [seniors’ income plan] program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — It is a 110 per cent increase. What else 

we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve doubled the number of 

seniors that qualify for the benefit program. In addition that 

means 20,000 seniors will receive additional health benefits, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I am thrilled to stand, once again, to re-announce that. 

Maybe I could announce it 16 times to make up for the 16 years 

that the former NDP government totally ignored seniors in this 

province. You know, it’s easy to sit there and poke fun at a 

mistake. If you’re trying to calculate a zero increase, you don’t 

make any mistakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know she’s trying to 

avoid what happened on Tuesday, but the truth is, the 

responsibility for her communications is hers alone. 

 

In a media scrum on Tuesday, the minister was asked if there 

was any possibility that a single senior who makes $5,000 a 

year wouldn’t quality. She replied yes; that’s a possibility. 

Moments later she said no in a response to a question about 

whether the income cut-off could be as low as $5,000. 

Meanwhile, yesterday’s media advisory says that the correct 

maximum income threshold for singles is $16,313. To the 

minister: which figure is correct? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I told the media, the 

calculations for this program is quite complicated because the 

SIP through the province is calculated prior to any of the federal 

programs. The federal programs, the OAS [Old Age Security] is 

a constant amount, whereas the GIS [Guaranteed Income 

Supplement] is also a sliding amount. And it was in calculating 

the GIS where the mistake was made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like I said, the officials, to their credit, had to dust 

off the documents that explained how to do these calculations 

because they didn’t have to look at them for 16 years. For 16 

years they didn’t have to understand how the whole program 

integrated with the federal programs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the good news is this is doubling the amount 

our seniors will — our most vulnerable seniors — will receive. 

And it’s doubling the number of seniors that qualify. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course the officials are very busy with all the work they had to 

do this week keeping up with the minister. It is the minister’s 

responsibility to understand the impact of the policies before 

she . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Allow the member to place his 

question. Member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the minister’s 

responsibility to understand the impact of the policies before 

she announces them to the general public, and it’s her 

responsibility to correct any error she makes. 

 

We have three different versions of her news release dated 

October 29. We’ve had several different sets of figures around 

the maximum allowable income thresholds; first for singles and, 

more recently, for couples too. We have a minister who doesn’t 

understand the difference between taxable income and other 

income. 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did she announce a new 

policy which she clearly didn’t understand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, our Premier as the leader 

has been very, very, very upfront that this government, if they 

discover a mistake, will fix it. We will not hide it for years. We 

will not bury it like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] for six years and just cover it up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, yes, the officials came forward and said there 

was a mistake made. Within the day, within the 24-hour period, 

we corrected it. And I apologize to those seniors that had the 

wrong information. 

 

The good news is we doubled the number of seniors that 

qualify. We doubled the amount they got; we more than 

doubled the amount that they will receive. Does the member 

opposite care about the most vulnerable seniors in this province 

or not? Because I’ll tell you, this government cares. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to talk about 

increases in benefits and that type of thing, but her government 

has imposed added costs on seniors like rising SaskEnergy rates 

or means testing for prescription drug coverage. And now the 

rising cost of housing means that many seniors are now worse 

off than they were before this government came to power. 

 

Many seniors, Mr. Speaker, are turning to Sask Housing units 

for shelter this winter, and waiting lists are high in many parts 

of this province. Just to give an example, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: does she have any information on the waiting lists for 

seniors in Sask Housing units in Yorkton? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite amazed that 

the member opposite wants to go down this road, and he can do 

it by individual city if he wants. And he knows that he can 

access the specific information later by submitting a request. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what he should know is that the waiting 

list in Saskatoon is down than it was over the four-year average 

from 2001 and 2004. Isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker? Was 

that not when the NDP were in government? 

 

You know, Regina — the two major cities, Saskatoon and 

Regina — Regina’s numbers are significantly down from the 

statistics of 2001-2004. Go figure, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 

decided, we’re not tracking it, so I can’t even access the 

numbers after 2004 until this year, but that’s because the 

numbers are down from where they were when they were 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, she can talk in general 

terms all she wants, but when she’s talking to the individual 

senior who’s worried about where they’re going to be this year, 

facing SaskEnergy rates, that’s a big issue. 

 

Well we’ve been told that there’s been approximately 80 

seniors on the waiting list for Sask Housing units in Moose Jaw. 

And I mentioned in this House earlier about the waiting lists in 

Saskatoon and Regina, and each one of those seniors is 

important. At the same time, this government cut $5 million out 

of the Sask Housing budget, and then nests on 60 per cent of an 

historic $3 billion surplus. And she calls this action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: can she name one new seniors’ 

housing project that she has initiated since becoming minister? 

Not one funded from money allocated by the previous 

government and carried forward, but something that she’s done 

by herself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what the member’s 

trying, the point he’s trying to make so I’ll help him out, the 

Sask Housing Corporation at the time of the election had money 

in the corporation. Has that money now been spent? Yes, it has, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are 205 units that have been completed. There are 429 

units that are in construction. There are 180 units that are in the 

development of expression of interest. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

are 120 units that are the Aboriginal Trust Fund expression. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the money that was in the Sask Housing 

Corporation, the federal government put it there. What should I 

do, Mr. Speaker? Say oh no, that was there before the election; 

let’s not use it even though we have a housing crisis. That’s 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely ridiculous. 

 

So are we moving forward? But we announced a huge $1.5 

billion fund for infrastructure — housing falls there and just 

wait for the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a series of 

questions for the Premier this morning. Earlier this week we 

listened as the Minister of Government Services reported to the 

legislature that Heritage Gas was not a profitable investment. 

 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

I believe later that day, and clearly in the press the next day, the 

Minister Responsible for CIC reported to the people of 

Saskatchewan that in fact Heritage Gas is a profitable 

investment and is expected to remain profitable for 20 years. 

 

My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is this: in this 

contradiction between his ministers, which minister is right? Is 

Heritage Gas a profitable investment or not? Which of his 

ministers is right on this question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The members opposite say, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t want to hear the facts, but I’m very happy 

to review the balance sheet of Heritage Gas. Heritage Gas has a 

net positive operating income of $4.2 million. They have 

retained earnings of $5.7 million. They have $9 million 

deficiency in the capital in infrastructure account. So it’s 

making some money; it’s got a long way to go to make up the 

money. We have an investment of $48 million, $3 million of 

that is a loan guarantee that was made to customers of Heritage 

Gas. As you know, Heritage Gas is a partnership of SaskEnergy 

and Scotia Investments, the Jodrey family in Nova Scotia, as 

well as TransAlta public corporation. 

 

We have indicated that we have a Saskatchewan-first policy 

here, Mr. Speaker, where we would like to at some point use 

that capital to bring it home, to extend SaskEnergy’s reach into 

rural Saskatchewan, into northern Saskatchewan, across 

Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people. That’s what we intend 

to do with this investment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s 

silence on this question tells me he cannot be very pleased with 

one of his ministers saying one thing and another minister 

saying something quite different. Again my question is to the 

Premier. 

 

On Tuesday of this week, the Minister of Agriculture told this 

House that he would provide livestock producers with any 

program they wanted. Then yesterday, when confronted with a 

letter from those very producers seeking $148 million in 

support, he said well no I will not. What he did in this House 

was to read press excerpts from Alberta. So then when 

questioned by the press, Mr. Speaker, this same Minister of 

Agriculture said well look, I said this in opposition, but I am not 

going to be doing that in government. 

 

Well my question to the Premier is this: is he satisfied with a 

minister whose response is that I could say or do anything in 

opposition, but will do something quite different in 

government? Is the Premier pleased with that kind of response? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last day of the week, let’s do a review for the Leader 

of the Opposition. I don’t think he heard clearly what I had said 

earlier in the week. Let’s do a review. 

 

What we’re doing for agriculture producers — whether you’re 

on the grain side or the cattle side, hog side — number one, 

we’ve done a crop insurance review to improve a program that 

was totally gutted by the NDP when they were government. 

AgriStability, we’re working bringing the administration of that 

back to Saskatchewan so that responds to producers in a timely 

fashion. Farm and ranch water infrastructure program in the 

southwest — an area that that NDP opposition totally neglected 

when they were in power for 16 years. Gopher rebate program, 

we’re putting money back in the hands of producers who can’t 

afford the total cost of strychnine and other baits out there right 

now. We were asked for a hog loan program and a cattle 

program. We did that, Mr. Speaker — $90 million. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll put our record up any time in the first year in 

power against what the NDP did for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, well again the Premier’s silence 

tells me he cannot be pleased with the attitude taken by his 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Also this week, Mr. Speaker, we have been requesting from the 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety some very 

rudimentary, simple information. We’ve asked him to provide 

for this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan the emails 

or written copies of the policy which clearly is not working, a 

policy which he clearly cannot seem to implement. 

 

My question is to the Premier: is he satisfied with a minister 

who will not provide this basic information to the legislature 

and to the people of Saskatchewan — by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

the same minister who told us that there was no gang activities 

in the jails. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let 

me thank the hon. member for his series of questions. The 

theme here is, the theme of his questions is this: am I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier has the right to be 

heard. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Am I satisfied 

with a Saskatchewan-first policy in our Crown corporations that 

says we ought to put a priority in Alida, Saskatchewan instead 

of Atlanta, Georgia as the NDP did? You bet I am, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Am I satisfied, Mr. Speaker, with a government and with a 

minister that has said rural Saskatchewan must be and will be a 

priority of the Government of Saskatchewan? Am I satisfied 

with a Minister of Agriculture who has said we’ve got to fix the 

crop insurance program that we inherited in a bad state from the 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

members opposite? Am I satisfied, Mr. Speaker, with a 

government and a minister that says we’ve got to focus on the 

education property tax in the city and in the country, unlike 

members opposite who were going to ignore farmers with their 

plan for property tax? You bet I’m satisfied, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Am I satisfied with a policy in corrections that says above all 

else, we’re going to put public safety first? We’re going to 

notify the public when someone who is dangerous is on the 

streets, unlike what happened under the previous 

administration. Mr. Speaker, you bet I’m satisfied. 

 

We can always do better. We are determined to do better, but 

we are making progress in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on this point I can agree with the 

Premier. They sure can do better. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got, 

we’ve got evidence . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — We’ve got evidence in this week of a minister 

who will not provide fundamental information to the legislature. 

We’ve heard a Minister of Social Services who issues three 

separate press releases on one day to get the story straight. By 

the way, Mr. Speaker, when we introduced the universal health 

care plan, drug plan for seniors, we didn’t need to issue three 

news releases to explain. We’ve got the Minister of Agriculture 

saying it’s one thing I can say in opposition; I’d do something 

quite different in government. We’ve got ministers 

contradicting themselves in this legislature this week about the 

value of an asset of this province. 

 

I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from a journalist who wrote to the 

people of Saskatchewan in a journal: 

 

Governing has to be more than feel-good announcements 

related to football and raking in money from oil royalties.  

 

You need to have ministers . . . [with] at least a 

rudimentary ability to handle their portfolio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Obviously this 

cabinet engine of his is not firing on all cylinders. My question 

is, what is he going to do to tune this organization up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of tune-ups, 

Mr. Speaker, I am mindful of the fact that we are approaching 

November 7. I am mindful of the fact that we are approaching 

the anniversary of a date when the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan gave members opposite a tuning up, Mr. 

Speaker, of some significant proportion. 

 

And what has happened since in the Government of 

Saskatchewan? Well, I tell you what. We’re paying off the debt 

at $5,000 a minute. In our first year we’ll have reduced the debt 

by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s happening in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve made record investments in infrastructure — $1.5 billion 

compared to their $600 million in their last year. That’s what’s 

happening in the province of Saskatchewan. Record tax relief 

for Saskatchewan people — the biggest in history — made 

retroactive to the beginning of this year. That’s unheard of, but 

that’s what’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, compare that with a record of inaction and a 

record, Mr. Speaker, on issues like Murdoch Carriere and 

SPUDCO that speak to a government that had its priorities 

wrong. And I don’t think they’ve learned their lesson. The good 

news, Mr. Speaker, is they’re over there and the people’s 

government is on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy Cadets Recognition 

Day Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 

River that Bill No. 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League 

Cadets Recognition Day Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 

Assembly, immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave that the Bill 

be now read a second time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member for Wood 

River. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise to move second reading of The Air, Army, Sea and 

Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act, 2008. 

 

First off, I’d like to give a thank you to the people that were 

totally involved with this. I’ve mentioned the detachment 

commander Major Peter Garton, and Captain Rhonda 

Notschaele. I’d also like to pay recognition to our own caucus 

person that was so much involved in this, is Lara Zaluski. 

 

I’d also like to thank all of the cadets and the cadet instructors 

and the civilians associated with the leagues to be here today for 

this Bill. I think it’s very appropriate to see so many young men 

and women in when we introduce this Bill to recognize the 

cadets. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will recognize the long and 

noble history of the cadet corps. 

 

In addition to the important role that the cadet organization has 

meant to thousands of young people for close to 150 years, it’s 

really with a sense of duty, pride, and honour that I stand in the 

House today to speak about the cadet organization. As we 

know, the cadet organization is a partnership between the 

civilian leagues, the Air, Army, Sea and Navy Cadets, and the 

Department of National Defence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate to look back at a little bit of 

the history of the cadets in Canada. It started out in 1862 as drill 

associations. It progressed from there. In fact in the earlier days 

it was from ages 13 to age 60, and it wasn’t until 1879 that the 

formation of Association for Drill in Educational Institutions 

was first introduced, and that separated the concept of militia 

from the cadets, for young men over 14 could join the cadets. 

 

By 1887 the name cadet corps was recognized for organization 

providing training to boys over age 12. 

 

In 1895 the Navy League of Canada, which was the early Sea 

Cadets, was founded. The cadet instructor cadre, who are the 

men and women who really provide the instruction and 

supervision for the cadets, was founded in 1909. So, Mr. 

Speaker, they will be celebrating their centennial next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by the end of World War I, there were 64,000 

boys enrolled in the Army Cadet Corps. In that time frame also, 

the Navy League was authorized the creation of the girls’ navy 

brigades. 

 

World War II brought a renewed interest to the cadet program 

and the Air Cadets were formed in 1940, with an enrolment of 

about 29,000 cadets by the end of the war. Many female cadets 

were involved but only in an unofficial capacity. After World 

War II in recognition of their contribution, His Majesty King 

George VI conferred the title royal to the program, creating the 

Royal Canadian Sea Cadets, the Royal Canadian Army Cadets, 

and the Royal Canadian Air Cadets. 

 

In the ’60s, Sea and Air Cadets came more fully under the 

control of the Canadian Forces in order to standardize the three 

cadet organizations. A directorate of cadets was established in 

Ottawa to set policy and coordinate the activities of the three 

cadet organizations — the Sea, Army, and Air. 

 

The Army Cadet League of Canada was formed in 1971 in 

order to give the Army Cadets a civilian voice comparable to 

that of the Navy League and the Air Cadet League. 

 

While girls have participated in the cadet program since almost 

the beginning, it was not until July 30, 1975, before parliament 

amended legislation by changing the word boys to persons, and 

since that time the cadet program has enjoyed a tremendous 

amount of young females in the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the cadet program, and we often get 

asked about the association with the military. Well the program 

itself is designed to develop leadership and good citizenship, 

promote physical fitness, and although it is partnered with the 

military, there’s no obligation by young men and women to 

have any part of becoming a member of the Armed Forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague earlier talked about some of the core 

values of the cadets and it’s worth repeating. The core values 

are loyalty, professionalism, mutual respect, and integrity. And 

I’d like to just talk a little bit about each one of those. 

 

With loyalty, it is the expression of dedication to the ideals of 

the cadet movement and all its members. Professionalism, the 

accomplishment of tasks with pride and diligence. Mutual 

respect is the treatment of others with dignity and equality. And 

integrity, the courage and commitment to exemplify trust, 

sincerity, and honesty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my previous life I had the great pleasure of 

being a senior staff officer cadets at Air Command headquarters 

in Winnipeg from 1992 to 1994. During that time frame I 

became extremely familiar and hands-on with the cadet 

program. The prairie region cadets which I was in charge of 

actually encompassed Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 

northwestern Ontario, so I really got a first-hand look at the 

workings of the cadet program. But the big thing that I gained 

from that period of time was seeing how it affected our young 

men and women who were part of the program. You recognized 

the teamwork. You recognized the leadership gained by these 

young men and women. And they all worked toward a goal of 

citizenship. 

 

After my retirement from the military, I also had the 

opportunity to be the commanding officer of the Cold Lake Air 

Cadet Summer Training Centre. And I’m sure a lot of our 

cadets in the gallery today have spent time at the Cold Lake 

training facility. There, there was a senior leaders’ course where 

again young men and women came to study leadership and 

really, really broaden the scope of their own particular lives. 

What these young men and women accomplished there, they 

did have a sense of accomplishment. 

 

They worked very closely with their peers. It was an 

experience. And dealing with the cadets at that time, it was an 

experience that was a lifelong experience for them. They made 

friendships that would last a lifetime. And in the course of the 

program, the six-week program, you saw the camaraderie. You 

saw the cadets working together. You saw how they integrated 

and really stood up for each other. 

 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity there to be confronted by an 

individual. He said, you treat the cadets pretty rough at this 

camp that you have them parading through all hours of the 

evening, up till 10 o’clock at night. And being a new person on 

the camp, I said, I will look into it. And they were right. But I 

talked to my staff and they said, come and look at this. We had 

a drill team that comprised of approximately 50 people, and out 

of 310 cadets we had 300 that volunteered for that drill team. 

And that meant that every night they were out on the parade 

square practicing because they wanted to be part of the drill 

team. It sure wasn’t directed by us. 

 

We had parades on Saturday morning, and parade positions 

were quite sought after. And again these 310 cadets, I think we 

had 290 of them tried out for the parade positions. That meant 

that they were working late, late evenings to try and make the 

parade positions. So I went back to this mother and I said, you 

know, you were right. They do work late at night, but it’s at 

their own choosing. They wanted to do that. They wanted to be 

part of a team. They wanted to be part of an organization where 

they could display their skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of programs within the cadet 

organization that I think we are all just so extremely proud of. 

We look at, from the navy side, the sailing that’s available. 

From the army side there’s mountaineering, there’s abseiling. 

There’s a number of programs that the cadets can aspire to. On 

the air side we look at flying scholarships, we look at gliding 

scholarships. And these are very high-value courses that are 

much sought after, and I can assure everyone that the 

competition for these is extremely keen and it’s extremely 

tough because we have so many great cadets in the 

organization. 

 

Just as a side note to the cadets, in my first tour on the 

Snowbirds as a solo pilot, out of nine pilots — the 1 to 9 pilots 

— we had three of those pilots that had their start in the cadets, 

and they would attribute their success to the cadet program. 

When I had the opportunity to go back as the team lead, lo and 

behold, once again, three of our 1 to 9 pilots had their start in 

the cadet organization. So I think that leaves it open for cadets 

to look at the sky is the limit. Make your choosing and go for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation honours the more than a century of 

service by the cadet corps. The young men and women who 

belong to the air, army, and navy sea cadets are a testament to 

the integrity and character of the next generation. Through the 

cadet organization, society is investing in today’s youth, as well 

as Saskatchewan and Canada’s future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the declaration that we have 

put forward in the Bill and the declaration reads: 

 

The first Saturday in November in each year is declared to 

be Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition 

Day in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

move second reading of The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League 

Cadets Recognition Day Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Wood River has moved 

that Bill No. 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at this time, I’d really like to just join in and offer 

some comments on behalf of the opposition on the Bill that’s 

before us today, No. 601, the Air, Army, Sea and Navy League 

Cadets in Saskatchewan, and really ends with the declaration 

that the member opposite just read into the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s any doubt that cadets have 

and continue to have a huge impact on young people right 

across the province of Saskatchewan. And I would just like to 

repeat that that’s one of the things that has hit home for me, and 

especially today when we look at the number of cadets that are 

here and the organizations that are represented, and we look at 

the list of cadets that was given to each of us to see the 

communities that they represent right across Saskatchewan. 

That’s important. 

 

It’s not always easy to accomplish, but it’s important when we 

see that these are organizations that pay particular attention to 

young people right across Saskatchewan and provide some very 

important opportunities. One part of the Bill that the member 

referred to, speaking to the organization helps young women 

and men to develop self-confidence, self-esteem, and teamwork 

that encourages them to become active, responsible members of 

their communities. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, in attending events with cadets in 

Moose Jaw a number of times, when you see the cadets, each 

session they progress. And I’ve actually seen those words in 

action. I’ve seen cadets that have been struggling to keep up 

with all of the commands that are coming out and looking a 

little bit awkward, but within a very short period of time you 

can see the confidence build in those cadets. You can see their 

self-esteem. You can see the camaraderie that the member 

spoke about. It’s truly visible. 

 

Well this organization, the cadet organization across the 

province has a huge impact. We also will see cadets growing, 

but we also see proud parents and grandparents in the audience 

that take a great deal of pride in coming to see their family 

member and how cadets have benefited them. 

 

I’d also like to pass along a huge thank you to the instructors, 

the Canadian Forces personnel that are involved — sometimes 

more than part-time — with cadets in their community, and also 

the league and the league administrators and instructors and 

directors that spend countless hours travelling from community 

to community across our province and give so much to these 

young people in the work that they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very nice day to see this Bill being tabled 

and to have the House unanimous and being able to move the 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

Bill forward today. And, Mr. Speaker, when you’ve seen the 

cadets in action and when you hear their core values and 

principles, we know that not only the cadets benefit from this 

organization, but our families benefit, our communities benefit, 

our province benefits, and also the country of Canada benefits. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to also enter into this debate — that we are about to 

have a unanimous vote in support of Bill 601 — with just a few 

comments, if I may, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to again welcome the cadets who have 

joined us today. Through you, through the Chair, a welcome to 

all of them and the cadet leaders and others who have joined us 

for this very special day. 

 

The service that we held this morning in this legislature, aided 

by our public service and public sector unions, our service of 

remembrance that is an annual service here was enhanced today 

by the third-floor presence of so very many cadets along the 

rail, and then at the laying of the wreath at the memorial here on 

the legislative grounds. What an honour it was to have an 

honour guard — that great line of cadets who were there to 

make the wreath laying and that moment even more special. So 

we say to them, thank you very, very much. 

 

I have a few comments to make on cadets in general and on this 

Bill, but I’d be remiss if I didn’t first begin by saying, Mr. 

Speaker, in acknowledging the support of the opposition and 

thanking the hon. member for Riversdale, the Leader of the 

Opposition, and through him his party, his members for making 

this day happen and agreeing to unanimous support. I think it’s 

obviously appreciated and so we want to say for the record, 

thank you for that. 

 

And I would also be remiss if I didn’t open up by 

acknowledging that gentleman, that hon. member who really 

brought forward this initiative, the hon. member for Wood 

River. Modesty would prevent him from saying a lot of the 

things that I will share with you very briefly about his bio. But 

it is important I think that we in this room, including the cadets 

who’ve gathered, know a little bit more about the member for 

Wood River who has sponsored this Bill. 

 

By the way, this Bill will be unique in the country — the only 

one like it as far as we know in all of Canada to honour cadets, 

to set aside a day to honour cadets in the cadet program. That’s 

the pioneering work of the member for Wood River. 

 

He was enrolled in the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1961, 

selected for pilot training, received his wings in 1968, posted to 

421 Strike Attack Squadron in Germany, served as a member of 

the embassy staff in Washington, DC [District of Columbia] to 

consult with the United States on the newly acquired CF-18 or 

F-18 Hornet. 

 

And if you can ever manage the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and 

to all members of this House, if you can encourage the member 

for Wood River to share with you some of the stories around 

either his time in Germany or especially this time when the 

country — the Trudeau administration — was purchasing F-18s 

for our air force and we were trying to make sure they were 

suitable for our needs, and that the transaction proceeded 

smoothly, he has some great stories to tell. I think enough time 

has lapsed, he probably can . . . I think most of them are 

declassified and they’re all pretty entertaining actually, as well. 

 

He is most well known of course as a team leader for the 

Snowbirds — very well known across this province. And we as 

his colleagues hear about that all the time. 

 

And in 1987, Her Excellency Jeanne Sauvé invested him in the 

Order of Military Merit for exceptional service with the 

Canadian Forces. And we’ve also heard him detail himself his 

own involvement — very direct involvement — in cadets. 

 

And so again I say to the hon. member, on behalf of this House 

and cadets who are here, cadets of the future, the cadet leaders, 

we say thank you for your service to the country and your 

dedication to cadets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The member for Wood River is just one 

example of people who are involved in public life, different 

vocations and avocations, who can trace some of the things that 

they learned and the reasons for their success later in life to 

cadets. 

 

His Honour Dr. Gordon Barnhart, as you will know, Mr. 

Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor is very proud of the fact that 

he was a Saskatchewan air cadet. And we had a chance to talk 

today as we walked to the memorial about his time in Saltcoats 

and his participation in remembrance services as an air cadet. 

 

The hon. member for Cannington, our Minister of Government 

Services, was a proud member of the 675 Air Cadet Squadron 

in Oxbow. These individuals of course have become involved 

very much in public life and have carried on this spirit of 

service that, if you asked them, they would learn in part 

certainly from cadets. 

 

Back in June, I attended a banquet honouring 19 young men 

and women at 605 Tarry Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron 

in my hometown of Swift Current. The squadron has been in 

continuous operation, Mr. Speaker, for 53 years — 53 years and 

extremely active still in our community. I was there and had a 

chance to meet Major Garton, Major Pete Garton. We had a 

chance to sit together at the head table, and I want to tell the 

member for Wood River that it is his misfortune that Major 

Garton was prepared to share some stories about him, and they 

will come out in due course, Mr. Speaker. There are a lot of 

stories, and he has a lot of anecdotal evidence, does Major 

Garton. And we also want to acknowledge and thank him for 

his leadership in the cadet program. 

 

He points out that while he was a flying instructor at Portage la 

Prairie and Moose Jaw, he would ask every flying course that 

came through how many of them had been through cadets. And 

half the class, he says, would inevitably, about half, raise their 

hands. 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

There are many famous cadets from our province who’ve gone 

on to amazing things. Captain Mike Jellinek . . . And this comes 

from Major Garton. Captain Mike Jellinek from Estevan — 

there you go, Beau — was the officer in charge at the NORAD 

[North American Aerospace Defence Command] command 

centre on the September 11, 2001, if you can imagine the 

weight of the duties that he faced that day. And I’m sure drew 

again on the principles and the things that he learned as a result 

of the cadet program. 

 

So we say to the young women and men who have joined us 

today, we congratulate you on your involvement in cadets. And 

we encourage that it would continue, and we would encourage 

that you would take all these things you are learning in cadets 

and apply them as you get older, because they will not let you 

down. 

 

We are very honoured to rise today in support of Bill 601. As 

has been pointed out, the Bill quote: “. . . recognizes, honours, 

salutes, and celebrates the tremendous contribution of Air, 

Army, Sea, and Navy League Cadets in the province of 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Aristotle said, Mr. Speaker, that “In the arena of life the 

honours and rewards fall to those who show their good qualities 

in action” — not have those good qualities, but show them and 

demonstrate them in action. And it strikes me and all of us here 

today that that is precisely what cadets are all about. I want to 

again acknowledge everyone who has joined us today and close 

with the comments today made today by Cadet Warrant Officer 

First Class Ashley Clark of the 34 Royal Canadian Air Cadet 

Squadron. She, I think, said it all when she said: 

 

Provincial Cadet Day will give the public a chance to 

recognize the hard work and dedication of all of those 

involved in the cadet organization. 

 

This day will give the cadets an opportunity to be seen as 

a positive influence on today’s society. 

 

Congratulations to Ashley and all her fellow cadets for their 

involvement and their participation here today. We look 

forward to the Royal Assent of Bill 601. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member for Wood River that Bill No. 

601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition 

Day Act. be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate that 

Bill 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act be referred to the Committee of the Whole 

and request leave for the said Bill to be considered in 

Committee of the Whole immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee of 

the Whole and the member from Wood River has requested 

leave for Bill No. 601, the air, army, sea and navy league to be 

considered in the Committee of the Whole immediately. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 

go into Committee of the Whole. 

 

[11:15] 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act 
 

The Chair: — The item for business before the committee is 

Bill 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act. Clause 1, therefore the short title, The Air, 

Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act. Is 

clause 1 agreed? 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.] 

 

[Preamble agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

enacts as following: An Act to Recognize the Air, Army, Sea and 

Navy League Cadets in Saskatchewan. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It is moved by the member from Wood River 

that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard November 6, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League 

Cadets Recognition Day Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When will this Bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this 

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Wood River has requested 

leave for Bill No. 601, the air, army, sea and navy league be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Wood River. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from Wood 

River that Bill No. 601, The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League 

Cadets Recognition Day Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I just want to remind the House 

that His Honour is here to approve the Bill. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 11:22 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed a Bill which in the 

name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which 

Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bill is as follows: 

 

Bill No. 601 -  The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets 

Recognition Day Act. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:23.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the 

answers to question 87 through 92. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 87 through 92 tabled. I recognize 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to seek leave of the 

Assembly to move a motion of leave of absence. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to move a 

motion of absence. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence for Member 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Therefore by leave of 

the Assembly, I would move: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres for Monday, November 3 to 

Wednesday, November 5 inclusive to attend the annual 

meeting of the Partnership of Parliaments in Myrtle 

Beach, South Carolina on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved, by 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres from Monday, November 3 to 

Wednesday, November 5 inclusive to attend the annual 

meeting of the Partnership of Parliaments in Myrtle 

Beach, South Carolina on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the members to participate in the rest of the cadet 

recognition program, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until Wednesday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:26.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1607 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1607 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1607 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1607 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1608 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembrance Day 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 

 Honouring Canadian Cadet Corps 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1609 

 2008 Prince Albert Women of Distinction 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 

 Sale of Agricultural Crown Lands 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 

 Wings Over Wascana Festival Receives Award 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1610 

 Implementation of Summit Recommendations 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1610 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1610 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1610 

 Support for Seniors 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1612 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1612 

 Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1614 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1614 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1614 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1615 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1616 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act ................................................................ 1619 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 601 — The Air, Army, Sea and Navy League Cadets Recognition Day Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1620 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence for Member 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


