




















































Hansard: April 03, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 20A  THURSDAY, APRIL 3, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 565 

 April 3, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, it’s a pleasure to 

introduce some very special guests that have joined us in your 

gallery. I’d like to introduce to my colleagues here in the 

Assembly young Brandon Malcolm. Brandon, if you’d stand 

and give us a wave maybe, please. His mom, Tracy Malcolm, is 

joining him and his grandma, Dianne Holo, is also here. And 

Jennifer Johnson from our office is also accompanying them in 

the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brandon is an amazing seven-year-old who cares 

so much about the environment that he has set an example that 

many of us who are many times older than he is will not be able 

to meet, I fear. He’s been picking up garbage and recycling for 

more than a year now, Mr. Speaker. He takes bags with him to 

school to clean up his schoolyard and he spends hours 

wandering around his neighbourhood picking up the garbage 

and the bottles, even though he’s not yet allowed to cross the 

street on his own yet. 

 

He also has encouraged his family to recycle more at home. 

Brandon says cleaning up the city is not something he was 

taught; he just rather knows that it’s something that he wants to 

do. Recently Brandon’s mom, Tracy, entered him into the 

Sunlight Eco-Action Kids contest. That’s a national contest for 

environmentally friendly kids. Brandon was one of 18 of 200 

finalists, of 250 entries. He didn’t capture the grand prize. I 

think I’m a little biased, but I think he should have. But he 

didn’t capture the grand prize, but it has not slowed his efforts 

at all. 

 

Over the past year Brandon has saved more than $400 by 

turning in bottles and cans. He donates the money to kids’ 

charities like the donation collection jars at Tim Hortons, for 

example. And one of the things he wants to do with the money 

he’s raised is to buy extra garbage cans for his neighbourhood. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the new government I 

think is going to help with that a little bit today if we can. 

 

There are sure to be more great things that we’ll all expect from 

this young environmentalist. 

 

And if I may, young Brandon’s also a published author, and 

he’s published a book called How to Clean the Earth. And if I 

can just share with hon. members his conclusions. The first step 

is to never litter. The second step is to recycle. The third step is 

to always shut the light off when you’re leaving a room. The 

fourth is always shut down your computer when you’re not 

using it — something I think I could do a little better job of, 

frankly, Mr. Speaker. Take a bath instead of a shower. Open 

your blinds in winter and close them in the summer. Use 

rechargeable batteries. Walk or ride a bike, but don’t always 

drive a car. Use reusable bags for grocery shopping. Drive only 

a small car — I say to the member for Kindersley. And finally, 

use cold water instead of warm or hot water when you’re doing 

the laundry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and to all members of the House, a young 

environmental hero, Brandon Malcolm.  

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through 

you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to once 

again introduce a group from Milestone. But I want to clarify it 

as a different group today than it was yesterday. It’s a group of 

grade 4’s from the school in Milestone. There are 17 grade 4’s 

in the gallery today. Their teacher is Mary-Jo Steve — hello, 

Mary-Jo — and chaperones, Jamie Schmidt and Denise Nagy. 

 

I’ll certainly be having an opportunity to visit with them after, I 

believe, question period and explain the goings on of this 

House, and certainly glad to see them. It seems to be a very 

popular time in spring sittings that a number of the school 

groups get to come to visit their Legislative Assembly. So I’d 

like all members to welcome them again to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview.  

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I wish to present 

several pages of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on 

behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning 

the withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and 

the withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon, Cut Knife, 

Lloydminster, Davidson. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition on behalf of Moose Jaw residents that will help to 

improve health services in our city and in the surrounding area 

and our health district of Five Hills. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this on behalf of Moose Jaw residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

that has been signed by a number of residents in the city of 

Saskatoon, where they are petitioning the Legislative Assembly 

to cause the government to immediately restore funding to the 

Station 20 project in the city of Saskatoon. This is signed by a 

number of residents that live throughout Saskatoon. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petition 

for a private Bill has been reviewed, found to be in order, and is 

read and received of Caronport schools of the province of 

Saskatchewan praying for An Act to amend The Caronport 

Schools Act.  

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association Nomination 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, recently nominated for the 

best performance by a Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Association is Nipawin-born actress Shannon Jardine. The 

awards ceremony will be held today at the 2008 Showcase Gala 

in Regina. 

 

Shannon has been on several episodes of Corner Gas, The 

Englishman’s Boy, Little Mosque on the Prairie, The Velvet 

Devil, Moccasin Flats, The Delicate Art of Parking, and 

Jeremiah.  

 

On top of acting, she also writes. Prairie Threat Entertainment 

Inc., her production company, is in the process of developing a 

half-hour TV series as well as a miniseries. Shannon is also 

anticipating the release of a big screen feature, Surveillance, in 

which she is proud to be performing all of her own stunts. 

 

Shannon has won many awards over the years, some of which 

include the Most Outstanding Performance People’s Choice 

Award from the Theatre BC North Shore Zone, Most Promising 

Actor from the Saskatchewan Drama Association, Best Female 

Performer at the Victoria Fringe Audience Awards, just to name 

a few. Mr. Speaker, we look forward to seeing much more of 

Shannon in the upcoming years. Her hard work and passion will 

undoubtedly continue to make her very successful. 

 

We ask all members to join me in congratulating Shannon 

Jardine on her nomination and past accomplishments, and in 

wishing her well and all the best in her future undertakings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Firm Wins Environmental Leadership Award 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask all 

members to join me in recognizing Jim Finnigan of Digital 

Environmental, Saskatoon, for winning the SEIMA 

[Saskatchewan Environmental Industry and Managers 

Association] award for environmental leadership this year. Jim 

moved to Saskatchewan in 1978 to complete a graduate degree 

in archaeology, and as he says, forgot to go back to Alberta. 

Originally working with the Saskatchewan Research Council, 

Jim created Digital Environmental in 1995, a firm specializing 

in satellite imagery and remote sensing. 

 

Digital Environmental supplies most of the satellite imagery 

used here in Saskatchewan. They have mapped Saskatchewan’s 

forests for forest fire purposes and now they are mapping all of 

Saskatchewan’s pasture land. They have had project support 

from the Canadian and European space agencies and will be one 

of the first recipients of RADARSAT-2 data this summer. In the 

past, Digital, they have brought delegations from China, Israel, 

Nigeria, and Poland to work in this province and they are 

currently doing a research project on rice fields in the 

Philippines. 

 

Digital Environmental have offices in Alberta and Manitoba, 

with plans to expand into northwestern Ontario, but their head 

office remains in Saskatoon. 

 

Now Jim has worked hard to grow SEIMA. He continues to 

serve on the executive and is a supporter of SEIMA’s efforts in 

promoting innovation and expertise, and many of us may have 

met him last night at their reception. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Jim 

and all the folks at Digital in Saskatoon. I wish them the very 

best. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Swift Current Team in Western Hockey League Playoffs 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the second round 

of the WHL [Western Hockey League] playoffs are set to begin 

this weekend and there remains only one Saskatchewan team 

that is left in the playoffs. That’s of course the Swift Current 

Broncos. The smallest market to have an actual CHL [Canadian 

Hockey League] team is in Swift Current. The Broncos won 

what many described as one of the most exciting first-round 

series of the playoffs, beating the Regina Pats in six games. 

Bronco fans were there to support their team in full force, 

selling out the newly expanded Credit Union iplex in Swift 

Current and loading up fan buses for the road games here in 

Regina. 

 

Regarded as one of the most balanced teams in the league, with 

eight 20-goal scorers in the regular season led by the likes of 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

team MVP [most valuable player] Zack Smith, Levi Nelson, 

and Erik Felde, a solid defensive core featuring Michael Wilson 

and Eric Doyle, and the stellar goaltending of netminder Travis 

Yonkman, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos are now set to take on the 

Hitmen for game one on Friday night in Swift Current. 

 

Things are looking very good in Bronco land and we know that 

WHL fans who would normally cheer for their teams in other 

Saskatchewan centres will want to join the Bronco bandwagon 

and cheer for the Swift Current Broncos as they continue 

through the playoffs. 

 

Congratulations to the head coach and GM [general manager], 

Dean Chynoweth; the assistant coach, Tim Kehler; assistant 

general manager, Elden Moberg; the board of directors, the staff 

who make Bronco hockey possible in Swift Current, everyone 

in the front office, the scouts, the volunteers; the play-by-play 

team, Jon Keen and Ryan Switzer. And good luck to the 

Broncos the rest of the way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

National Poetry Month 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April each year is 

National Poetry Month, and tonight the Saskatchewan Writers 

Guild, along with a number of others, at the special invitation of 

the Lieutenant Governor, are having a special poetry reading at 

Government House. All people are invited. It’s at 8 o’clock. 

 

The poets who will be reading tonight will be the Poet Laureate 

of Saskatchewan, Robert Currie, as well as poet Tom Wayman 

from British Columbia. The Lieutenant Governor will read a 

poem. And late flash has it that Councillor Clipsham from 

Regina will also be reading a poem. I encourage all members to 

be part of this event. 

 

Robert Currie, our Poet Laureate, has been a writer and poet in 

Saskatchewan for a long time. And I would just like to take this 

chance to read another Saskatchewan poem. This one’s called 

“Intimations.” 

 

Striving to make them sense 

their own mortality 

I gripped the shrunken head, 

a rubber toy but grisly, 

addressed it as Yorick, 

and no gorge rose. 

But after class 

one boy shied towards me: 

“I was just wonderin if . . . well . . . 

Howdja like a real skull for that part?” 

Trying not to think 

of what was left headless 

I seized upon his offer. 

Now when Hamlet holds 

the jester’s skull, 

the classroom grows 

quiet as the grave. 

They see the end, 

and cannot laugh at that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Poetry Month. I encourage everybody to 

buy a book of Saskatchewan poetry. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Wadena Hockey Team Wins Provincial Championship 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Michael Jordan is quoted as saying: “Talent wins games, but 

teamwork and intelligence wins championships.” The Wadena 

Wildcat Midgets have learned the validity of this statement. For 

the final game the Wadena rink was packed with over 1,000 

fans who came to witness this team maintain its one-goal lead 

against Balcarres and win the provincial championship. The 

men’s bonspiel even closed down in order for the curlers to 

watch the game. 

 

Coach Leach told The Wadena News that part of the success 

was a result of the team’s desire and ability to support one 

another. He said, “Right from the beginning the team’s unity 

was something to watch. The players were always looking out 

for each other and really enjoyed playing together.” 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these boys didn’t just come from one town. They 

represent Wadena, Elfros, Invermay, Kelvington, Porcupine 

Plain, Weekes, and Gordon First Nation. 

 

To develop this unity and togetherness is an attribute not only to 

the players but to coach Lyle Leach, assistant coach Roley 

Rumbold, and manager Brian Helberg. 

 

The road to the championship started with a two-game total 

point victory over Wynyard, followed by another victory over 

Wilkie and a final one-goal victory over Balcarres. 

 

I ask members to join with me in congratulating the 2008 

Wadena Wildcat provincial champions: James Nakrayko, Evan 

Ericson, D’Neil Korolchuk, Jordan Weinhandl, Taylor German, 

Shelby Gray, Ben Stasiuk, Travis Grisdale, Aaron Ostapowich, 

Devin Helberg, Cole Rothlander, Josiah Lumsden, Scott 

Lorenzen, Earl Bohachewski, Drew Ross, Dean Stephanyshen, 

Derek Leach, and Matt Warburton. 

 

Congratulations to all of you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Fantasy Food Charity Gala 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on March 29 it was 

definitely my pleasure to attend the seventh annual Fantasy 

Food Charity Gala event. This event is a gourmet tasting event 

involving over 30 fine food vendors of wine, spirits, and brew 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

in conjunction with a silent and live auction. Proceeds from this 

event go to the Saskatchewan Science Centre as well as its 

discovery fund, EYES, educating youth in engineering sciences, 

and the Ehrlo sport venture program supporting the outdoor 

hockey league. 

 

I want to extend thanks to all those who attended this fantastic 

event and participated in the live and silent auctions. 

 

Special thanks to event sponsors, Tyler and Associates 

Financial, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], 

Co-operators, the Leader-Post, DirectWest, Z99, Casino 

Regina, Solvera, the University of Regina, HSBC, Western 

Litho Printers, Delta Regina, as well as participating sponsors, 

Culligan, IPSCO, CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] of Saskatchewan, and Mitchell Developments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I request all members within this Assembly to join 

with me in extending thanks to the organizers, volunteers, 

participants, and donors that made this a wonderful evening and 

successful event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Good News for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. More 

good news for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more evidence that Saskatchewan’s 

economic momentum is here to stay. This morning RBC [Royal 

Bank of Canada] released its provincial outlook for all 10 

Canadian provinces. RBC called Saskatchewan the new 

provincial growth leader. They projected Saskatchewan will 

lead the nation in economic growth in 2008 and 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — But that’s not all. RBC says 

Saskatchewan will be the only province in Canada to see an 

increase in housing starts in 2008. We will lead Canada 

employment growth in 2008. We will lead Canada in disposable 

income growth. We will lead Canada in retail sales growth in 

2008 and 2009. Simply put, Saskatchewan is the new economic 

star in the nation, and Saskatchewan’s people are enjoying the 

benefits of this tremendous growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems fitting that this report comes out on the 

same day that we will vote on the first Saskatchewan Party 

budget. The RBC forecast shows that Saskatchewan’s economic 

growth is here to stay. And I will be pleased to support a budget 

that ensures Saskatchewan is ready for growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Drug Plan Administration 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister didn’t 

know the cost of administering his plan to take away drug 

benefits from seniors. But thanks to The StarPhoenix, we now 

know the plan will cost the province at least a half a million 

dollars and could cost as much as $700,000 in administrative 

costs this year alone. The ongoing administrative costs will be 

over 100,000 a year, and additional funds will likely be needed 

for advertising. That’s a whole lot of cash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Through you, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: is the 

minister so caught up in his political posturing that he would 

rather spend half a million dollars or more on administrative 

costs instead of helping all seniors get the drugs they need? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, a campaign commitment made, a campaign 

commitment kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We campaigned on the issue. In fact 

this whole issue started last year when the government 

introduced the drug plan, and at that time we talked about we 

should maybe look at some income testing. We looked at it 

further and said, if we income tested, we would drop about 

6,700 seniors off the drug plan. But what we would add, who 

we would add benefits to are about 110,300 young citizens of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. And it was a trade-off that we 

thought would be a good trade-off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to the implementation of 

this plan in July 1. We do know that it costs some money to go 

through the start-up, initial start-up, and certainly we are willing 

to bear that cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers will be 

bearing that cost. 

 

After last year’s budget, you couldn’t swing a dead cat in the 

rotunda here without hitting a Sask Party MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] who was blathering on about the 

unsustainability of the seniors’ drug plan. Just a year later, those 

same MLAs introduce a budget that includes a seniors’ drug 

plan, a children’s drug plan, an administrative cost that total 

over a half a million dollars this year alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if the plan was unsustainable 

before and the minister has since added coverage to children 

under 14 and tacked on some administrative costs, how can the 

minister believe it is sustainable now? Is it just because it’s his 

plan? 

 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I find it just really passingly curious that that member 

would stand in the House and criticize the party that is moving 

some money from a senior drug plan and covering kids under 

14 at an administration cost of, a start-up of about $400,000 in 

the first year, when that government, when they were in 

government and trying to regain government ran on a drug plan 

that was going to cost the taxpayers of this province $250 

million a year, about $1 billion over the four years. And she has 

the nerve to stand in this House and complain about a $400,000 

first-time, one-time administration fee to provide benefits to 

over 110,000 youths in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister hasn’t learned that he doesn’t refer 

to me as she. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the minister has said 

the government plans to means testing, or to extend the benefits 

to all children under 14. So much for not picking winners and 

losers. With the Sask Party in charge, seniors need to prove they 

deserve help. But families with children — no matter how much 

they make, even if they make as much as the Sask Party chief of 

staff — don’t have to prove a thing. 

 

The minister has acknowledged to reporters that this is an 

inconsistency but seems perfectly willing to let it be. We’re 

hearing now that some seniors have missed the magic cut-off by 

$1. To the minister, why is he targeting seniors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, well over, well over 90 

per cent, 97 per cent of seniors will be able to receive the 

benefit of the $15 prescription fee. Seniors that are over that 

64,000 threshold are still eligible for the 3.4 special drug status 

where if their drugs are over that certain amount of 3.4 per cent 

of their income, they’ll be covered, Mr. Speaker. So they’re not 

left out in the cold as that member would say. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s again interesting that they would call 

claim and cry foul about a $400,000 one-time administration 

fee when just months before the last previous election when 

their political hopes were not looking very positive, that they 

could find $1 million to advertise a health care system that was 

in trouble, Mr. Speaker, that was in trouble — $1 million of 

unbudgeted money to try and prop up their political interests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Lakeview. 

 

Nurses’ Contract Negotiations 

 

Ms. Junor: — Eastview, but thank you. Mr. Speaker, according 

to media reports, SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] and SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 

exchanged full proposal packages following a meeting with the 

conciliator yesterday, Wednesday. The SAHO president and 

CEO [chief executive officer], Susan Antosh, called the 

exchange of packages a positive result. Obviously the minister 

cannot discuss specifics, but hopefully he can provide the 

public with some degree of confidence that things are 

progressing in a constructive manner. 

 

To the minister: is the minister as confident as SAHO that 

negotiations are moving in a positive direction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that the negotiation process is working its way through. There 

are going to be high times and low times, certainly, through that 

negotiation period. There are going to be times where the 

parties agree on issues. There’s going to be times when they 

disagree. It is not the job of this minister or our government to 

interject into that. I’m certainly glad that they have been 

working together through the conciliator and finding some 

common ground, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I do want to refer back to $1 million spent on 

propping up that former government’s hopes in health care. It 

was dashed. In four short months, not only have we signed a 

partnership with nurses; we’ve attracted nurses from around the 

world to this province. And there’s more to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is quite 

proud of his MOU [memorandum of understanding] . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Junor: — Despite the minister not knowing the cost of the 

MOU or what the SUN-RHA [regional health authority] fund 

will be used for. The minister has called the agreement historic. 

He has argued the MOU is an asset to the bargaining process, 

that he’s not inserted himself into, and that it will help smooth 

relations with nurses. 

 

To the Minister of Health: does the minister have any indication 

yet that the MOU is contributing in a positive manner to the 

progress of negotiations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

partnership agreement that was signed by the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses and our government is an agreement that, 

certainly, that government could never reach. That government 

had worked for years to try and find a partnership. In fact we 

have copies of the recent, the most recent partnership that that 

opposition tried to reach when it was in government, and it 

couldn’t get it done, Mr. Speaker. In four months, we got it 

done. 

 

Certainly there’s work to be done on the partnership; it is a 

memorandum of understanding, and that work I am pleased to 

say will start on Monday morning when Marilyn Smadu brings 

both sides together and starts working on the terms and 

references of that partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think Dr. Smadu’s 

first name is Marlene, so we might as well get that right before 

we start the meetings. The minister is obviously very proud of 

his MOU. I understand that there’s cost involved, that SAHO 

has suggested that are $1.2 billion. And I know the minister has 

asserted in supplementary estimates that he’s not inserting 

himself into the bargaining process, but he has said that this 

MOU is someway supposed to smooth the bargaining process. I 

want to hear from him that he thinks that it is doing that as of 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I do want to correct what I said as far 

as the naming Dr. Smadu; it is Marlene Smadu, and I do 

apologize for that. I will give her credit for that. But I do want 

to talk about the partnership and the great work that it will 

create. We certainly know that over the last number of years the 

money that was spent and the energy that was spent by the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses to rail against the government 

that just didn’t listen. 

 

That government had 16 years to listen. They had an all-star 

candidate run in Saskatoon from the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses that was supposed to go into government. She was in as 

associate deputy minister; that was to carry the message. She 

didn’t get it done, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses have been frustrated for years with the lack of 

attention, the lack of concern, the lack of compassion, by the 

former NDP [New Democratic Party] government. Mr. 

Speaker, we have lots of work to do, absolutely, with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and I’m proud to say it starts 

Monday morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this House is often the site of 

frank debate and fierce disagreements, but one place we share 

common ground is in our understanding of how poorly the 

Minister of Advanced Education has been in communicating his 

actions and the actions of his government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Broten: — We know what members of the press gallery 

think. We know that the minister himself admitted a few weeks 

ago that, quote, “I could have been more informative.” And we 

know that the Premier is disappointed in his minister. 

According to an email I have here, even the government’s own 

executive director of communications isn’t impressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’ll get no disagreement from this side of the 

House, but here’s the minister’s chance to redeem himself. To 

the minister: what communications took place between 

members of his government and stakeholders about essential 

services legislation prior to Bills 5 and 6 coming to this 

Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question. What we did, Mr. Speaker, is obviously we sat down. 

We said that we would table the legislation. From there we 

would move forward with stakeholder consultations, Mr. 

Speaker. We advertised in nearly 100 newspapers across the 

province. We sent out 84 letters inviting feedback, Mr. Speaker. 

We had meetings with nearly 100 people — either myself or the 

deputy minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those stakeholder consultations were very informative, Mr. 

Speaker. What they’ve allowed us to do is offer that we’ll be 

moving forward with amendments on the essential service 

piece, Mr. Speaker. Because the key question, Mr. Speaker, is 

that when the people of Saskatchewan turn and say, why is 

Saskatchewan the only province not to have in place or have 

tabled an essential service Bill, the answer looms over on the 

other side — because they would not move forward on such a 

bold piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is where the future is. It’s balancing the right 

to strike with public safety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it seems like he’s pretty selective 

about who he talks to. When the minister was first confronted 

with evidence that consultations did take place, he feigned 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

ignorance. Days later he declined to give any real answers to 

reporters until he had a chance to speak with Bonny Braden, the 

Premier’s communications adviser who waded into this debate 

by acting inappropriately. 

 

When asked if Ms. Braden’s contact with the president of the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] during the middle of the 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] strike raised any 

concerns or issues, the minister said to reporters, quote, “It 

certainly does, and it’s something I plan on addressing in the 

coming days.” 

 

Well it’s been two weeks, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell us 

what discipline, if any, has been given to Ms. Braden? And can 

you tell us what other actions he has taken to cover for their 

missteps? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, what is amazing 

is that the member opposite fails to begin to understand the 

significance of the essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

That is, during the recent strike at the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, the CUPE strike, 

nearly 400 people per day were being turned away from 

medical assistance, Mr. Speaker. The key question is, how do 

you come up with a system that ensures that people . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was just 

saying, the key question is, how do you ensure that the people 

of this province are able to have public safety and security 

during labour disruptions? The answer is, we can look across 

Canada. We can see other provinces and what they’ve done — 

and that is establish essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what we’re moving forward on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the key question, Mr. Speaker, is, will the members 

opposite be voting for that piece of legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the nonsensical ramblings of the 

Minister of Advanced Education have sadly become the best we 

can expect. He and whoever is advising him still don’t 

understand how problematic the government’s communications 

with President MacKinnon really were. 

 

Let’s recap. Problem number one, the discussions were 

one-sided, only occurring with fans of the legislation. Problem 

number two, discussions took place smack dab in the middle of 

a labour dispute. Apparently their quiet diplomacy wasn’t so 

quiet. Problem number three quite simply is that the revelation 

flew in the face of government claims not to have consulted 

with anyone. 

 

To the minister: why on earth was Bonny Braden in contact 

with President MacKinnon about essential services right while 

he was in the middle of a labour dispute, and why was Bonny 

Braden lining up support for a Bill which the government 

claims wasn’t even written yet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the key 

questions is, I’m not certain what the member opposite has 

against President Peter MacKinnon. And I guess because . . . 

The reason I say that is, Mr. Speaker, is that because President 

MacKinnon is on the record that he was not consulted regarding 

any of the substance of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. He is on 

the record, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. Speaker, we go back and 

ask the question . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

establish a broader dialogue, Mr. Speaker, what I did is, in 

weeks past I invited the member opposite for lunch. And that 

lunch occurred last week. That way we could establish a 

dialogue relating to students, student funding, student housing, 

and, Mr. Speaker, instead of addressing the key questions that 

were raised during that lunch, Mr. Speaker, he continues to go 

back to an issue that’s already been addressed on the public 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The key question, Mr. Speaker, it relates to the key question, 

why is Saskatchewan the only province not to have essential 

service legislation either in place or tabled? And, Mr. Speaker, 

the key question is, will you be supporting the legislation or 

not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, lunch was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Justice will 

come to order. The member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Lunch was just fine, Mr. Speaker, but I felt the 

relationship was just moving a little too quickly for my liking. 

Mr. Speaker, let’s review the timelines here. In the days 

following the CUPE strike, the Minister of Advanced Education 

bragged there had been quiet diplomacy during the strike. 

 

A week later, still before the agreement was ratified, the 

Premier’s staff was in contact with Mr. MacKinnon about 

essential services legislation. Again our problem here is about 

the process. 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to be a high-rolling Saskatchewan 

Party chief of staff or communications officer to know that this 

isn’t right. The minister has had several weeks to mull it over, 

and he’s had time to consult with Ms. Braden. Can he tell this 

House, plain and simple, was it appropriate that Bonny Braden 

allegedly went behind his back and communicated with one 

side of a labour dispute? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak very 

slowly because maybe we were moving too fast. You know, 

sometimes the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, sometimes they 

even go in reverse. But we’ll get to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key premise of the question actually relates to 

legislation, and President Peter MacKinnon is on the public 

record as saying that he was not informed of or attentive to any 

aspect of the legislation. So that’s already on the public record. 

 

The key question, Mr. Speaker, relates to the substance of the 

essential service Bill. What we did is we went forward; we held 

consultations. Again they were quite extensive, Mr. Speaker. As 

I’ve said in this House, we’ll be coming forward with 

amendments on that. 

 

And the key question, Mr. Speaker, as we look across Canada 

— as we look and see that other provinces have essential 

service legislation — then, Mr. Speaker, the key question is, 

what are the members opposite going to do? Are they going to 

vote in favour of the people of Saskatchewan and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, immediately after hearing the Sask Party provincial 

budget, Mayor Fiacco knew what was in store. I can tell the 

citizens of Regina that there will definitely be a property tax 

increase this year — a property tax increase. With more than $1 

billion in the bank, the Sask Party cannot manage to fund 

municipalities to the point that property taxes in Regina will not 

have to be raised. 

 

My question is to the minister: how do you justify sitting on 

such a huge surplus and forcing Regina citizens to pay more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 

couple of essential points that need to be made here. What the 

member opposite fails to remember, and never reminds this 

Assembly, is that the primary reason that there are tax increases 

in this decade is because that former government clawed back 

hundreds of millions of dollars from the revenue-sharing fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Shameful, inappropriate, 

disrespectful to municipalities in the extreme, Mr. Speaker. In 

Regina’s case alone, $100 million was clawed back by that 

former government over the decade. Not just over one or two or 

three years, Mr. Speaker — it went on for an entire 10 years. 

That’s the reason we’re looking at property tax increases today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Donna Brothwell, the 

manager of the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce, also made a 

prediction for her community following the budget. The 7 per 

cent increase going to the city probably isn’t going to be enough 

to not to have to raise local property tax. This is sounding like a 

pattern is developing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Monday, city council in Yorkton introduced their budget, 

and the council was forced to propose a property tax increase 

for Yorkton necessary to offset the shortfall of funding from the 

provincial government. To the minister: how do you justify 

sitting on a huge surplus and forcing Yorkton residents to pay 

more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I expect 

that we’ll hear other similar announcements for preliminary 

budget projections and discussions. The city of Saskatoon came 

out with one in the last 24 hours, I understand. The fact, the fact 

that the hon. member opposite would confuse initial budget 

projection talk with final budgets accepted and passed by city 

councils betrays an unbelievable ignorance of how cities do 

their municipal finances. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that the member may bring little 

if any relevant experience to the role of critic for Municipal 

Affairs, but I do find it astounding that after four months the 

questions are at the basic level that we’re seeing here today. In 

order to avoid future such embarrassment, I suggest the member 

actually get out from Regina, go to visit cities, towns, villages, 

RMs [rural municipality], and northern municipalities, as we 

have and actually find out how these people do their job. 

 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, so here the minister stands 

up and he’s lecturing me as he gives up . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — He stands up and gives an answer. His big 

explanation for underfunding municipalities was going back to 

1991, when over the last five years there’s been a 55 per cent 

increase in municipal revenue sharing in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — And the money that this government is putting 

into the municipalities is less than what they received last year. 

They talk about growing the province, building for growth, but 

they’re stifling any growth that there is and any possibility in 

municipalities. The minister needs to appropriately fund the 

municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised at 

the tone of the question from the member opposite. It’s not my 

habit, it’s not my habit to do, to you know to give lectures, but 

perhaps a tutorial is needed. And if the hon. member would like 

to meet me for lunch, I’d be happy to explain once and for all 

how the business of municipal finance is actually conducted. I 

think we would see a remarkable change in the questions from 

the member opposite. 

 

With respect to revenue sharing, they broke it; we’re fixing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine for the minister to 

stand and be smug and condescending, but that’s inappropriate 

way to treat the municipalities. Mr. Speaker, every municipality 

across this province is being forced to raise property tax to fund 

infrastructure and build communities that are growing. When is 

this province and when is this government going to get off that 

big, fat surplus they’ve got and actually support the 

municipalities that are building this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Smug and 

condescending were the only two words I heard from the 

opposite member before the cackling and the squawking 

drowned out the rest, so I’m just going to have to fill it in as 

best I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 16 years the members opposite were in fact 

smug and condescending. They have defined arrogance. They 

have defined disrespect to the municipalities. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, they broke it. It is our job to fix it. We fully intend to 

do so. And again I’ll offer my . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Will the members come to order. 

 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s difficult for the Speaker — and the 

Clerk is close to the Chair — to hear exactly what the order is 

being called. Special order. 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I am 

very pleased to have an opportunity to participate in this budget 

debate which, I if may say, Mr. Speaker, as one who has 

listened to a number of budget debates, would report that I think 

this has been a very, very good debate. 

 

I have listened, Mr. Speaker, over the course of this debate to 

contributions to the debate made by my colleagues in 

opposition, and I have noted, Mr. Speaker, something which in 

my experience is rather unusual. We have seen in this budget 

debate a number of members of this opposition stand in their 

place and actually recognize components of this budget which 

we believe are good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have not simply stood in our place in opposition and 

criticized this government and this budget. We have in fact 

stood on occasion and recognized components of this budget 

which we believe are good for the people and the communities 

of Saskatchewan. That’s not been the experience we’ve seen in 

the last number of years when the Sask Party was in opposition, 

and that I think, Mr. Speaker, tells you something about the 

difference between our two approaches to governance in this 

province. 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

In fact some in opposition and if I may say, some in the media 

have gone so far as to say that this is almost an NDP budget, 

almost an NDP budget. That’s been observed by members on 

this side of the House and if I may say, it’s been observed by 

members in the media. In fact one of our members just in this 

debate recently said it appeared to him that in fact — I believe 

he was the member from Athabasca — he said it appears that 

the Sask Party has been NDP-ized, NDP-ized, that they came to 

government, didn’t have a lot of plans of their own, and so 

would just adopt the NDP plan. In fact there is some argument 

about that, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this budget. 

 

Those who have supported the Sask Party and those who look 

forward I think for dramatic new initiatives, especially in a 

budget that contains this amount of financial resources, they are 

somewhat disappointed. Those who come from the right 

supported the Sask Party. Because what we have seen in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, is a budget which essentially is last year’s 

budget with more money. And the more money that’s been 

added, of course, was money provided by the former 

government. So we have an NDP budget. We have NDP money 

making this budget even better in some regards for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do want to say there’s one element in this budget that you 

would never have seen in an NDP government, and that’s the 

contribution of $8 million to foster a bureaucracy called 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. You would never have seen that, Mr. 

Speaker, an $8 million ticket item for fostering and paying for 

this bureaucracy which is called Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

So there have been, Mr. Speaker, elements of this budget which 

we have welcomed and in fact which we have applauded. Now 

let me say though, Mr. Speaker, there are — and these again 

have been identified very clearly in the debate — there are 

some very glaring deficiencies within this budget. And in my 

view, Mr. Speaker — and this is the approach that I want to 

take today — this budget fails on three very significant 

questions. It fails on three very significant questions. 

 

The first question is this: does this budget demonstrate a 

government that has the competency to manage the treasury and 

the treasure they have been given? That’s the first question. 

Does this budget demonstrate competence? 

 

Secondly, does this budget demonstrate a government that is 

willing to stand up for the province of Saskatchewan, that’s 

willing to stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan people? 

That’s the second question. 

 

And the third, and the perhaps most important question, Mr. 

Speaker, is this: does this budget, with the mountain of money 

that this government has available to it, does this budget 

provide real and tangible benefit for the families of 

Saskatchewan, real and tangible benefits for the families of 

Saskatchewan? And, Mr. Speaker, does this government share 

that wealth in a fair manner? Does it provide a fair share of the 

wealth for all of the people and all of the communities of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

So those, Mr. Speaker, are the three tests that I want to apply to 

this budget. The first test, does it demonstrate competency in 

the delivery of public services and the collection of large public 

revenues? Does it demonstrate competency in the way this 

government has managed the affairs of the province of the past 

four months? Secondly, does it demonstrate a government that’s 

willing to stand up for the people of Saskatchewan? And thirdly 

and most importantly, does this budget, does this budget 

provide real and tangible benefit from this mountain of money 

that they’ve got? Does it provide real and tangible benefit for 

the people of Saskatchewan and the families of Saskatchewan, 

and does it fairly share the wealth? 

 

On the first question of competency. Now even the most 

partisan member over there, even the member for Moose Jaw 

North can’t deny this fact: no other incoming government in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan has inherited from a 

former government a stronger economy, a better fiscal picture, 

and a larger financial surplus than the Sask Party government 

inherited from the former New Democratic Party government. 

 

It cannot be denied. Everybody knows that, Mr. Speaker. 

Everybody knows that. Even the member from Moose Jaw 

North knows it. He knows it; he can’t deny it. No other 

incoming government has ever inherited a circumstance like 

this SP [Saskatchewan Party] government has inherited from 

the former NDP government. Whether it’s in terms of the 

economy, whether it’s in terms of resource royalty rates and 

prices, whether it’s in terms of 16 straight credit rating 

upgrades, 16 straight balanced budgets, no other government 

has ever inherited this kind of treasury. Everybody knows it; no 

one can deny it. 

 

Now the test, Mr. Speaker, the test is, how will they manage it? 

That’s the test. How will they manage the treasure that’s been 

put in their hands? How will they do it? 

 

Now we all watch with interest, Mr. Speaker. In fact, this was 

brought to my attention by a friend last night just out on the 

street. We all watch with interest how this new government is 

going around trying to take credit for that which they’ve 

inherited. I mean we’ve all seen the Minister of Social Services 

out cutting a ribbon on a housing project, trying to take credit 

for a housing project as if that housing project sprung out of the 

ground in the last three months. 

 

We’ve seen them trying to take credit, Mr. Speaker, for 

population growth, for population growth. As if 16,000 people 

were all standing on the border somewhere just waiting for the 

SPs to take over here. I mean, it’s laughable, Mr. Speaker, 

because they do this. 

 

Get this, Mr. Speaker, get this. I read in this budget document a 

great big commitment from this government, right here in the 

budget document — the critic for Highways knows all about 

this — right in this budget they promised . . . Do you know 

what they’re going to do as a result of this budget? They’re 

going to complete the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. They’re 

going to complete the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. 

 

You know what’s left, Mr. Speaker? I think you know this. But 

you know what’s left? I can’t engage the Speaker, I know. You 

know what’s left, members of the House, in terms of twinning 

of the No. 1 Highway? Well it’s the completion of the 

intersection at Moosomin. I think they have to complete the 

intersection there, maybe put up one or two signs, and the job’s 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

done. 

 

But you mark my words: some of these days, the Premier and 

the Minister of Highways, they’ll get a great big cavalcade 

going. They’ll go down the highway, the flags waving. They’ll 

throw out news releases everywhere they go, and they’ll say, 

look at us. We completed the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. 

Mark my words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the people of Saskatchewan see this government trying 

to take credit for all the good work, well we smile because 

we’re pleased with the inheritance we’ve given. We’re pleased. 

We walked away from government and we have our heads held 

high. But it’s a bit laughable when they try and take credit for 

that which is already in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government has inherited more work 

done, a stronger economy, better resource prices, balanced 

budgets, and if I may say, a treasury that contains $1.3 billion 

— $1.3 billion. A mountain of money. And the test is, the test is 

now, Mr. Speaker, can they manage it? Are they competent to 

manage the treasure that the people of Saskatchewan have given 

them, the treasure they’ve inherited from a former government? 

 

Well now the member from Moose Jaw North says, no 

comment. Well that’s fair because his friends are commenting 

on it. And I’ll have a word to say about that in a moment. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, to date, to date in this four-month 

experience we’ve had of this SP government, to date they have 

demonstrated that little assurance can be given to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they in fact are competent to manage the 

treasure they’ve been given. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, it is hardly competent, it is hardly 

competent when on the night they were sworn in, the very night 

they were sworn in, the Premier of the province steps in front of 

the cameras and says to the people of Saskatchewan with a very 

glum look on his face that the fiscal situation of Saskatchewan 

is stark, he said. Stark, he said. Well you know, right then, right 

there, right across the province of Saskatchewan, people 

scratched their heads. How can this be any sign of competence 

when everybody knows oil’s at $100 a barrel, when everybody 

knows there’s hundreds of millions of dollars in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund? We didn’t quite know how much till we got 

the third quarter. It’s hardly a sign of competence when a newly 

sworn in government and its leader, the Premier, comes in front 

of the people and says, oh but the situation is stark, friends. 

Well not since that night have I heard that word come out of the 

Premier’s lips again. That word seems to have disappeared from 

the vocabulary. It’s gone. 

 

It’s hardly competent, Mr. Speaker, it is hardly competent when 

a government comes to office and then goes around firing 

long-term, non-partisan, valuable, experienced public servants 

— senior public servants who have served this province through 

governments and changes in government, who bring that wealth 

of that experience to their work. This government comes in and 

just starts firing those people. And firing, Mr. Speaker, without 

cause, without cause. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re yet to see what this is going to cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. We’re going to see what this costs 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It’s hardly competent to come 

to government and just rid yourselves of some of the best assets 

in terms of public policy that this province has — hardly 

competent. 

 

It’s hardly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It will only be appropriate for 

members to allow the Leader of the Opposition to place his 

comments without interference. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hardly competent to stand up 

in front of the people of Saskatchewan the night you’re sworn 

in and say, well by the way the fiscal circumstances here is 

stark, and then about the very next day announce to the same 

people of Saskatchewan that, I tell you what, we’re going to 

give our senior political staff in our ministers’ offices these 

great big raises, great big raises. That’s exactly what they did, 

Mr. Speaker. It hardly speaks to competence. 

 

Then we witnessed over the course of these past four months 

and even over the course of this budget debate a minister, a 

part-time Minister of Labour or Minister of Advanced 

Education and Employment and Labour, whatever his title is, 

goes about firing the Labour Relations Board, again without 

cause. Not even a hint of a cause. Right in the middle of a 

Labour Relations Board hearing. Is incapable or will not 

respond to a very simple question — what has happened to the 

30 cases now before the Labour Relations Board? And will not 

respond to the question, how much is this going to cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan? How much will these, these 

ill-advised severances cost the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Is this competence, Mr. Speaker, to destroy the Labour 

Relations Board right in the middle of its work? To interrupt a 

hearing that’s ongoing? To fire the board without cause and 

therefore accept even further expense to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

But even worse, Mr. Speaker, to then take what has been the 

tradition of an open and competitive process to fill the role of 

the Chair of the Labour Relations Board and instead remove 

that open and competitive process and appoint your political 

friend, Mr. Ken Love. And then what, Mr. Speaker? Give him a 

$60,000 increase, a $60,000 increase. How, Mr. Speaker, can 

this be described as the competent management of the public 

purse? How can this be described as the competent management 

of the treasure that they have received? 

 

I tell you it’s hardly competent, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to 

have more to say about this later, but I tell you it’s hardly 

competent when the Minister of Finance goes to the editorial 

board of The StarPhoenix in Saskatoon and says, we are 

shutting down the funding for Station 20 — you know why? — 

because those folks have to raise 12 or $14 million, and they’ve 

only raised 75,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is so completely 

wrong. So completely wrong. How can the Minister of Finance 

be out millions of dollars about a very significant project like 

this? It’s just so wrong. Does that tell you about competence, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

[11:00] 

 

And here again we’ve had another example today, right on the 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

front pages of the newspaper. They institute a plan that will 

cause our seniors in this province to have to declare their 

income if they’re going to reap the support of the drug plan. 

Now to put this plan in place it’s going to cost them hundreds of 

thousands of dollars. Now the Minister of Health is saying 

today publicly, well it’s more than he thought it was going to be 

— more than he thought it was going to be. A big surprise 

about what was supposed to be a major campaign promise. Now 

they get in office; it’s a great big surprise. Is this competent, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And you talk about competency. We have watched and the 

people of Saskatchewan have watched how this Minister of 

Social Services, this current Minister of Social Services agrees 

— at cabinet, at Treasury Board, at the caucus — agrees to a 

plan that will make a huge transition in the provision of social 

welfare workers and social welfare services in this province. 

She agrees to it. She had to agree to it because the Minister of 

Finance put it in his budget. You can read right in the budget 

documents: this is the plan; this is how much money it will 

save. Then when this plan is announced to the workers in Social 

Services, when this plan is announced — as it should be when 

such a plan is in the budget — what does the minister say? Well 

I knew nothing about it. I woke up this morning on budget day 

and now here’s something I apparently know nothing about. 

 

And what does she try and do? She signed off three times. Now 

she tries to say, I don’t know anything about it because she’s 

been caught, she’s been caught. And what happens then? Well 

then she tries to blame senior public servants, tries to put the 

blame on senior public servants in her own department. It’s 

their fault. It’s not my fault. They can’t hear or something. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this does not speak to competency. This 

does not speak to competency, Mr. Speaker, 

 

I will give this budget a failing grade on this first point. This is 

not demonstrating to the people of Saskatchewan a group of 

men and women who are competent to manage the treasure 

they’ve been given. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what. I’m not 

alone in this. I am not alone in this assessment. 

 

Members will be interested to see I have here the assessment of 

this budget by the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, the 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, a group of men and women 

who traditionally have shown significant support for the Sask 

Party. 

 

I mean, the member from Moose Jaw North, he comes directly 

from the chamber of commerce, and they’ve done a very 

thorough assessment of this budget, a very thorough 

assessment, if I may say so. And what is their assessment of the 

competency of this government, of their government? F. They 

give this budget an F. They do give it some E’s. They do give it 

some D’s, and when they get really enthusiastic, they give it a 

C. They give this budget an F. This is the Saskatoon Chamber 

of Commerce. This is not the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour. It’s not the New Democratic Party. It’s not the 

opposition. It’s the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. It says 

right here in their report. They get an F for competence — an F. 

But they’re overspending, says the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the chamber of 

commerce in Saskatoon. It’s not just Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. It’s not just people all across the province who are 

recognizing the incompetency that’s being demonstrated by this 

government. It’s the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. It’s the editorial 

board of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix who wrote this editorial 

after they met with the Minister of Finance. This is what they 

said. This is what the editorial board of the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix says about this budget and this government’s 

competence. And I quote: 

 

If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party used its 

budget to set the tone for its administration, the province 

has a growing list to worry about. 

 

The budget should set the tone for an administration. The 

StarPhoenix says if the tone that’s being set is what we’re going 

to look for, for the next four years, we have a lot to worry 

about. And then note these words, Mr. Speaker. This is directly 

quoting the editorial from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix after the 

Minister of Finance met with them: 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the public 

purse, Premier Brad Wall’s team has been extravagant in 

its spending, ham-handed in its communication strategy 

and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

Extravagant, ham-handed, and incompetent. That is, Mr. 

Speaker, the review not of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, not 

a group who are politically partisan, but from an editorial board 

which generally has been supportive again of the SP. They say 

this group is extravagant, it’s ham-handed, and it is 

incompetent. On the first test, Mr. Speaker, of this budget, this 

government fails, fails to deliver competent management of the 

treasure they had been given. 

 

The second test, Mr. Speaker, my second test is this: does this 

budget stand up for Saskatchewan? Does it stand up for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It sure does. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well somebody from the backbench over there 

is saying, it sure does. Well I’m going to ask him a few 

questions, and maybe he’d like to answer these from his seat 

since he’s so verbal from his seat — not so much from his feet, 

but often from his seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I need to turn now to the revenue side of the 

budget, to the revenue side. Not many members have touched 

the revenue side of this budget. One or two of the opposition 

members have. I’ve not heard one member of the government 

opposite talk about the revenue side of this budget. They’re not 

wanting to talk too much about that because, you see, Mr. 

Speaker, there isn’t a tax decrease in the thing, not a tax 

decrease in the budget. That’s not what I want to talk about. 

 

Now I listened with interest to the member from North 

Battleford in his budget presentation point out to this 

legislature, the people of Saskatchewan, if you look on the 

revenue side of the budget, this government is predicting, is 

predicting that from all sources of taxation in this province that 

affect individuals and business, all personal and business tax 

will raise exactly $4.68 billion. That’s all taxes in — sales 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

taxes, corporate income, corporate capital, personal income, 

fuel, tobacco. The whole range of taxes will raise for this 

government $4.6 billion. 

 

Now if you turn back to the expenditure side, if you turn back 

to the expenditure side and put in one column the expenditures 

into the department of Health and expenditures in the 

department of Education — just those two departments — what 

is the total? Four point six billion dollars. 

 

Now what does that tell us? It says that every tax dollar 

collected by this government will be expended just to provide 

health and education. So how do we then pay for highways, 

justice, social services, post-secondary education? How do we 

pay for the legislature? How do we pay for our international 

expeditions? How do we pay for Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

Because all of the tax dollars from persons and individuals and 

business goes directly to health and education. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, how we’ve paid for it. We pay 

for it from resource revenues. That’s the revenues we collect 

from oil and gas, uranium and potash, which by the way, Mr. 

Speaker — as the Minister of Finance has now admitted — can 

be very volatile, very volatile. How do we pay for it? Well we 

pay for those other services from transfer money from the 

national government, transfer money from Ottawa. 

 

Now I want to make a point here, Mr. Speaker, because 

members opposite try and confuse this issue. That transfer 

money from Ottawa, those dollars that come from Ottawa, are 

dollars that originally came from Saskatchewan. That federal 

treasury is filled with dollars from the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. These are our dollars that are in Ottawa. These 

are our dollars in Ottawa. And when they’re transferred back, 

they should be transferred back to the people of Saskatchewan 

and all of its provinces in an equitable and fair manner. Because 

those dollars, Mr. Speaker, pay for essentially everything but 

what we take from resource revenue and what we spend on 

health and education. 

 

So I’ve done a little comparison, Mr. Speaker, comparing the 

budgets of the province of Manitoba with the province of 

Saskatchewan. I think a fair comparison — similar in our 

demographics; very similar in our population; similar in our 

resource base. Exceptional resources in Manitoba around hydro. 

We have some non-renewable exceptional resources. A fair 

comparison, I believe. 

 

Now the Government of Manitoba have not introduced their 

new budget. It will come in April. So I’m back to the budget of 

last year. Note these figures, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 

Manitoba in its budget last year received from the Government 

of Canada and the Canada Health Transfer, monies from Ottawa 

to fund health, $807 million. That’s the transfer to Manitoba. 

This budget of this government says that we can expect $810 

million in CHT [Canada Health Transfer] transfer for the people 

of Saskatchewan. That’s understandable. That’s fair — 807 to 

Manitoba, 810 for Saskatchewan. Similar population, that’s 

relatively fair. 

 

The Canada Social Transfer to Manitoba, in their last year’s 

budget, will likely be similar this year, $341 million. This 

budget document tells us that this government expects, in this 

year, $335 million. So 341 to Manitoba, 335 to Saskatchewan, 

that’s fair. But here’s where it goes wrong, Mr. Speaker. You 

take the Government of Manitoba’s budget — last year’s 

budget, never mind this year’s — and look under the category 

of equalization payment from Ottawa to the province of 

Manitoba. What’s the figure you read? One point eight billion, 

$1.8 billion, and all the projections say that in this year’s budget 

that will reach $2 billion; $2 billion from Ottawa to the people 

of Manitoba. 

 

What does it say in this Finance minister’s budget for 

equalization for this budget? What does it say? Zero. One big 

fat zero. So the people of Manitoba are receiving transfers of 

their money back — last year 1.8 billion; this year likely 2 

billion. And the people of Saskatchewan, whose non-renewable 

resources are being extracted from the ground on a daily basis, 

are not able to retain the value of those resources. We achieve a 

big fat zero. You will know, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know that we’ve been fighting this for years up 

until, up until these last four months when this new government 

has given up the fight, given up the fight for what everyone has 

agreed on is a $800 million a year benefit for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now I know the Premier says and the 

government opposite says, well lookit here: we’re going to give 

peace a chance and we’re going to achieve great things. In fact 

he promised that he would achieve more than equalization. 

 

Well let’s see what we’ve achieved so far. We’ve achieved a 

$240 million deal for a clean coal experiment. A $240 million 

. . . [inaudible] . . . deal for a clean coal experiment. Now the 

Premier is quick to bring out that 240 number. What he doesn’t 

bring out is that this 240 million is over six years, over six 

years. Now I can divide 240 by six. What do I get? About $40 

million a year for an experiment, an experiment in clean coal. 

Now I’ve supported the government and I’ve supported the 

concept of clean coal and I continue to do so, but I also support 

the matter of accountability. 

 

So he somehow signed us up on a deal down there in 24 Sussex. 

I’ve been there, Mr. Speaker. I know what it’s like. They have 

napkins but they’re linen. So if business was done on a napkin, 

as someone suggested, it was a linen napkin, you can be sure. 

We got a $240 million commitment now over six years; $40 

million a year for an experiment in clean coal. 

 

For this, for this, this government without any study, without 

any signed agreement, has signed the people of Saskatchewan 

into a deal that commits the people of Saskatchewan to $800 

million — $800 million — and the whole thing falls apart 

unless they find a private sector partner who has got $400 

million. And it’s pretty clear from the answers we’ve been 

getting they don’t know who the private sector partner is. They 

have no idea what they’re going to charge for the carbon 

dioxide. And they have no idea what this is going to mean to 

the power bills of the people of Saskatchewan because that 

$800 million is going to be paid for by the power consumers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So instead of a situation like Manitoba where you’ve got $1.8 

billion coming in here — probably 2 billion this year — we’re 

getting zero. And the Premier and his government says we 

ought to be real happy because we got $40 million this year, 

240 overall, putting us on the hook for 800 with another 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

missing 400. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to challenge . . . I know the 

Premier is going to be on his feet shortly. Let’s assume that this 

is, you know, real money, this $240 million. I ask the Premier 

when he gets on his feet today show me, show us, show the 

people of Saskatchewan where this $240 million is in the 

budget. Show me where the money is. Show me. Show us all. 

Where is the money? Or is it still in Ottawa? Or is it in Ottawa? 

Oh is it just a promised bit of money? Is it just a promised bit of 

money? Is that money in this budget? Do we have the 240 in the 

bank, or is that money still in Ottawa? 

 

[11:15] 

 

And is it just a promise? Because I want to warn this Premier 

and I want to warn this government and I want to warn the 

people of Saskatchewan, a promise from this federal 

government, a promise from this Prime Minister isn’t worth the 

news release that it’s written on. 

 

He better have the cash in the bank, this modest amount of cash 

in the bank, because I tell you, I tell you we’ve learned a bitter 

lesson about the promises from this Prime Minister. And it’s not 

only Saskatchewan people who have learned this lesson. The 

people of Newfoundland and Labrador learned the lesson. The 

people of Nova Scotia learned the lesson. The people of Ontario 

are currently learning the lesson. This Premier should stand up 

today and tell us this money’s in the bank, that he’s got her 

locked down, it’s no longer in Ottawa, it’s here. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, let’s just put this in context. So we get, 

this province gets $240 million for an experiment — a national 

experiment, by the way, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know why the 

people of Saskatchewan have to be on the hook for the majority 

when it’s a national experiment, but nevertheless we get 240 

million over six years. What will Manitoba get over six years? 

What will Manitoba get? Twelve billion — $12 billion. Can 

you imagine what we could do to make our taxation regimes in 

this province even more competitive, what we could do to 

provide services to our people with that kind of resource? 

 

Now the members are saying it’s a have province. You know 

who made that a have province over here? This government, 

this government working with the people of Saskatchewan 

made this a have province. Now I’ll tell you what. And what 

they say, what they say is . . . Look, look, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw North is going to jump right out of 

his chair. I wish he’d stand up once in a while and speak in this 

legislature. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you 

what. I still have a lot of colleagues and friends in the city of 

Moose Jaw, a lot of colleagues and friends in the city of Moose 

Jaw. 

 

You know what they’re talking about? Why is Moose Jaw not 

represented in the cabinet of this government? Why is Moose 

Jaw not represented in the cabinet of this government? This is 

the first time in decades that the city of Moose Jaw, one of 

Saskatchewan’s four largest cities, has no representation in the 

cabinet of the province. And the member from Moose Jaw 

North sits in his chair and hollers. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It appears that members are paying 

attention to the speech by the Opposition Leader; however we 

need the opportunity to hear that speech. So I ask the members 

to give the Leader of the Opposition the opportunity to speak 

without interference. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m going off the topic. 

Let me go back to my topic. On the question, are they 

competent to manage, Mr. Speaker, we give them a failing 

grade. So does the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. So does 

The StarPhoenix. 

 

Are they standing up for the people of Saskatchewan when 

they’ve completely abandoned the right for us to keep our 

resource revenues available to the people of Saskatchewan? No. 

They’re failing. They’re not standing up for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me move on to the third and perhaps the most important 

test. Does this budget, does this budget with its mountain of 

money make a real difference in the lives of Saskatchewan 

families? Does it make a real difference in the lives of 

Saskatchewan families? Well you’ve heard my colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker, on the deficiencies of this budget. They have so 

eloquently pointed out that in fact this budget does nothing, 

nothing to address the single most significant environmental 

challenge facing the families of Saskatchewan, Canada, and the 

globe. That’s climate change. They’ve adopted our targets; 

they’ve thrown out all of the resources to accomplish those 

targets. 

 

You’ve heard the colleagues on this side of the House talk 

about the deficiency in this budget when it comes to housing, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re in the midst of a housing crisis in this 

province, and what do we see in this budget? Less support for 

housing. How can that be, Mr. Speaker? We’re sitting on a 

mountain of money. We’ve got a housing crisis in our province, 

a crisis that’s affecting not just inner-city neighbourhoods, but a 

crisis that’s affecting young families and seniors, not just in 

cities but in small communities. We’ve got a mountain of 

money on one hand. We’ve got a crisis on the other. And this 

budget puts nothing in the hands of new housing development. 

 

Well again the member from Moose Jaw North has a lot to say 

from his seat but little from his feet. Mr. Speaker, he asked what 

have we done about it. Well his own . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . oh that was the member from Northwest in Saskatoon. Well 

the two of them are kind of colleagues over there. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members know that they’re not 

to draw other members into the debate. Allow the Leader of the 

Opposition to speak. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saskatoon reminds us yes, they’re in government; we’re not. 

You’re right. They’re in government. They should be, ought to 

be doing something with the privilege of being in government, 

doing something with this mountain of money they’ve 

inherited. The member says we’d done nothing about housing. 

But the Minister of Social Services is out cutting ribbons on 

housing projects we built. How does that work? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have pointed out the deficiency, 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

they’ve pointed out the deficiency around housing. They have 

equally and eloquently pointed out one of the most significant 

deficiencies in this budget, and that is its lack of emphasis on 

training spaces. Mr. Speaker, they call this a budget that wants 

to get the province ready for growth. How can they make that 

argument when the key component in making Saskatchewan 

ready for growth is the training of our young people and the 

provision of training spaces? That has to be the key component. 

We hear that from every sector. We have the shortages. 

 

So last year, Mr. Speaker, what was in the budget? Over 2,000 

new training spaces, 2,000 new training spaces. What do we 

find in this budget? A 50 per cent, more than a 50 per cent cut 

to training spaces. Mr. Speaker, with the resources available to 

this government and the needs of our young people and the 

needs of our economy, this should be the budget where there’s a 

huge investment in training and expansion of training, 

particularly for Aboriginal young people. It’s not here. My 

colleagues have pointed it out as a significant deficiency that 

affects real families in real communities in a real economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have so eloquently pointed 

out how this budget with $1.3 billion in the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund, the fund they’ve now fallen in love with, how this budget 

with 1.3 in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund provides to the average 

home in Saskatchewan — get this, Mr. Speaker — an average 

benefit of $27. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Half a pizza. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now my colleague from Dewdney says that’s 

half a pizza. Well where I go, it still gets me a pizza, but that’s 

it. One pizza for the year. One pizza for the year. 

 

And the minister of Municipal Government jumps up and down 

today saying, isn’t this wonderful. We’re giving the property 

tax payers relief of $27. Mind you they promised, Mr. Speaker, 

they promised relief of $450. They give us $27 — $450 

promise — the people of Saskatchewan are going to get $27 

benefit. But watch out, Mr. Speaker, because that benefit is 

going to disappear faster than it appears because they’re also 

forcing the municipalities in Saskatchewan to raise property 

taxes. They’re forcing our municipalities to raise property taxes. 

We’ve heard it now — Saskatoon looking at a 

eight-point-something increase; Regina looking at four; 

Yorkton looking at closer to 10. It’s sweeping the province. The 

municipalities do not have a choice. They’ve been shortchanged 

by this minister and this government. 

 

That $27 benefit is going to evaporate and be gone. And the fact 

of the matter is, the fact of the matter is this government, this 

government is going to force a tax increase on the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I need to take my chair. I need to 

take my chair soon. 

 

So let me go through again the three and then conclude with 

another observation. Have they demonstrated competency in the 

management of this treasury they’ve been given? No. Have they 

stood up for Saskatchewan, the rights of Saskatchewan people 

to keep the benefits of their resource revenues? No. Have they 

provided real and substantive benefit to the young people of 

Saskatchewan of training spaces, to the future of our 

environment, in housing, or in property tax relief? And the 

answer is no, not at all. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around budgets a long time. And I 

tell you an interesting thing can often happen with a budget. 

You know, we have a . . . I think it’s a $7 billion budget now, 

isn’t it? Seven billion. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nine billion. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Nine. You know that represents between 7 and 

$9,000 per person in this province. They will spend 7 to $9,000 

per person in this province. But sometimes a budget comes 

down to one decision, and everything you ever needed to know 

about a budget can be found in one decision. The irony this 

year, Mr. Speaker, the irony in this debate is the one decision 

they’ve made, that I believe in some ways colours this entire 

budget, is not even a part of this year’s budget. It was a part of 

last year’s budget. 

 

They have through this budget process announced that they are 

going to take from the community of Saskatoon $8 million that 

was in their bank account to build Station 20 West. They say, 

Mr. Speaker, that community, the inner city primarily but 

engaging the entire community of Saskatoon — and I’m 

watching it engage the entire province of Saskatchewan — they 

say that money that was in their hands they don’t deserve. 

They’re going to pull it out. It’s a mistake, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

mistake. It’s an ill-advised, it’s an ill-advised mistake. 

 

And we’ve listened with interest how this government has 

endeavoured to defend this. First thing we heard was from the 

Minister of Finance. He went to The Star Phoenix. He said, well 

we can’t continue with this project because they need to raise 

12 to $14 million, and they’ve only raised $75,000. The fact of 

the matter is — and he’s been corrected and he’s admitted his 

mistake — that in fact this project in total will be 11.5 million; 

that the provincial contribution of 8 million means there’s about 

3 million, three and a half to raise. And when the Premier then 

repeated the error by saying they’d only raised $75,000, it’s 

now become clear that the organizers have raised and have in 

place commitments up to 1.5 million. The fundraising’s there. 

So it surely wasn’t a financial reason that caused them to pull 

the plug on this project. 

 

So then I listened carefully to the Minister of Health and his 

explanations of why he won’t fund Station 20. Well what does 

he say? Well you know what? We need the money. We need the 

money to do other important things. We need the money for fire 

extinguishers or supplier programs over there at St. Paul’s. We 

need the money for chillers in another hospital. We need the 

money, he said. You know, we need the money. 

 

Well I want to tell the Minister of Health, just like the Minister 

of Finance was wrong in his numbers, the Minister of Health is 

wrong too. He doesn’t need the money. The Minister of Finance 

has it. The Minister of Finance has it. He doesn’t need to go get 

that $8 million from the inner city of Saskatoon. He goes over 

to the Minister of Finance. He’s got 1.3 billion sitting over there 

in his growth stabilization fund. He’s got the money. Just go get 

it. 

 

Why doesn’t he do the same thing that the Minister of Social 

Services just did? Admit she made a big mistake and without 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

any consultation with the Minister of Finance or anybody, she 

just says no; we’re putting the program back. We’re putting the 

program back and I don’t care what it does to the budget. I 

don’t care what I committed to. You don’t need the money that 

belongs to the inner city community of Saskatoon. You’ve got 

the money. Just go get it from the Minister of Finance. 

 

Then the Premier says we don’t need this project because, you 

know what, it’s a mall. It’s a mall. 

 

Now somebody over there . . . Yes, I missed . . . The member 

from Wood River, he’s hollering from his seat; it’s a grocery 

store. He ought to come down and meet the folks. He ought to 

come down and meet the folks that are building Station 20 and 

find out the facts, to find out the facts. 

 

The Premier says it’s a mall. The member from Wood River is 

chirping from his seat. Mr. Speaker, here’s the fact of the 

matter. There will be space within Station 20 to provide health 

services — dentistry services, medical services, immunization 

services, addiction services, and dentistry. These are provided 

by the College of Medicine. 

 

Members opposite are shouting from their seats, these services 

already exist. I would like the member from Wood River to 

come down to Riversdale and show me where the community 

has access to community-based dental programs. I’d like him to 

come over and just show me where that is. 

 

The Station 20 concept, Mr. Speaker, came out of the 

community. It’s not the idea of the NDP. It’s not the idea of a 

provincial government. It’s not the idea of the city. It’s an idea 

and it had its genesis in the community. People have worked for 

years. 

 

The Premier says it’s a mall. The Premier says it’s a mall. 

Okay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week the Premier of Saskatchewan said, in 

what I think is some pretty good advice to the FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], you know, decisions can be 

reversed. He said, you know, even after you’ve gone out and 

made a definitive statement, decisions can be reversed. 

 

Now I tell you . . . Now the Premier says there’s no moral 

equivalency. I tell you he ought to walk up and down 20th 

Street. He ought to talk to the people. He ought to talk to the 

people who cannot get the dental services for their children. He 

ought to talk to the people. When he said, when this Premier 

says this is a mall, he ought to say what his real plan is. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. Let me say this, Mr. 

Speaker. Let me say this. Let me say this. Let me say . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. When the 

Station 20 people came together last week and held a press 

conference, there was a pastor there. There was a pastor in that 

press conference. And this pastor asked the following question. 

He asked this following question. He says, is this a government 

that cares about people and need, or is it a government that 

cares about profit and greed? Mr. Speaker, that’s the question 

he asked in Saskatoon. 

 

You know, we could take a little advice still from Franklin 

Delano Roosevelt who said, way those many years ago, that the 

test of our progress is not whether we add more to the 

abundance of those who have much, but whether we meet the 

needs of those who have little. That test, Mr. Speaker, when I 

apply that test to this budget, it fails. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

therefore it fails in my view on competency. It fails, Mr. 

Speaker. It fails on standing up for Saskatchewan. It fails to 

deliver real benefits to real families, and it fails to meet the 

needs of people in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

Therefore I have no choice — no choice. I will support the 

amendment. I will vote against this government’s budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 

enter into the budget debate here today in the legislature on the 

day that I think this budget is going to pass in about an hour 

from now. I’m pretty certain that this historic budget will pass 

the test of this Legislative Assembly and so it’s a pleasure to 

enter into the debate. 

 

If I may very quickly, Mr. Speaker, just acknowledge again the 

great privilege that I have of representing the constituency of 

Swift Current, an honour that is mine to represent neighbours 

and friends and family. And those many new residents to the 

community I have not yet met, it’s an honour to represent them. 

 

And let me also, let me also say for the record, Mr. Speaker, 

that I appreciate, as always, the support and love that I can find 

at my home through Tami and our kids. Obviously none of us 

can do this job very effectively if we don’t have the support of 

those who are closest to us. And so let me just say again for the 

record that I’m so very grateful for Tami and Megan and Colter 

and Faith. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, I have also noted some of the 

comments from members opposite as they’ve entered into the 

budget debate. I think it was the member for Dewdney, for 

example, who acknowledged at the beginning of his speech that 

there are elements of the budget that he thought were good. I 

doubt that will translate into him joining us and voting in favour 

of the budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Maybe it will. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe it will. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And Minister of Energy . . . Maybe it will. 

We don’t know. I noted, I noted similar remarks by the former 

premier, but now Leader of the Opposition, with respect to the 

fact that there were many good elements in the budget. And so I 

think, by the way, that sort of debate is helpful and a welcome 

thing. 

 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

And I hope it’s true of this side of the House that we can also 

point to things that were done in the past by the government 

that we have replaced that were, that have led, that have been in 

fact helped with the momentum that we seek for the economy 

and have certainly been in the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

And so let me just make those observations at the outset, Mr. 

Speaker, before moving on to the substance of what I wanted to 

raise today in the budget debate. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t very long ago we were all 

campaigning. Everybody that’s now in this room were on the 

hustings. We were involved in an election campaign. And I 

think very much one of the central questions of that campaign 

was at the beginning and actually strengthened through the 

course of the writ, this notion of this question: which party that 

was contesting the election — that actually had a chance to win 

the election — which party, which team, had the best plan, 

offered the right vision, were committed to the right actions, 

that we might be able to see what was at that time a shorter term 

boom translate, transition into long-term prosperity for the 

people of Saskatchewan? I think that was the central question of 

the election campaign. 

 

And I’m very proud today because I think we’ve been working 

very hard as a new government — imperfectly to be sure, 

imperfectly to be sure because we are new to this. And as I said 

on November 7, we’re going to make some mistakes. But we’ve 

been working very hard as a brand new Saskatchewan Party 

government to answer that question in the affirmative,. That we 

have the right plan and the right vision and the right team. That 

we would be able to see this current momentum we see in the 

economy last for the long term. That we would maintain 

have-province status. That we would first boldly state that that 

ought to be the plan and the goal and the vision of any 

Government of Saskatchewan given our resources, and that we 

would execute a plan to carry it out. 

 

And so early on in the mandate of the government we set out to 

keep promises we made that also would answer this key central 

question. The day after the election, the day that I met with the 

now Leader of the Opposition and we planned transition — and 

I’ll again acknowledge the co-operation we received from the 

member for Riversdale and how that was appreciated — we met 

that day after we actually had a press conference, the day after 

the campaign, to keep our first promise to set the next election 

day for November 7, 2011. 

 

And since that time, since that time we’ve set out to keep still 

more promises. In the fall sitting of the legislature in December 

we introduced much-needed changes to the labour legislative 

environment of the province that we had committed to in the 

campaign. We had the Minister of Justice get a lot tougher in 

terms of our laws against those who still drink and drive. We 

kept that promise early on. We kept the promise to eliminate the 

used car tax that the NDP had imposed on this province some 

time ago. We kept that commitment as well very early on. 

 

In January I was very proud to be at the Allan Blair Centre with 

the Minister of Health. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that was a 

highlight for me in what has been a number of . . . there’s been 

a lot of great days, a lot of highlights, but that one stands out. 

When we were able to, at a press conference attended by family 

members and some who those are still struggling against 

colorectal cancer, when we were able to stand in our places 

there together with those from the Blair and the Minister of 

Health and say, we made a promise with respect to drugs that 

will help extend the lives of those who are battling colorectal 

cancer, that our government had a hard time trying to put a 

price on what another 150 sunsets might mean, or what another 

Christmas might mean. And so we said we’d rather not try to 

put a price on that; we’ll just go ahead and keep the promise 

with respect to Avastin and provide that for the people of the 

province who need it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — It was a humbling experience. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It was very humbling experience to be sure. 

And it was a reminder of why all of us are in this Assembly 

today. 

 

It was a reminder of why we need the economic momentum to 

continue. Because as we said in the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and again reinforced in the budget we debate today, 

we don’t, on this side of the House, see growth for the sake of 

growth. That’s not why we’re pursuing growing economy. It’s 

not why we want to attract more oil and gas investment — and 

more on that in a moment. It’s not why we want to see 

responsible oil sands development go ahead. That’s not the 

reason even why we want to see us pursue the whole uranium 

value chain, the nuclear opportunities that exist for what this 

province is — the Saudi Arabia of uranium. 

 

The reasons that we seek that kind of investment are not 

represented in economic statistics or in GDP [gross domestic 

product] rates of growth — and we heard more good news from 

the Royal Bank today. It’s not the reason why we’re pursuing it. 

We’re pursuing this, Mr. Speaker, we pursue long-term growth 

for the province so that Saskatchewan can continue to offer all 

of Canada and North America the best possible quality of life, 

that we would have . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that we would have the 

capacity, the fiscal capacity, in this budget to pay for Avastin — 

that’s why we want growth. That we would have the fiscal 

capacity to keep our promise to improve what was a woeful 

record in terms of child poverty and child hunger, and actually 

invest more in school lunch programs —that’s why we seek 

growth, Mr. Speaker. That’s why. So we can fund those. 

 

We seek growth in this province so we can do things like keep 

our promise to the food banks of this province for 5 million new 

dollars for job skills and life skills training so people in the core 

neighbourhoods can find full-time employment in this 

economy, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re pursuing growth. 

 

And that’s why the central point of debate today on the budget 

isn’t about all the numbers and all the 40-plus promises that we 

made that are kept in our very first budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

about that. This budget debate we have today is about the 

central question of how do we, how do we as a province sustain 

the growth we see so that we can do these things — that we can 

fund health care and education and fix a few roads, maybe, and 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

provide accessibility to post-secondary education. That’s what 

the budget debate is all about. 

 

So in terms of answering that question specifically . . . And I’ll 

get into some of the details in the budget, although my 

colleagues have done a very good job of covering that ground. 

And on budget day of course the Minister of Finance tabled all 

the details and did an excellent job in a very hot speech that he 

gave with respect to the budget, cooled down by his friend, the 

member for Kindersley, from time to time. 

 

How do we do it, Mr. Speaker? How do we keep things going? 

Well it strikes me that first of all a government has to realize 

that they don’t create jobs in the economy. That’s the first 

realization we have to make. The first realization that we have 

to make in terms of how do we keep the momentum going is 

that the government of the day, which happens to be a 

Saskatchewan Party government, that the government of the 

day would understand with clarity, with absolute clarity that it’s 

not its role to create jobs directly, to get into the business of 

running business. But rather that its role in the economy is to 

get the fundamentals right, to make sure there’s infrastructure 

available to accommodate growth, to keep taxes as low as 

possible and as competitive as they can be, to ensure our labour 

legislative environment is balanced and competitive with other 

provinces, to fully engage First Nations in this economic 

growth through training. And again we’ve heard the historic 

levels of investment with respect to training for First Nations 

and Métis people that were in this budget. 

 

That’s what a government can do and should do. And that’s 

certainly the vision that is going to be required on the part of a 

government that wants to sustain some economic momentum. 

 

And so what is the vision then on that count, Mr. Speaker? 

What is the vision of the alternative to the current government? 

Because the alternative, small and battered though they are, still 

sits right over there. It’s the New Democratic Party. They’ve 

been very successful in politics in this province. And anyone 

that takes the New Democratic Party, in terms of their political 

abilities in this province, for granted will make a major mistake. 

But there they sit as the alternative. 

 

Today, today, certainly battered and diminished in number from 

the election in November 7, what is the vision that they’re now 

espousing? If the central question is how do we keep the 

economic momentum going, what are they saying about what is 

their vision for growth? Do they also believe . . . Do they 

understand that a role of the government is to not invest directly 

in business? 

 

They advocate for it every day, almost every day in question 

period. This new member from Prince Albert, this new member 

from Prince Albert seems to advocate every day that the 

Government of Saskatchewan would take $100 million of 

taxpayers’ money and invest in an industry that is unfortunately 

under great stress and under siege from external factors. And 

we’ve had more bad news we will be working on with respect 

to the Hudson Bay area. 

 

They continue to advocate for that kind of a thing unless they 

get tough questions in a scrum outside these walls. And then 

they kind of back away and just want to put out the fire that 

they’re involved in. 

 

What about the vision of this government with respect to what 

we should aspire to here in Saskatchewan? Because that’s an 

important part of answering this question that the budget is 

about, the Ready for Growth budget. 

 

Well on this side of the House we believe then we will need a 

government if we’re going to sustain growth, that says, with the 

resources that we have, with the people that we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan, this province should aspire to being 

a have province permanently, permanently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I heard the Leader of the Opposition 

moments ago stand in this House and take credit for the fact 

that we have become a have province recently — amazingly. 

Because when we did attain have-province status that member, 

then the premier, came back to this province and was 

interviewed and then quoted in the Leader-Post about the new 

have status of Saskatchewan. 

 

The media would have obviously asked him, I’m guessing from 

his answer, well what do you think about our have province? 

You know, what do you think of that? This is now the then 

premier of Saskatchewan who is now taking credit for have 

status, asked the question about your province finally, finally 

attaining have province status. 

 

And do you know what he said? He downplayed expectations 

about the future. He kind of lowered expectations about what 

this province could achieve. That member, when he sat here as 

the premier said, “We will,” quote, “always be in and out of 

equalization.” That’s what he said. 

 

The province that has this inventory of natural resources that 

would be the envy of any nation in the world, that has the 

resources, by the way, that the world wants right now, had a 

premier at the time — at the time; they’ve made a change — 

but at the time they had a premier that said, we’re always going 

to be in and out of equalization. Yes, we’re a have province 

today. Yes, we’re a have province today, he said, but we never 

know, next year we could slide back. 

 

I want to tell you, if we are going to sustain the economic 

momentum in this province right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

we will achieve that through this budget and through a brand 

new government getting the fundamentals right, we have to — 

and Saskatchewan people have — categorically reject that kind 

of defeatist attitude that we’ve seen come from the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So you have to have the right vision. The 

government, if we’re going to sustain growth, in addition to 

having a good budget you need the right vision. 

 

What else should a vision contain with respect to trying to 

sustain economic growth? I think there should be a fundamental 

belief by a brand new government that wants to sustain 

economic momentum that we can exceed the national average 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

in Canada in many economic categories, that we can do better 

than what’s going on in other provinces. Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

think that should be part of the vision. And by the way, that is 

part of the government’s vision. That is very much part of the 

vision. 

 

Retail sales growth right now I can tell you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we’re leading the nation in January ’08. Wholesale 

trade, we’re leading the nation in January ’08. Population 

growth in the fourth quarter last year, we’re leading the nation. 

And by the way, by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year we 

saw population growth at 1.7 per cent. So does the 

Saskatchewan government believe we can keep that going? Do 

we believe we can lead the nation or be certainly in the top 

three provinces? Absolutely we do. And we need that vision as 

well if we’re going to sustain growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now what have the members opposite said 

on this point for example on population? What is the vision that 

has been described and articulated by those who sit opposite, 

diminished and battered, but who aspire I presume one day to 

be the Government of Saskatchewan? They have said, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they have said this. The New Democratic 

Party has said, a sitting NDP MLA, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 

said this. 

 

When the Saskatchewan Party said not too long ago that we 

ought to aspire to have the same growth in population as the 

national average, which is 1 per cent a year . . . And remember 

we just came through a year where we did 1.7. When the 

Saskatchewan Party said, in opposition then, we ought to have a 

plan to grow this place by 1 per cent a year, that’s the national 

average — why wouldn’t we want to be as least as good the 

national average? — do you know what the NDP said? Do you 

know what the NDP MLA said? And it was reported in, well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it was reported in a paper that 

comes from your constituency if memory serves, so you may 

remember this well. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the NDP 

said at the time is, it was preposterous that Saskatchewan would 

have this plan to try to achieve even growth at the national 

average, that it was, quote, “statistically impossible.” 

 

But I would say this to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I also 

believe that the New Democratic Party got a little bit arrogant 

towards the end of their term, that they believed it was 

statistically impossible for them ever to lose the next election, 

for them to be fewer of them than there are of us. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we found out that it is very much statistically possible 

that the people of this province would say, we’ve had enough of 

that kind of defeatist attitude and they ought to be sitting over 

there, Mr. Speaker. And they are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And this may be the only example where 

the previous minister of SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] was right. And we know now we have 

in the legislature SPUDCO 2, and we look forward to more 

questions from that member. But the first minister, the first 

minister of SPUDCO also had this to say about Saskatchewan 

when we were losing population — and mercifully we’re not 

any more — but when we were he said, don’t worry when 

people leave because there’s more left for the rest of us. 

 

Well I think there’s perhaps only one example in Saskatchewan 

when you could actually lose some people and still have more 

left for the rest of us — and I think we saw it on November 7 — 

when less on that side is more for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So vision is pretty important. Vision is 

pretty important, but you also have to have actions to back up 

that vision, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to want to stimulate 

the economic growth. If you’re going to sustain the economic 

growth in the province, we need to also back it up with actions. 

And I think I heard my friend from Regina Dewdney just chirp 

about property taxes. Am I right on that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Right. Well, well let’s consider then, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue of property taxes in terms of being the right 

action to take to sustain economic momentum. 

 

Saskatchewan under the NDP government — that we had for 

way too long — relied more on property to fund education than 

where? Anywhere in the Dominion of Canada. Any other 

province in Canada, we compared poorly to. That is the record 

of the member for Dewdney. It’s the record of the Leader of the 

Opposition when he was the premier. It’s the record of now the 

seat mate — is she the deputy leader? — the member for 

Nutana and our friend from Regina who . . . Actually I think we 

may have a lot in common with him. I wouldn’t be surprised if 

he would stand up and vote for this budget at the end of today’s 

proceedings. 

 

But at the time, Mr. Speaker, when they had the chance to make 

a difference, when they had promised to make a difference with 

respect to property tax, when the now Leader of the Opposition 

marched into SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] and promised real action on property tax for this 

province, what did they deliver? What did they deliver? They 

did not deliver the property tax they promised. And in the last 

election campaign, when it comes to action again reflected in 

this budget, what did both sides, what did both parties offer on 

this issue of property tax? 

 

Well the Saskatchewan Party committed to a phased-in rebate 

increase and the long-term solution that we so desperately need, 

when we would move the reliance of funding education from 

property to general revenues and make a significant, lasting, 

and permanent shift. And by the way, that’s another promise 

that we intend to keep with our help . . . with our friend the 

member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But our plan — let’s be very clear, Mr. 

Speaker — was for all of Saskatchewan. Our plan was for 

people who lived in the city, people who lived in towns, and oh, 

by the way, those who are most affected by high education 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

property taxes, people on farms, people in rural Saskatchewan 

who arguably brought this to the attention of the province even 

before it became as significant an issue as it is — and it is — in 

urban Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the NDP? I remember that campaign. I 

remember that day on the campaign when we announced our 

plan and they announced their property tax initiative. Was there 

a dime of property tax relief for agriculture? Nothing. Nothing. 

No new measures for rural Saskatchewan. I think they had 

decided, look we’re going to lose this election; we’ve got to try 

to consolidate what we can in the cities so we will do what 

we’ve done for 16 years — we will ignore rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This side of the House understands that rural Saskatchewan is 

an economic engine with the resources that are there that will 

help answer the question about sustained growth in our 

province. And we will not now, neither will we ever, ignore 

rural Saskatchewan, unlike the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So those are some of the actions I think that 

we need to focus on in terms of this budget. And there are many 

more. The property tax relief certainly was one of them.  

 

But I think the top of the list of initiatives in the budget is the 

ready-for-growth initiative, the ready-for-growth initiative that 

garnered attention from right across the country. The 

ready-for-growth initiative got attention . . . Frankly we were 

able to talk a little bit about it to the ambassador from the 

United States. He was very interested in what the Saskatchewan 

government was saying in its budget. 

 

We believe it is important to be ready for the growth that is 

coming, to learn from the mistakes and also the successes of the 

province next door because let’s also be reasonable. Alberta — 

yes, they’ve had challenges, but they’ve also made a lot of the 

right decisions in terms of the role of the government and how 

to attract investment. So we don’t just learn from the mistakes 

they’ve made. We also learn from the successes they’ve had. 

And we have in our budget highlighted an historic $1 billion 

fund for infrastructure. 

 

Why would we have to do that? Why would we have to do that, 

I wonder? Because you know there was a lot of money in the 

till when they were in office. When the NDP were here, they 

were sitting on their mountain of money. So dating back a 

couple of years, they could have started to deal with the 

infrastructure deficit in the province. So the question then is, 

Mr. Speaker, did they do it in their budgets? And the answer is 

no. They didn’t do it in their budgets. 

 

We know that they commissioned a study in the Department of 

Health. We know that the NDP commissioned a study in the 

ministry of Health that said, what is our infrastructure deficit? 

How bad are the facilities out there? How much would it cost to 

actually just fix what we have? Never mind build that hospital 

in Moose Jaw, never mind the children’s hospital that we also 

seek for Saskatoon — never mind any of those. Just to maintain 

what we got, just to maintain what we have, how much would 

that cost? Was it a billion five? 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty close. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Pretty close to 1.5 billion. Maybe a little 

less, a little less than 1.5 billion. What about in Saskatoon 

alone, where we have had this Station 20 debate? What about in 

Saskatoon alone? What was the infrastructure deficit that the 

NDP knew they were sitting on but didn’t release? Four 

hundred-plus million dollars.  

 

And in education, Mr. Speaker, what was the track record of 

that party when they were in power with respect to just keeping 

up the schools that we need, fix the ones we have, build some 

where there are communities that are growing? What did the 

NDP do on that count? I’m looking over at the Deputy Premier, 

the now Minister of Education. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They were short 555 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Short $550 million deficit in our schools, 

Mr. Speaker, where the kids of this province need to go to get 

that education so that they can be part of the prosperity of the 

province long term. 

 

So we said very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in this budget . . . And my 

colleague from Melfort did an excellent job of highlighting the 

problem. But more than that, this government said, here is the 

beginning of the answer. The beginning of the answer is more 

action and less talk. The beginning of the answer, Mr. Speaker, 

is a ready-for-growth initiative, an historic $1 billion investment 

in infrastructure in this province — nothing like you’ve ever 

seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Nothing like you’ve ever seen. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, we could break it down in terms of health 

care and education, but we also better talk about the highways 

of this province because we’ve heard about them for a very, 

very long time. 

 

And again, for the last number of years, the NDP government 

that we have replaced was sitting on a lot of money. They were 

sitting on a lot of money. They certainly could have made some 

more investments in highways. They could have repaired the 

crumbling highways of the province. They could have taken 

action so that the middle- to upper-middle- aged men of 

southwest Saskatchewan would not have had to pose in a 

calendar — a fundraising calendar with only cameras and things 

covering stuff — to try to draw attention to Highway 32. 

 

We subscribe to the radical notion, on this side of the House, 

that the people of Saskatchewan who live in an area where there 

is oil and gas being produced and helping to balance the books 

here in Regina — oil and gas royalties that are paying for health 

care and education — that when people live in that kind of an 

area and the road’s been falling apart and ignored for 16 years, 

we subscribe to the crazy notion that they ought not to have to 

pose nude in a fundraising calendar to try to get the attention of 

the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — In fact I know them. I know a number of 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

them, and I have said it is absolutely one of my goals as the new 

Premier of the province that they would never ever do that 

again. So how would we achieve that goal, Mr. Speaker? Well 

here’s another radical idea. Let’s fix Highway 32. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Let’s fix the highway to all of those 

short-line manufacturers who provide jobs and pay taxes; 368 

— let’s fix that highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue with the twinning. We’ll continue 

with the projects, but you know, we are going to take a practical 

approach when it comes to infrastructure. If it is broken and we 

need it to sustain the amazing economic momentum of this 

province, if it is broken, let us be the kind of government that 

fixes it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we intend to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — What are some of the other actions in this 

budget that back up this notion, what I posit today, and that is 

that the new government has what it takes to keep the 

momentum going in the province? Well we need to make sure 

we have the kind of investment climate to attract businesses. 

And so what you won’t find in this budget for example is an 

increase in royalties in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we know, I know, and I’ve noted this . . . And by the way 

this is not good for the economy. And so I would ask the Leader 

of the Opposition to be very, very careful, even in opposition. 

The industry, business understand that the NDP from time to 

time have provided government for this province over a certain 

number of years. And when they, and when they make it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The majority of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, and the member for Dewdney says 

the majority of time. Yes, including the times that really scare 

and put a chill through the business community. And we saw it 

with respect to the royalty policies of the NDP of the past. 

We’ve seen it with respect to their decision to nationalize the 

potash industry in their decisions of the past. And thank 

goodness we’ve taken care of that little matter. 

 

But I urge great caution to the Leader of the Opposition and to 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Because at their convention very 

recently here, at their convention they debated a motion to 

increase royalties in Saskatchewan. At a time when we are 

seeing . . . And I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, that 

debate should happen, I guess. But what I hoped, what I hoped 

when I saw this debate occurring, when I knew that would be 

happening, is that the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 

Riversdale . . . And the member for Dewdney who fancies 

himself as a bit of a business guy — Kevin, I can’t wait to find 

out the businesses you’ve been involved in, but we’ll have that 

discussion some time. I think, by the way, he might be the voice 

of reason on this issue. I don’t know why he didn’t . . . I hope 

he stood up at the convention. 

 

And I hope the Leader of the Opposition will stand up soon to 

his party and say, we can’t do this. Let’s not risk the prosperity 

we see. Let’s not risk the math, the hundreds of millions of 

dollars of exploration that are moving from Alberta to 

Saskatchewan here in the first quarter — let’s not risk that. 

 

We just met with a number of oil companies when I spoke at an 

energy conference in New York, did the Minister of Energy and 

myself. And company after company said, we’re going to be 

ramping down things west of you, and we’re coming to 

Saskatchewan; we like your announcement that royalties would 

stay the same — we like it. That’s also in this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I asked the minister. I said we can’t 

release a lot of this information because it has to do with the 

markets, and we want to be sensitive to that. But he was, the 

minister was sort of keeping a running tally of the commitments 

that were being made. Comments were being made. 

 

And when we were done after the meetings, I said, Bill, I said 

— I’m quoting myself now, Mr. Speaker — how much money? 

What was your tally, because I lost track at about $700 million 

in money coming into the province right now — $1.2 billion 

because we said we won’t increase royalties. And they would 

risk it, Mr. Speaker. They would risk it even having the debate 

and not defeating the motion, because what happened to that 

motion? It was tabled. They’ll talk about it again. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And then, and then I was very alarmed this week to see the 

former premier of the province standing beside a placard 

outside this legislature that said, stop the tar sands. Stop the tar 

sands. Mr. Speaker, what message does this send to the 

hydrocarbon industry, to the oil and gas sector, when just 

months after being booted from office the now Leader of the 

Opposition, the then premier, would join a protest of an 

industry that he said he supported, that he said he would 

provide policies to support? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not helpful at all. And if the hon. member 

wishes to attend those kinds of things and stand beside a placard 

that says stop the oil sands — that even in their exploratory 

stage are creating jobs right now in northwest Saskatchewan for 

First Nations and Métis people — if he’s going to do that, then, 

Mr. Speaker, we would ask that he not then try to portray his 

party as one that understands what it takes to grow an economy. 

We would ask him not to try to make a charade out of any 

understanding they might have on how to keep the investment 

coming to the province and ensuring that people can work in the 

energy sector in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are so very many 

initiatives in this budget that we could talk about, I know, and 

I’ve said my colleagues have done a great job of that. There’s a 

couple of things I want to highlight though in terms of promises 

kept. 

 

We campaigned on a plan to implement a tuition rebate 

program for this province. We wanted to say to Saskatchewan 

students that you could earn all of your tuition back if, when 

you graduate from any post-secondary institution, if you 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

graduate from a post-secondary institution in the province of 

Saskatchewan, you can earn all of your tuition back up to 

20,000 — for many that would cover all of it — if you will but 

stay in Canada’s best province and help us continue to build our 

future here. And we kept that promise. It’s in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We committed to the training seats for the 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission so that we 

could help deal with the shortage of those seats and continue to 

deal with the labour shortage. That promise was kept as well. 

 

With respect to physician training seats, and this one is 

interesting because for how long in the province have we all 

known that there is a doctor shortage, that there are other 

provinces who’ve made the right decision? Next door in 

Manitoba — about the same size province — I think they’ve 

always had about 100, or for a long time they’ve had 100 

training seats for doctors. One hundred. 

 

How many have we historically had under that government 

when we were going through doctor shortages — 50? Well 

they’ve increased a bit in the last budget. We in our campaign 

platform said, you know, in Saskatchewan we ought to be as 

effective as Manitoba, not just on Labour Day but in health care 

and in recruiting doctors. And so, Mr. Speaker, we said there 

needs to be more doctors, in the election campaign, and we 

have backed that up with action. There’s money in the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, for new doctors. 

 

There’s money in the budget for the nursing, the partnership 

with SUN and our nurse recruitment and retention plan. And I 

can’t help but note that only a few months in office after we had 

set a goal for 800 new nurses, we sent down the member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle along with some great officials and staff 

from the health region, and we’re over a third of the way there 

already in just a few months, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 

we’ve got for Filipino nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is full of measures to help families. 

This budget is full of measures to help those who live in our 

core neighbourhoods, those who perhaps are on, have lower 

incomes. This budget doubles the caregiver tax credit that we 

want to afford to families who take care of those who in turn 

take care of disabled loved ones or the elder and the infirm. And 

we’ve kept the promise. In fact we went beyond the election 

promise we made there. 

 

We have kept the promise, as I’ve said, for school lunch 

programs — a half-million dollar increase investment there; 

45.3 million for child care and early childhood development 

including 500 child care spaces in this budget. I haven’t heard it 

from members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the core areas 

of our cities that are certainly under some stress as a result of 

economic growth — and I heard the Leader of the Opposition 

raise Station 20 again — I want to be very, very clear that no 

one ought to doubt the resolve of this government, because it’s 

backed up by action and investment in this budget to deal with 

the issues of health care, for example, in the inner city, Mr. 

Speaker, that may exist either in Saskatoon or Regina, that deal 

with the issues of affordable housing. 

 

So let’s do a bit of a fact check with respect to Station 20 

because we don’t hear very many facts on the issue coming 

over from members opposite. First of all, I just heard the Leader 

of the Opposition say that this is about increasing the access to 

health care in that area. So I would then ask the question of 

members opposite, the many who have stayed to listen to this 

speech. Mr. Speaker, I would ask each of them to point out 

where there is additional health care facilities in the Station 20 

proposal. 

 

Because what we have in the proposal is the relocation of an 

excellent community clinic, that Westside Clinic, from one 

location that they own and from where they didn’t even want to 

move originally, a location that that Westside Clinic owns and 

operates today, they would simply relocate them to a brand new 

bricks-and-mortar building that this government would have, if 

they would have been the government, would have paid $8 

million towards. That’s point number one. 

 

So is there increased health care access? No. It’s a relocation, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the truth of what this project would have 

been. What else would have been achieved? Would the housing 

initiatives in Station 20 be lost as a result of the decision of this 

government? Not one. We will finish the job. What about the 

library, an important part in terms of literacy in the core areas? 

Is that lost as a result of the government’s decision? No. It’s 

going to be finished, Mr. Speaker. It will be finished. 

 

No, there will not be a plaza development that includes a 

grocery store. There will not be that because government is 

about choices. And if we have a choice in terms of $8 million 

for a plaza to house a grocery store and more affordable 

housing, we’ll choose housing. If we have a choice to make 

between, Mr. Speaker, between ensuring that we can continue 

to provide operations in the heat of summer because the air 

conditioner actually works in the surgical theatre, we will 

choose operations over a grocery store every single time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The members opposite are still heckling 

what is not the truth about the decision the government has 

taken. I’m going to say it again. I’ll say it very clearly, Mr. 

Speaker. The decision that the Government of Saskatchewan 

has made with respect to Station 20 in no way, in no way 

impacts the affordable housing initiatives that are a part of this 

plan. The actions that the new Government of Saskatchewan 

has taken with respect to Station 20 in no way impacts the 

library that is also part of this project. 

 

The decisions the government has taken is that we will focus on 

housing, Mr. Speaker. We will focus on providing those school 

lunch programs. We will focus on providing investment to food 

banks who already have facilities and an amazing track record 

of not just giving people fish but teaching them how to fish. 

These will be the priorities of this new government. And no 

matter what misinformation that side wants to spread about it, 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

this is the fact of the matter, the truth of the matter. 

 

And you know what? As that message gets out there, Mr. 

Speaker, there is an understanding and support for that position. 

Because again we back up our words with action, action like 

we’ve seen in this particular budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m anxious to hear from the Minister of 

Finance. And so we ought to. Certainly we want to give him the 

opportunity to speak for really as long as he wants about the 

budget. 

 

But there have been some comments from the budget. We’ve 

seen the reviews come in very strongly from almost every 

single third party group in the province. They’ve said, you 

know the government understands what we’ve got to do. We’ve 

got to invest in infrastructure. We’ve got to sustain this 

momentum. We have to answer the question. 

 

And do you know, others understand it as well. It was very 

interesting to hear the opposition leader use, for the most part, 

the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, who had some problems 

with our budget. They would’ve liked to have perhaps seen 

more tax cuts than infrastructure investment. And I would say 

to them that tax reductions will be coming from this 

government. But we’re going to deal, first things first, with the 

infrastructure deficit we’ve inherited from the NDP. But it was 

interesting because the Leader of the Opposition was quoting 

from the chamber of commerce of Saskatoon in his attack of the 

budget. 

 

I want to read to you the third line in the provincial budget 2008 

report card, for immediate release March 19, 2008. Here’s the 

very first line — and I admit that they had some concerns with 

the budget — but here’s how they start: “While the grades 

improved from the previous government . . .” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So the Leader of the Opposition has to kind 

of scour all of the papers and the Internet. He had to dial up the 

Internet and find, and find somebody that didn’t really didn’t 

like the budget. And he found the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce, and they raised some good points. And we’ll have a 

debate with them, to be sure. 

 

But even that piece, he didn’t read the whole story. The whole 

story of course is that, even though they didn’t necessarily like 

all of the Saskatchewan Party budget, they liked it a lot better 

than anything they saw from that party opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Others have weighed in. You know, it was 

interesting, it was interesting to see in the London Financial 

Times . . . And there’s a debate in the province right now about, 

well you know, it’s all commodity prices, and does it have a lot 

to do with government? 

 

And as I said at the outset, it does have a little bit to do with 

government. We need a government that understands the 

fundamentals, a government that won’t sit on, that won’t put 

$100 million, by the way, into Crown Investments Corporation, 

waiting to bail out a Domtar, to risk it in that mature industry. It 

takes a government that says, we’re going to use that money in 

CIC to actually pave some roads and fix some schools and do 

some work with respect to our hospitals. So it does impact on 

the government. 

 

And you know, and you know, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve seen, 

we’ve seen the comments from across the country. We’ve even 

seen them from over the seas. We’ve seen them with respect to 

the London Financial Times, that highlighted the fact that . . . 

Here’s a quote from the London Financial Times, from 

someone in Saskatchewan interviewed by that UK [United 

Kingdom]-based operation: 

 

“The business community has high hopes for the new 

government. A prominent Regina businessman predicts 

that [quote] they’re going to move in a direction to make 

Saskatchewan more competitive than any province in the 

country,” [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

That’s an interesting quote. 

 

Not very long ago, last week in fact, in the Leader-Post and The 

StarPhoenix there was a guest editorial, an opinion writer from 

Alberta who had this to say about the governments — and we 

know about commodity prices — but about the governments. 

Here’s the quote: 

 

The political climates in both Saskatchewan and B.C. have 

changed, too, in recent years. Where once both were in the 

grip of high-tax, anti-development NDP governments . . . 

 

And we see that old face starting to emerge again with respect 

to royalties and oil sands and uranium development. I 

interrupted myself. Let me just read that part again. 

 

Where once both were in the grip of high-tax, 

anti-development NDP governments, both [Saskatchewan 

and BC — both] are now governed by more 

growth-friendly administrations. The pent up demand for 

more exploration and development has finally been 

released [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

That’s to close the quote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And what a great place to close. Because 

I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, that’s the sense that 

Saskatchewan people have right across this province. The 

pent-up potential of Saskatchewan that we’ve all understood 

has been there for a very, very, very long time — probably 

since they first discovered oil and then uranium and then potash 

— that pent-up potential is being released, Mr. Speaker. The 

pent-up energy and potential of the people of our province — 

First Nation, Métis, non-First Nations, rural and urban, north 

and south — that too is being released, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the good news is there is a government now in 

Saskatchewan that understands how to keep it going. It’s 

reflected in the budget document so capably presented by the 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

Minister of Finance. And it will be a great pleasure for me — 

and dare I say my colleagues and friends on this side of the 

House — to stand up and vote for sustained growth, for 

Saskatchewan to continue to lead the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s my duty, pursuant to rule 52(3), to 

warn the Assembly that the Minister of Finance is about to 

exercise his right to close the debate. Afterwards, all members 

will be precluded from speaking to the question. Therefore if 

any member wishes to speak, let him do so now. I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a very great pleasure for me to rise today and to be able to 

close the debate on this budget. One of the most difficult things 

in this whole process is not the work that went into preparing 

the budget. It’s certainly the most difficult challenge to follow 

the eloquence of the Premier in his address and to be able to 

make comments that would compare favourably. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased to have this opportunity. 

 

You know over the four months we’ve had to prepare this 

budget, I would like to extend some moments of gratitude and 

appreciation for the process. We were a new government on 

November 7 with much to do and a great agenda moving this 

province forward. We recognized that there was momentum 

beginning to build in this economy, and we were very, very 

concerned to make sure that we did everything that was 

reasonable and responsible to do to make sure that that 

momentum was sustained going forward. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And so my colleagues and myself reflected on what were the 

priorities. And the first priority we thought was important to do 

was something relatively new for Saskatchewan, is actually 

reflect on the promises and commitments we made to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan when we campaigned leading up to 

November 7. And we have thought out those programs. We’ve 

thought out those commitments very, very carefully leading up 

to the campaign. And the first thing we said we had to do in 

order to move this forward is to do something rather unique for 

Saskatchewan, and that was to honour the promises we made to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And so the very first thing that I had 

to focus on when we prepared our budget, and when our 

colleagues worked on it, was to keep those promises. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as we went through the process with four short 

months, we knew that we had — in order to maintain the 

calendar for the rules of the House — we knew that we had to 

meet a mid-March deadline for the presentation of the budget. 

That was sort of a fact. And so what we did is had to work very, 

very diligently in our ministries and in our caucus and in our 

government to make sure that we could bring those promises to 

reality in a very, very time-sensitive way and a very short 

period of time. And that was one of the very strong priorities 

that we had in the preservation of this budget. 

 

And I was so delighted as it all came together, that we were 

able to honour 40 promises that we made during the campaign 

in this budget document. And I think we can stand very proud 

as a government and as a caucus that we were able to achieve 

that result. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the other reality that I 

would have to share with this Assembly is that this whole 

process would have been a much easier process if it was a 

question of comparing good ideas to bad ideas. All of us could 

have a pretty easy time knowing the difference between a good 

idea and a bad idea, and it’s pretty easy to choose the good idea. 

 

The reality of a budget process is not that simplistic. What it is, 

is choices between competing good ideas to be able to balance 

different good ideas and be able to priorize them and rank them 

in terms of when they’re reasonable to implement. 

 

The members opposite have suggested alternatives that we 

might consider as a budget. Some of them are good ideas, and 

they’re competing good ideas and I note them. Others are bad 

ideas and I dismiss them. But over all I’d say that the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that it’s a balancing of priorities that 

is the most difficult challenge. Black and white is easy; shades 

of grey are much more difficult to balance out. 

 

And I’m very, very proud of this government in that we were 

able to, I think, come up with a very, very good balance of good 

ideas and initiatives that we needed to accomplish in this budget 

cycle. 

 

There is much more to be done in this province going forward, 

and I look forward to the opportunity for our government to 

meet those challenges going forward and to make sure that 

Saskatchewan’s growth momentum is sustained in the years 

that approach us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, one of the other realities 

that we had is that we had to say to ourselves and the people, 

what is the single most important initiative that we can do over 

and above keeping our election promises? 

 

And we talked to people in this province. We talked to 

companies. We talked to companies and businesses and 

government people to our west who have experienced 

incredible growth for a good number of years while we were 

languishing. And we asked them really many simple questions. 

 

One of them is, is to recognize all of the successes that they 

have achieved. But we asked them a simple, fundamental 

question. If there was anything you could go back and do over 

again in the incredible growth that your province has 

experienced, what would that be? And they told us, virtually 

unanimously, if it was government, if it was business, if it was 

companies or individual citizens, they said, do not forget to put 

some emphasis on infrastructure. Don’t focus just on debt 

retirement. Make sure you remember to invest in infrastructure, 

so you don’t curtail the ability of your province’s economy to 

grow. 



April 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

And I thought it was pretty good advice and particularly good 

advice when I recognized how poorly the previous 

administration had looked after infrastructure. You would hear 

stories from the Education critic of leaking school rooms and 

falling down facilities. You’d hear in health care that there was 

a need for badly needed equipment and emphasis on repair so 

that needed surgeries and procedures could go forward. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we talked about providing chillers for 

the hospitals. Well it isn’t to keep the executives comfortable. 

What it is, is to make sure the operating rooms can operate in 

the heat of the summer. It’s those kind of fundamentals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, when we talked to the 

people in industry, they said you simply have to do something 

about the roads because we need access to our transportation 

networks to haul the oil that is being pumped out of the ground 

to the places where it’s collected. We need to make sure that 

companies like St. Brieux who have an incredible GDP have 

access to move their cultivators out and sell them across the 

world. 

 

Those fundamental, simple realities of a major investment into 

highways needed to happen — not only just on the roadways 

between our major centres but also in those economic hubs and 

also to make sure that bridges and culverts and things of that 

nature are properly attested to because they’re getting to the end 

of their lifespan, and they’ve neglected by that previous 

administration for far too long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we went through all of these programs . . . 

And the speakers that have gone before me have certainly 

outlined many of the individual programs, and the ministers that 

have talked about their own ministries have talked about the 

specific details of the investments we made. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am so proud of this $1 billion investment. I 

have to simply say, we are ready for growth because we are 

investing $400 million for highways, $200 million for health 

care, $160 million for education, $140 million for 

municipalities, and $100 million on other badly needed projects 

in this province for a total of $1 billion in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve also said that we 

have to be mindful of a fundamental commitment that we’ve 

made to the people of the province in terms of long-term debt 

strategy. We promised that we would invest $250 million — a 

quarter of a billion dollars — to reduce the debt, and in this 

budget we’ve realized that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We also, we also, Mr. Speaker, have 

promised to have an ongoing, sustainable approach to debt 

reduction. In legislation that we have tabled, and we look 

forward to debating in The Growth and Financial Security Act, 

we have promised going forward that 50 per cent of any surplus 

in the years going forward will automatically be applied to 

long-term debt. And so we are optimistic, that with the good 

results, that we’re going to achieve from the growth that we are 

supporting, that that’ll be a realization going further, that 

there’ll be much more of the dollars that will be applied to 

long-term debt. And it’s going to be on a sustainable, balanced 

basis. 

 

And the other thing that I’m very proud of, the final thing that 

I’d like to mention and I’m very, very proud of, we’re able to 

achieve all of these things and balance the budget this year in 

real terms, in real dollars, and a balanced budget initiative, and 

I’m very, very proud of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — You know, there have been comments 

by some that say, why don’t you use more of the money and 

spend down the $1.3 billion that sits in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund? Well, Mr. Speaker, I look at the 

balancing of the responsibilities of a province similar to the 

balancing of a family income. You know, we are a family that 

has a long-term debt. That’s true. It’s not any different than a 

family with a house mortgage that they have. They also have 

some money in the savings account, and many families have 

money in the savings account. And so they have to choose and 

balance out, do you take the money out of your savings account 

and apply it to your long-term debt? That’s not a bad idea. It’s 

one of those competing good ideas. 

 

But what if your income is not stable? What if that family’s 

revenue coming into the family is uncertain? What if, instead of 

a stable monthly income, that family operates under contract? 

And in one year you have a very good contract that actually 

provides a surplus of money compared to what your family 

needs. Another year it might be short. Is it not fiscally prudent 

to make sure that you’ve got money in the savings account so 

that you don’t have to, in the years when you don’t have the 

same resources, isn’t it wise to not put all the money against 

debt payment so they have to go and talk to the bankers about 

making sure your family has food on the table? 

 

I think it’s a responsible balance that we are trying to strike 

because we are mindful of the fact that while commodity prices 

in agriculture for example are very good right now, the crop is 

not in the bin as we speak. And we never know. There is certain 

uncertainties about the weather. I worry about the storm clouds 

that are looming in the economy of our neighbour to the south. I 

worry about the storm clouds that are predicted to the east of us. 

And certainly to be fiscally responsible and prudent is what the 

people of this province expect of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I could go through some 

of the positive comments that have been made about this 

budget. Many of my colleagues have done that already, and I 

won’t repeat it. 

 

But I will say that I had the pleasure last week to take three or 

four days to travel around the province to talk to people about 

this budget. And I very pridefully went to these meetings and 

went to these opportunities and breakfasts and lunches and 

other occasions to talk about the budget, and people were 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2008 

genuinely interested. We had very good turnouts at these 

events. 

 

And they were very, very pleased, I think, particularly about the 

budget. But they’re also pleased about the fact that I said to 

them that this was actually the beginning of the next budget 

cycle. This is the opportunity I had to listen to what they were 

saying about this budget and also to listen to them for what they 

had to say about what our priorities should be about the next 

budget. That is an ongoing process that we are looking forward 

to with a great deal of enthusiasm because we’re actually going 

to have 12 months of time in order to thoughtfully and 

professionally and excited and enthusiastically prepare the next 

budget for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

People in this province are excited. People in this province are 

ready for growth. They demonstrated on November 7 they were 

ready for change. Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be prouder to stand in 

this House and say that I will oppose the amendment and very 

pridefully vote for this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment brought forward by the member from Regina 

Dewdney, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Meewasin: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

condemn the government for stockpiling a $1.3 billion 

surplus without addressing the most pressing needs of 

Saskatchewan people, in particular property tax relief, 

skills training, the environment and the ongoing housing 

crisis. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. The question before 

the Assembly . . . The amendment’s defeated. 

 

The question before the Assembly is the motion brought 

forward by the Minister of Finance, seconded by the member 

for Saskatchewan Rivers: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:28 until 12:58.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we proceed with the vote this 

afternoon, I want to remind members that there should be quiet 

to allow the Clerk to be heard so the member can hear the vote 

call. If there is interruptions, we will pause until that eruption 

ceases. 

 

The motion before the Assembly, moved by the Minister of 

Finance, seconded by the member for Sask Rivers: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 36] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd McMorris D’Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 17] 

 

Calvert 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just to remind members, I’d 

like members to pay attention as the opposition did for the 

government vote. 

 

Harper Junor Trew 

Van Mulligen Atkinson Nilson 

Yates Higgins Belanger 

Iwanchuk Forbes Taylor 

Quennell Broten McCall 

Wotherspoon   

 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour, 36; those 

opposed, 17. 

 

The Speaker: — Motion carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Being the time of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. this coming Monday. Enjoy 

your weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 565 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 566 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk Assistant .......................................................................................................................................................................... 566 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association Nomination 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 566 

 Saskatoon Firm Wins Environmental Leadership Award 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 566 

 Swift Current Team in Western Hockey League Playoffs 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 566 

 National Poetry Month 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 567 

 Wadena Hockey Team Wins Provincial Championship 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 567 

 Fantasy Food Charity Gala 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 567 

 Good News for Saskatchewan 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 568 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Drug Plan Administration 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 568 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 568 

 Nurses’ Contract Negotiations 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

 Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 570 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 570 

 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 572 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 580 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 588 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 590 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


