




















































Hansard: November 26, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 19A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1859 

 November 26, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to introduce a number of students, 

17 to be exact, from the Kelvington High School — my 

hometown, the nicest town in Saskatchewan. And with them 

today we have Trent Whippler, the teacher. And we have Greg 

Niezgoda and a special lady, Caren O‟Grady-Blatchford. She is 

also my CA [constituency assistant]. 

 

And I‟m really pleased to see everyone in this legislature today. 

I‟m looking forward to meeting with you afterwards and 

answering any questions you may have and listening to your 

comments. And I ask my colleagues to please help me welcome 

these students to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s my pleasure to introduce a group of 10 grade 12 students 

from a constituency high school. This is Luther College‟s high 

school campus. And they‟re here with their teacher who‟s made 

this a tradition, Mr. Mark Leupold, Mr. Ben Rain, and Ms. 

Courtney Waugh, who I believe is interning at Luther. 

 

Luther has graduated many, many very successful graduates, 

Mr. Speaker, among them, my wife. And I certainly look 

forward to chatting with these graduates here today, and they‟ve 

got bright futures before them. Could I ask the Assembly to join 

in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of this Hon. 

Assembly, I would like to introduce three individuals who are 

joining us today. Firstly — and they‟re seated in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker — Mr. Dale Lemke, current president of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. Dale is also president of 

Display Systems International, Inc., otherwise known as DSI, 

an award-winning computer company based out of Saskatoon. 

Dale has most recently been appointed as Chair of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan‟s information technology sector team. Dale‟s 

knowledge of the industry and his business savvy will be most 

helpful to the work of this new team. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce Ms. Susan Gorges. 

Susan is the chief executive officer of SpringBoard West 

Innovations, a non-profit organization which assists business in 

technology commercialization and innovation. Susan is a 

member of Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s commercialization and R 

& D [research and development] services sector team. Her 

expertise and experience in this field will be a very valuable 

asset to this sector team. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce a man who is no 

stranger to this Hon. Assembly and the province of 

Saskatchewan — Mr. Steve McLellan, outgoing president of 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

I hope that all members will extend a warm welcome to all 

three of these special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these folks to the Legislative 

Assembly today. It is the chambers of commerce and their 

members that fuel the growth in our province. And I appreciate 

the opportunity to introduce them to this Assembly today, and I 

hope all members will join with me in doing that. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to members of this Assembly, what I‟d like to do is 

introduce Mr. Doug Richardson and Mr. Tom Galloway. We‟re 

delighted to have them join us in your gallery today, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. 

And it really speaks to the issue that families are struggling to 

find affordable and even available child care spots so they can 

return to work and enter the economy. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf 

of Saskatchewan residents concerned about the sporadic 

increases in minimum wage that do not often reflect the rising 

cost of living. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of affordable housing for Saskatchewan 

seniors, and I would like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

Thank you very much. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary 

education. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union, and 

the First Nations University of Canada Student Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property tax. This is desired by Saskatchewan 

families and Saskatchewan business. I will read the prayer. It 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by concerned citizens of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

United Way Thanks Community Members 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, 

November 20 I had the pleasure of attending the 2008 

Saskatoon United Way Dinner Date along with several other 

Saskatoon MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the annual dinner date is an opportunity to thank 

community members who have led by example in 

demonstrating what it means to give back to the community. 

This year‟s supper was a tribute to well-known philanthropists 

Les and Irene Dubé. Community turnout for the event was 

great, and a packed TCU Place banquet room was able to say 

thank you to the Dubés for the millions of dollars they have 

given to community organizations and facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, philanthropy is about the donation of financial 

resources, but it is equally about the donation of our time. 

Whether sitting on a board or helping with the front-line 

delivery of services, Saskatchewan people are among the most 

generous citizens in our country. The Saskatoon United Way 

understands this, and for nearly 50 years it has been providing 

resources to the community. This year they have set $4 million 

as a fundraising goal. I‟m happy to report that they are already 

$2.5 million on the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the organizing 

committee for the United Way dinner date on hosting another 

highly successful event and thank Les and Irene Dubé for the 

role they have played in our province. I also want to say thank 

you to the thousands of Saskatchewan people who regularly 

give of their time and resources, often without any recognition. 

I ask all members to join me in showing our appreciation. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

Kelvington Gold Hawks  

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on November 14 I had the honour of bringing greetings from 

our government to my hometown of Kelvington. The provincial 

girls 3A volleyball championship was hosted by the Kelvington 

High School and co-hosted by Porcupine Plain. 

 

The Kelvington Gold Hawks were coached by Raymond 

Krienke, assisted by Blair Lissinna and Michelle Patenaude. I‟d 

like to recognize Mr. Krienke for his dedication to coaching for 

30 years, and this is his retirement year. We think that he‟s put 

in about 18,000 volunteer hours. 

 

Five senior players from his team are sitting in our gallery 

today. Kelli Blatchford, Kayla Spray, Holly Marquette, Allysia 

Doratti, Kristin Shirley had already won provincial bronze and 

silver, and these girls finally achieved gold in their senior year 

and brought Coach Krienke‟s 11th provincial gold medal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not to be outdone, the Kelvington senior boys also 

competed in provincial 4A volleyball championship in Tisdale 

last weekend. Their coach was Barry Mason, assisted by Rob 

Lissinna. And their captain, Sean Patrick, is also in our stand 

today. They competed along with their classmates, and they 

took the Assiniboia Rockets in two straight games and the 

championship final. This is their second provincial gold in two 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask this Assembly to join with me 

in congratulating the Kelvington Gold Hawks on their double 

gold victory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Room to Grow Auction 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the Room to Grow Auction which was held 

Thursday, November 20 at the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] Heritage Centre in the fine constituency of 

Regina Rosemont. Also attending was my colleague, the 

member from Regina Douglas Park and the member from 

Wascana.  

 

This event featured both live and silent auction for many pieces 

of art donated by local artists including Vic Cicansky, Leesa 

Streifler, Jeannie Mah, Ken Lonechild, and Robert Roycroft. 

 

In celebration of International Children‟s Day and to highlight 

the promise and potential of the young children, artwork was on 

display, and five piece of children‟s artwork were included in 

the sale. All proceeds from this event are for the Regina Early 

Learning Centre‟s Small Hands — Big Dreams capital 

campaign, Mr. Speaker. Joe Fafard, honorary patron of the 

capital campaign, sent his greetings to the 180 people in 

attendance. 

 

I would like to thank event sponsors SaskEnergy, Karal 

Management, and Nicky‟s Cafe & Bake Shop, as well as the 

many artists and businesses which made donations. I would like 

to thank the dedicated board, staff, and volunteers for the Early 

Learning Centre who ensured the success of this event. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in extending our 

congratulations on this successful even. And our thanks for the 

essential and enriching contributions that the Early Learning 

Centre makes to our community. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Get in the Game for United Way 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

congratulate Regina area employees of SaskEnergy and 

TransGas for surpassing their United Way fundraising goal. 

These employees set a rather ambitious target, Mr. Speaker, to 

raise $145,000 in a two-week campaign. 

 

I‟m pleased to report that they beat that total, Mr. Speaker, by 

collecting $146,112. That‟s an average of more than $300 per 

employee in the Regina area. In fact, Mr. Speaker, special 

honours go the employees of the TransGas Regina‟s storage 

caverns with 100 per cent participation in the United Way 

campaign. 

 

The corporation campaign includes fundraising breakfasts, 

luncheons, bingos, ticket raffles, food sales, as well as 

employees signing up for payroll deduction. The generosity of 

these employees in support of the United Way campaign in 

Regina is overwhelming. 

 

The theme of this year‟s campaign was Get in the Game. And I 

think we can say that SaskEnergy and TransGas employees 

scored a big touchdown for the United Way. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, over the past eight years, SaskEnergy and TransGas 

employees provided worldwide donations of more than 500,000 

to United Way campaigns throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Please join with me in congratulating SaskEnergy and TransGas 

on their contributions to the United Way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan Poet Honoured 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Elizabeth Brewster is a 

very talented poet living in Saskatoon Nutana. On Wednesday, 

November 19, His Honour the Lieutenant Governor granted Dr. 

Brewster the 2008 Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Also a prolific author, novelist, and short story writer, Dr. 

Brewster has been publishing her poetry since the 1940s. She 

has received numerous awards for her clear, direct style and 

stimulating themes. Born in New Brunswick, she helped to 

found the journal The Fiddlehead before migrating to 

Saskatchewan where she joined the Saskatchewan Writers 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Guild and immersed herself in the rich writing community we 

enjoy in our province. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Dr. Brewster mentors young and emerging writers with 

constructive criticism and encourages writers through monthly 

poetry workshops reminiscent of those hosted by Saskatoon 

poet Anne Szumigalski for several decades before her passing. 

 

Dr. Brewster has received, among other awards, the 

Saskatchewan Book Award for Poetry in 2003 and a Lifetime 

Award for Excellence in the Arts from the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board. She was short listed for the Governor General‟s Award 

for Poetry in 1996, and is a member of the Order of Canada, a 

recipient of the Queen‟s Golden Jubilee Medal, and the 

Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. 

 

I invite all of my colleagues in this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Dr. Elizabeth Brewster on receiving the 2008 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Member Elected to Executive of Pacific Northwest 

Economic Region 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

I‟m pleased to announce the recent election of the member from 

Cut Knife-Turtleford to the executive of the Pacific Northwest 

Economic Region as Canadian vice-president. 

 

Founded in 1991, PNWER [Pacific Northwest Economic 

Region] is the only statutory non-partisan, non-profit, binational 

and public-private partnership in North America. As a 

pragmatic organization, PNWER provides formal structures for 

building and enhancing Canada-US [United States] 

relationships and discussing issues on a regional basis. 

 

The PNWER organization has over 14 working groups 

addressing such policy areas as energy, environment, 

agriculture, and border issues. Each of these groups is 

co-chaired by an industry leader and legislator. 

 

PNWER executive network includes private and government 

leaders and officials, industry associations, and economic 

development commissions. As a legislator, my colleague has 

been observing and attending meetings with this organization 

for the past four years. In April he was instrumental in 

organizing an official PNWER officers visit to Regina. 

 

At the PNWER annual summit in Vancouver in July, 

Saskatchewan officially announced its membership into the 

organization. Since August the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford has been serving on the finance and audit 

committee of this organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to congratulate my hon. colleague in his 

new role as fourth vice-president of PNWER. He‟s an excellent 

ambassador for this province and I‟m confident he‟ll do an 

outstanding job. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Multilingual Association of Regina’s 30th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Canada est un pays avec deux 

langues officielles. Nous parlons français et anglais. 

 

[Translation: Canada is a country with two official languages. 

We speak French and English.] 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

On Saturday I had the pleasure, along with the member for 

Regina South, to attend the 30th anniversary of the Multilingual 

Association of Regina. MLAR‟s [Multilingual Association of 

Regina] objective is to support and promote the diversity of 

culture, as well as to promote the teaching and retention of 

international and heritage languages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given that MLAR has achieved the milestone of 

their 30th anniversary, I would say that their objective is being 

achieved. Regina currently has 22 heritage language schools in 

operation, offering classes in Afghan, Chinese, German, Greek, 

Hindi, Italian, Spanish, and Ukrainian, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker 2008 is the International Year of Languages. There 

are more than 6,700 languages being spoken in the world today. 

 

I would like to ask all my colleagues to join me in commending 

the Multilingual Association of Regina for their dedication and 

achievement, and thank all of the students and families for 

providing the entertainment at the celebration on Saturday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

AgriStability Program 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When questioned 

about the AgriStability program move to Melville, the minister 

replied, and I quote, “It will cost a few million dollars to bring it 

home, but I think down the road . . . it will be cheaper to 

administer and that will save us more dollars . . .” In a 

November 12 Melville Advance article, when pressed on how 

much money would be saved, the minister couldn‟t give an 

answer. He wasn‟t sure. 

 

Well he‟s had over two weeks to find out. A simple question to 

the minister: how much is it going to cost to move the program 

to Melville? And how much is the province going to save? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite‟s information, that this 

year, in this year‟s budget, it will cost about $3.8 million, 

additional dollars to bring it back. The initial start-up of hiring 

people and start the move to Saskatchewan, next year will be 

about an additional $8.8 million, Mr. Speaker, which will be 

cost shared, of course, by the federal government who are 

assisting us in this move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wouldn‟t be doing things like this if the 

previous government, for the last many, many years, had‟ve 

paid any attention to agriculture whatsoever. We‟re bringing the 

administration of CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 

stabilization] home because right now there‟s files sitting there 

from 2005 and 2006. Producers all across this province are 

waiting for payouts from the program and are not receiving 

them, Mr. Speaker. We‟re actually cleaning up a mess left by 

the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta administers its 

AgriStability program. They‟ve said that it has to be up and 

rolling for three to four years before you see any cost benefits. 

If the program is launched in Melville in 2010 and it requires 

three or four years until the province sees the benefits, it could 

well be 2014 or 2015. To the minister: is it true that the 

province will not see cost benefits of administering this 

program at home until 2014 or 2015, and what type of deficit 

will this program run until then? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member 

knows, on a number of occasions I have told her that we have 

worked directly with the province of Alberta who administers 

their own program. The advice I have received from Alberta, 

who has been very good by the way in giving us ideas on how 

we can bring the program home, how we can make more 

efficiencies to the program, and how we can make the program 

better for producers. Mr. Speaker, by doing that, I think the 

member knows full well that a number of these numbers we 

won‟t know till we get down the road. 

 

What we do know is we can make the program more efficient 

by having it here in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, the 

efficiency that we‟re going to bring to this program will 

actually get dollars into the hands of producers far quicker than 

is happening now under the federal administration, and actually 

will get dollars into the hands of livestock producers. And if the 

former NDP government had‟ve done this four or five years 

ago, we wouldn‟t be in the mess that we‟re in today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a letter from a livestock 

producer sent to my office dated November 18 says, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . AgriStability does not work for cow-calf producers. 

The Ministers of Agriculture must meet . . . and ask some 

serious questions. So far nothing has changed. 

 

On the other hand, the minister has just said that AgriStability 

will provide further assistance to the livestock industry. 

 

So to the minister: what specific changes has he made along 

with his federal cousin, Mr. Ritz, to make the program such that 

it will provide further assistance to the livestock industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t believe we 

have to go down the list of the things that we‟ve done. In a 

small way I think a number of programs that we brought in . . . 

And I‟ve been first to say that not one of them are something 

that‟s really dramatic for the industry but I think every initiative 

that we‟ve come forth with in the first year of being government 

are helping the industry across this province, but especially in 

the Southwest where they were ignored for the last four years of 

drought by the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find, somewhat at odds with the member from 

Nutana . . . But I‟d like to give her some of the quotes coming 

out of some of the industry right now that might be a little 

contrary to what she‟s saying. And I‟d like to quote: 

 

Saskatchewan‟s cattle producers are pleased with 

Agriculture minister Bob Bjornerud‟s announcement last 

week to bring the administration of AgriStability — 

formerly known as CAIS — home to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the leaders of the industry in Saskatchewan 

who knew full well there was nothing done on the previous 

administration, and they appreciate the moves that we‟ve made 

to this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — To quote from a letter sent to my office, and 

I quote: “. . . unfortunately, this program was not set up for 

situations such as the ones livestock producers find themselves 

in now.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to be eligible for this AgriStability, 

two of three production margins used to calculate the 

producer‟s reference period have to be positive. The livestock 

industry is in crisis. Many are showing negative margins, not 

only for last year but for many years, and will not be able to 

benefit under AgriStability. 

 

To the minister: how does his AgriStability benefit those 

livestock producers that have shown negative margins for the 

last four or five years? 

 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, number one, I 

would appreciate the member tabling that letter. But I want to 

remind the member . . . And I think she answered her own 

question; she said for the last four or five years. Is her memory 

that bad that she doesn‟t remember who was in government 

until November ‟07? How quick we forget, Mr. Speaker. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind that member, and the Leader of 

the Opposition said, things are worse than when BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] hit. 

 

Culled cows, culled cows — for the members on that side that 

would know what I‟m talking about — in October ‟03, on 

average they were $296 a head. In October ‟07 — they were the 

government, Mr. Speaker — they were $398 a head. October 

‟08, this October, Mr. Speaker, they‟re $548 a head. If you can 

do the math, that means today, this October, they were $150 

more than when you were in government. 

 

Where was the crisis last year? What did you do about it last 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Environmental Issues 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An article in the 

October 29 Leader-Post stated: 

 

Wall said there are areas of federal-provincial duplication 

of services where the federal government could cut 

instead, such as “environmental processes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Environment: why is the Sask 

Party advocating that the federal government withdraw from its 

responsibility to protect the environment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as the 

member opposite would know, the province has jurisdiction in 

certain areas and the federal government in others, and at times 

they are overlapped. There is ways that we can streamline in the 

issue of Department of Fisheries and Oceans. 

 

If the members opposite would listen to, for the most part, their 

rural constituency, as large or small as that may be, they would 

understand that there were concerns with Department of 

Fisheries and Oceans in this province. And if we can find any 

kind of areas where we can streamline operations in conjunction 

with the federal government, we will do that. It‟s good for our 

residents. It‟s good for business. It‟s good for our province 

overall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, no one in their right mind would 

trust the Sask Party government to conduct an unbiased 

environmental impact assessment. The Sask Party appointed a 

nuclear advisory panel to advise the government on nuclear 

industry development. The minister who made the 

announcement recently told the Sask Party convention, quote: 

 

The purpose of this particular lobby is not to advise us 

whether we should proceed in the full nuclear cycle. It‟s 

to help us understand how we can best do that. 

 

To the minister: how can the Sask Party conduct a fair and 

unbiased assessment of any potential developments when it‟s 

already made up its mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud of the position 

that our government has taken, that we‟re actually open-minded 

to the possibility of value-added on the uranium side in 

Saskatchewan, and we look forward to information coming 

forward on the potential for nuclear power for our province. 

 

The NDP on the other side, Mr. Speaker, continually say that 

we need to do something for greenhouse gas emissions in this 

province, yet they‟ve completely slammed the door on clean 

coal even though they were huge proponents of it last year 

when it was apparently their idea. And they have absolutely no 

interest in even looking at the idea of nuclear power for our 

province. So in the face of dirty coal, I don‟t exactly understand 

how the NDP expect us to reach any kind of emissions targets 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Perhaps not cutting the $320 million fund that 

was there to address it would have been a start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the so-called Uranium 

Development Partnership includes three people with 

connections to a company that wants to build a nuclear plant in 

Saskatchewan. And their so-called representative of the 

environmental community, Dr. Patrick Moore, recently told 

Rolling Stone magazine that quote, “People who don‟t want to 

live near nuclear facilities should probably move.” 

 

To the minister: given that the Sask Party‟s closest advisers 

have such contempt for people‟s understandable reservations 

about nuclear, why should anyone have confidence in this 

government‟s ability to defend the public interest? 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that so 

far the sole candidate for the leadership of the NDP in this 

province is Dwain Lingenfelter who is an absolutely enormous 

proponent and cheerleader for the nuclear power industry in this 

province. He has asked that it be here. He thinks Saskatchewan 

is the ideal place for nuclear power. And I would wonder 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite should first 

pose her questions to her potential new leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — There‟s a big difference in being a proponent in 

a responsible fashion, which is not what we‟re seeing from the 

Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party wants to control the environmental 

assessment process so it can control the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think too many members want to get 

into the debate, but there‟s only one member recognized on the 

floor. The member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party wants to control the 

environmental assessment process so it can control the 

outcome. They want the freedom to do whatever they want 

without having to be accountable to anyone. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Energy and 

Resources told the Sask Party convention that he believes oil 

sands development will proceed at some point in time. Again 

these are not the words of a minister who is studying the matter. 

He has already made up his mind. 

 

Again to the minister: why should anyone trust the Sask Party 

to conduct a fair and unbiased environmental impact assessment 

of oil sands development when it‟s clear that the government 

has already made up its mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out that in 

the NDP‟s Energy and Climate Change Plan on page 16 that 

the NDP released in 2007 says, and I quote, “Identifying 

economic opportunities for the development of new energy 

resources such as oil sands, oil shale . . .” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that the member for 

Riversdale, the now Opposition Leader, speaking at the 

Petroleum Technology Research Centre in Regina in March 15, 

2005 said this. When it comes to tar sands, oil sand, whatever 

you want to call it, the member opposite said this, and I quote: 

 

It benefits the companies. It benefits the communities 

where this development will occur. It benefits the 

province, in that any increase in oil patch activity has a 

positive impact on jobs and the provincial treasury. 

 

If she has concerns, she can talk to her now leader. If she has 

concerns about nuclear energy, she can talk to her new leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Northeast. 

 

Funding for Proposed Bridge in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

going to refer to a Saskatchewan government news release 

dated June 20 of this year where the government is announcing 

a bridge in Saskatoon. The Premier is very excited to point out 

that the federal government and his buddy, Stephen Harper, is 

paying $86.5 million to that bridge. 

 

To the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure: does this news 

release reflect the situation as he understands it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to be able to 

stand on my feet on two days in a row. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

issue of infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan is a very 

important issue, and it‟s our pleasure as a government to 

address infrastructure in the most aggressive, dynamic way that 

that issue has ever been undertaken and approached before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year we have committed more money to 

infrastructure expenditures in the province than ever in the 

history of this province‟s budget process. Mr. Speaker, we have 

achieved more kilometres of repair on our highways than ever 

in the history of this province. Mr. Speaker, going forward 

we‟re going to be spending a lot more money on highways. 

 

As it concerns the bridge in Saskatoon, the federal government 

has made a commitment to us to assist with the cost of it, and 

we‟re looking forward to their participation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I will quote from the news 

release of June 20. The Premier says, and I quote: 

 

The federal government‟s funding commitment — which 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

is over and above the considerable funding already 

committed to Saskatchewan under Building Canada — is 

further proof that, by working in partnership, our 

government is able to get results for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — To the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure: is this bridge an example of unique money for 

Saskatchewan? And does a single bridge, no matter how good, 

make up for $800 million in equalization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the growing economy and 

the impact it is having on our traffic patterns in this province 

are going to necessitate a lot of investment in infrastructure in 

the years to come. 

 

We‟ve already indicated this year that we were committed to 

make that kind of investment. We had the largest budget in the 

history of the province for infrastructure this fiscal year. Next 

year we‟re going to be committing a lot more money. We 

believe that the money being spent by the federal government 

on the bridge project is new money, and that they are going to 

be willing partners in other endeavours in terms of 

infrastructure development in this province in the days and 

years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier says in his news 

release that this money is over and above the Building Canada 

fund, but the Prime Minister disagrees. In his news release he 

says, and I quote, “It is part of the Building Canada plan.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is saying one thing and the Prime 

Minister is saying the opposite. To the Minister of Highways 

and Infrastructure: is the Premier right or is the Prime Minister 

right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, once again I appreciate the 

question and I think the line of questioning has been pretty 

much in line with our expectations. They want to know if the 

money is unique. We believe the money to be unique, and we‟re 

anticipating receiving it at an appropriate time as we go forward 

in this infrastructure development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Financial Relationship with Federal Government 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, this bridge is just one small 

example of a much, much bigger problem. Stephen Harper and 

the federal Conservatives promised $800 million to 

Saskatchewan citizens, then they broke their promise. This 

Premier has completely sold out the people of this province 

when he dropped the lawsuit we launched to hold the 

Conservatives accountable. 

 

To the Premier: why won‟t he just admit that his relationship 

with Stephen Harper isn‟t worth a dime, never mind $800 

million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it‟s safe to say that it‟s our expectation that the relationship we 

have with Ottawa should continue to produce results for 

Saskatchewan people. That should be the measure, Mr. 

Speaker. And so far, we‟re making progress. Are we exactly 

where we want to be yet? No, we‟re not. But we‟re making 

progress. 

 

We see 10 million more dollars, new dollars, for the 

synchrotron. We see a quarter billion dollars of federal 

investment for our clean coal project in southeast 

Saskatchewan. We see $90 million for a bridge that certainly 

was not necessarily the case in all of the other provinces. We 

see $30 million for child care, Mr. Speaker — $30 million for 

child care that those folks in government apparently forgot to 

ask for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say this to members opposite: compare 

that track record in one year against a big fat zero that they were 

able to get, that they were able to deliver for Saskatchewan 

people, and then you have an accurate comparison, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Regina 

Northeast raises a specific example of a much larger problem, 

and that is accounting for exactly what funds Saskatchewan 

people get from their federal government. Mr. Speaker, surely 

the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know — have a 

right to know — exactly what transfers Saskatchewan is 

receiving from the federal government and how this compares 

to transfers to other provincial jurisdictions. 

 

The question I have for the Minister of Finance: can the 

Minister of Finance tell us, are his officials currently keeping 

track of these federal transfers and are they in a position to tell 

us what these transfers are and how these compare to other 

provincial jurisdictions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in response to the member‟s question, of course we‟re 

keeping track of it. You know, we don‟t have a practice in 

Finance that we just sort of put money in a sack and hope that 

we won‟t need to use it for the future. We account very, very 

deliberately. All of the records are deliberately audited, and we 

keep very deliberate account of where the fiscal transfers come 

from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could say the federal government has lived up to 

all of its obligations — past and present and ongoing. They are 

living up to their obligations for the health and social transfers. 

I am very, very hopeful and confident that when Minister 

Flaherty gives his economic update tomorrow, he will indicate 

that they — the federal government, that is — has full 

intentions of honouring their commitments to the social and 

health transfers. And we certainly expect them to do that 

exactly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, back this last summer 

when the Sask Party government was deciding to sell out the 

people of Saskatchewan, the Premier said, and I quote, “Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve taken a certain tack, and it‟s pretty clear it‟s 

paying off . . . ” and earlier said that we‟re making progress. 

 

So does the Minister of Finance agree with the Premier that his 

relationship with Stephen Harper is paying off as compared to 

other provincial jurisdictions? Has his government seen a 

sudden influx of federal money that we‟re not aware of as 

compared to other provincial jurisdictions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m surprised that the member isn‟t more 

enthusiastically supportive of the fact that Saskatchewan has 

become a have province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I was in 

attendance . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. Will the 

government members allow the Minister of Finance to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that former government 

was so engrossed with finding a way to try to milk every cent 

out of equalization, they forgot to get the province into a 

position . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I had the rare 

opportunity to be in Toronto at a meeting where the federal 

minister substantiated the fact that Ontario was likely going to 

slip into a have-not province status. That is not where this 

province wants to be. This government is going to do 

everything it can to continue its status in the future as a have 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Where I come from, Mr. Speaker, 

money is money. Well, Mr. Speaker, again this last summer 

when the Sask Party decided to sell out the people of 

Saskatchewan, the Minister of Justice said, and I quote, “We 

will work to develop a positive working relationship with the 

federal government and we will deliver dollars to the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me underline that: “. . . we will 

deliver dollars to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker.” If 

the Minister of Justice is so convinced and if the Premier is so 

convinced that we‟re going to get new money from the federal 

government and that this is a good deal for the people of 

Saskatchewan, surely they don‟t mind proving it. And so far the 

question I have for the government is, will the government 

support the private member‟s Bill to publicly report all transfer 

payments from the federal government as compared to other 

provinces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the fundamental answer is, will this government 

continue the practices in place to do detailed and complete 

reporting? Of course the answer is yes. We will report on a 

General Revenue Fund basis and we will report on a summary 

financial basis the affairs of the province and the relationships 

with the federal government. That is appropriate and 

responsible. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to put measures in 

place as we develop the budget to ensure this province 

maintains its status in this country as a have province. We‟ll 

continue to do those things that are needed in challenging the 

future to make sure that those challenges are met. 

 

Is the next year going to be an easy budget year? It‟s going to 

be more difficult than the current year we‟re experiencing, but 

we are confident that this province is well poised and well 

positioned to ensure going forward that we are going to 

continue to be a proud member of the have provinces in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

[14:15] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 71, The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Enterprise and Innovation has 

moved that Bill No. 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan Act be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Members will come to order. 

We‟ll move on with the business of the Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its fourth report. I 

move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Economy: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to question no. 125 to 131. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 125 to 131 tabled. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table 

the annual report of the Saskatchewan legislative internship 

program. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with 

great pleasure that I rise today on this historic day for Crown 

corporations in our province and pleased to move second 

reading for The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008. The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 is administered by 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and it outlines the laws 

regarding road use in Saskatchewan. It is scheduled to come 

into effect in April 2009. 

 

The first proposed amendment that I‟ll outline is designed to 

provide Saskatchewan residents with an alternative 

identification source to a passport for United States land and 

water border crossings. The amendment will allow SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to provide qualified 

Canadian citizens residing in Saskatchewan with an alternative 

form of acceptable identification for United States land and 

water border crossings in the form of an enhanced driver‟s 

license or enhanced photo identification card. Currently 

Canadian citizens travelling to the United States by air are 

required to present a passport for entry into the country. 

Effective June 1, 2009, Mr. Speaker, that requirement will 

extend to border crossings by land and water with the 

introduction of the western hemisphere travel initiative. 

 

The western hemisphere travel initiative requires all Canadian 

residents seeking entry into the United States by land or water 

to have a passport or a NEXUS or FAST card, an enhanced 

driver‟s license, or an enhanced photo identification card. 

 

The enhanced driver‟s license and enhanced photo 

identification card are voluntary options for Saskatchewan 

residents to purchase through SGI. They do not replace the 

requirements of having a passport to cross the border by air. 

However they do provide an alternative for Saskatchewan 

residents who do not have or do not wish to get a passport for 

land or water crossings. 

 

We‟re committed to making cross-border travel easier for 

Canadian citizens who are Saskatchewan residents and business 

owners. And we are actively working at having the enhanced 

driver‟s license and enhanced photo identification cards 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

available by June 2009. Mr. Speaker, this will make us the third 

Canadian province to move in this direction. BC [British 

Columbia] was the first to go forward with a pilot concerning 

the 2010 Olympics. Ontario has just passed legislation last 

week, and we will be the third province to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second proposed amendment deals with 

allowing municipalities to designate vehicles owned by 

volunteer firefighters and first responders as emergency 

vehicles. The amendment will allow Saskatchewan 

municipalities to designate volunteer firefighters and first 

responders to operate their vehicles as emergency vehicles 

when responding to an emergency situation. This includes using 

flashing red lights and sirens and driving contrary to the rules of 

the road if, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed safe to do so. 

 

To ensure public safety as well as their own safety, all 

volunteers, Mr. Speaker, will be required to complete 

emergency defensive driver training before receiving this 

designation. Once designated, these volunteers will be 

recognized as being on the job as soon as they leave their home 

in response to emergency situation. 

 

Currently in Saskatchewan volunteer firefighters and first 

responders are required to obey all traffic rules while attending 

to an emergency. If they do not, they are subject to traffic 

convictions and penalties for breaking the law. For example, 

they cannot speed or go through red lights. We are proposing 

this change, Mr. Speaker, because many small communities in 

Saskatchewan rely on many, many volunteers to meet their 

firefighting and EMS [emergency medical services] needs. 

 

This amendment allows us to recognize the importance of 

volunteer firefighters and first responders in our province. The 

service these volunteers, Mr. Speaker, provide, some 6,000 of 

them, they provide a service that is invaluable, Mr. Speaker. 

Since they best know their communities, and they best know 

their specific needs, municipal leaders will be allowed to 

authorize this designation. This includes making sure these 

vehicles are mechanically fit and have proper lights and sirens. 

They must also ensure that these volunteers are adequately 

trained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concludes the outline of the proposed 

amendments found in The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008. 

These amendments will simplify land and water, cross-border 

travel for Saskatchewan residents and will enable volunteer 

firefighters, and first responders to properly respond to 

emergency situations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Traffic Safety Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations has moved that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today to speak at second reading of Bill No. 72, 

An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

listened carefully to the minister outlining the government‟s 

reasons behind this piece of legislation and, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the explanations as to what is contained within that 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, obviously we see these two parts 

as being distinct and separate, but, Mr. Speaker, we also 

recognize the value that exists within the changes that are being 

made here. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, on the enhanced driver‟s 

licence, Mr. Speaker, I want the government to know that I 

think from my reading of the Saskatchewan population that 

there is considerable support for an enhanced driver‟s licence. 

Despite the fact that a passport is the best identification that an 

individual can have, not all Saskatchewan residents feel the 

need to expend the money and go through the process of having 

a national passport, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province does identify people for almost every reason 

except citizenship. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are 

circumstances on both sides of the Canada-US border where 

Saskatchewan meets the United States where residents are 

frequently crossing the border, Mr. Speaker, and have done for 

generations, Mr. Speaker, without a passport. There has not 

been seen to be the need for that passport purpose to drive 

across the border to visit friends and family, Mr. Speaker, 

because that border — the 49th parallel, Mr. Speaker — for all 

intents and purposes for people who live in that area, does not 

exist. It‟s not an identifiable border other than the way in which 

we‟ve established it as such, Mr. Speaker. So families have 

crossed the border. There‟s been marriages between American 

citizens and Saskatchewan citizens over the years, Mr. Speaker, 

and there‟s a lot of family crossing. 

 

That, as well, Mr. Speaker, there is business crossing between 

farmers and ranchers, Mr. Speaker. There are business crossings 

between suppliers and users in both directions, Mr. Speaker. 

And for all intents and purposes, therefore an enhanced driver‟s 

licence is something that Saskatchewan people would applaud 

and would support. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we know that there have 

been negotiations for quite a number of years in the 

intergovernmental area between national and state, federal and 

provincial governments, to ensure safety and security of 

international borders, safety and security of citizens on either 

side of the border. And for a long time, the national government 

in the United States would not recognize Canadian drivers‟ 

licences because they did not contain a citizenship designation. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, it was deemed not appropriate for 

driver‟s licence issuers around the province to become the 

individuals who would identify a person‟s citizenship. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there has been considerable amount of 

discussion about the development of an enhanced driver‟s 

licence for identification purposes. And so, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

generally believed and generally supported that this is certainly 

a step in the right direction. And hopefully, Mr. Speaker, 

through our Intergovernmental Affairs offices at the provincial 

and national level and between the federal and national 

governments of Canada and the United States, we will 

eventually sort out this border crossing dilemma that affects two 

friendly countries and the citizens of those two friendly 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

countries. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, the second part of this Bill 

in front of us, The Traffic Safety Act, does deal with the 

circumstance about volunteer firefighters. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

read with interest when the Bill was introduced at first reading, 

the Regina Leader-Post writer Angela Hall wrote a story that 

sort of outlined where this part of the Bill comes from, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And she writes, the Bill “. . . will allow municipalities to 

designate volunteer firefighter and first responder vehicles as 

emergency vehicles.” Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say, “After 

designated volunteers complete the necessary driver training, 

they can use flashing red lights and sirens on their own vehicles 

and drive „contrary to the rules of the road‟ in emergency 

situations if safe to do so . . .” Mr. Speaker, finally she says, 

“The issue came to the government‟s attention . . . [last] 

summer following news reports about a volunteer firefighter 

from Estevan who was ticketed after proceeding through a red 

light while responding to a call.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things come to mind here. First 

and foremost of course we want to ensure that the citizens of 

our community are fully protected by their police, fire, and 

emergency services. Mr. Speaker, we want — as a society and 

as citizens of a community — we want to ensure that those who 

are delivering those services are properly trained and, Mr. 

Speaker, that they have the proper equipment and are financed 

appropriately, Mr. Speaker, to provide us with the appropriate 

response to our emergency circumstances, and more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, in the case of fire and emergency 

services, to protect property and life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we are talking about fire and emergency services, a 

critical component to this whole process, Mr. Speaker, is indeed 

an adequately funded fire service. Now some communities in 

our province, Mr. Speaker, are serviced by a full-time fire 

department, and other communities, Mr. Speaker, are serviced 

by a volunteer fire department. As far as this legislation goes, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this would not apply in communities 

where there are full-time firefighters. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And that means that, Mr. Speaker, the cities in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, with full-time fire services would be Regina and 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, North 

Battleford, Yorkton, and Weyburn. 

 

Now we notice, Mr. Speaker, that Estevan is not on that list. 

Estevan — a growing city, a city with a tremendous amount of 

growing pressures, Mr. Speaker — Estevan does not have a 

full-time fire department, fire service. They have a volunteer 

service. So naturally, Mr. Speaker, in a growing community 

with a growing population and a lot of new construction and a 

lot of young people, Mr. Speaker, would want to know that 

their service — their fire service, Mr. Speaker — is providing 

the same standard of response, the same standard of care, the 

same standard that people expect in other communities would 

be provided in that community. 

 

There are reasons, Mr. Speaker why some cities in our province 

— not many, but some — and other communities do not have a 

full-time fire service but rely on volunteers, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of those reasons is strictly financial. The taxpayers in the 

community, through their elected councils, municipal councils, 

have chosen not to support or fund a full-time fire service, Mr. 

Speaker. And therefore the ability of volunteers to respond in 

emergency cases are very important in those communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense that we are providing 

volunteers in those communities with the same type of response 

ability that we would . . . Response ability, not one word but 

two words, Mr. Speaker. Response ability — that means their 

response time, their ability to respond in time, Mr. Speaker, is 

the same as or similar to what people with full-time fire services 

would expect. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, does go beyond what exists in other 

provinces. I don‟t know if that‟s necessarily a good thing or not, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s something we‟re going to have to look at. 

Other provinces have some rules that allow volunteer 

responders to use their flashing lights, however they have to 

obey certain traffic rules, Mr. Speaker, whereas the 

Saskatchewan Party Bill in front of us now allows them to drive 

contrary to the rules of the road. So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll have to 

examine this point. We‟ll have to examine this point, Mr. 

Speaker, as we are examining the Bill further. 

 

But back to my other point, Mr. Speaker, about the capacity of a 

community to meet the fire expectations of the citizens who live 

in that community. Members of government just last week, Mr. 

Speaker, met with the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 

Association. And in fact questions from this side of the House 

to the minister responsible brought forward the response from 

the minister that this government, Saskatchewan Party 

government, would indeed respond as positively as possible to 

the demands and the needs and the expressed desires that were 

brought forward by the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 

Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I‟m getting to a point here that ties the 

volunteer services in communities like Estevan with some of 

the services in the other communities, Mr. Speaker, by the 

following. The Professional Fire Fighters Association brought 

to the attention of the members of this House, and through us, 

Mr. Speaker, to the public generally, that in fact fire service 

personnel within the province of Saskatchewan may today be 

unable to meet the expectations of the Saskatchewan public. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, according to one of the background sheets 

provided by the firefighters themselves, they say it is essential 

to make clear to the community that inadequate staffing equates 

to reduced service levels. And if the public expects a continued 

aggressive attack on fires, they must provide the fire department 

with at least minimum resources required to meet community 

expectations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, are the expectations of the people who live in 

a house or an apartment in Estevan for firefighting services the 

same as the expectations of the people who live in North 

Battleford — one with a volunteer service and one with a 

full-time service? I think, Mr. Speaker, the answer would be 

yes. The expectation is the same. 

 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

Mr. Speaker, the Professional Fire Fighters Association goes on 

to say a crew size of four firefighters or less on an initial 

single-pump response to a residential structure fire is 

inadequate to safely perform the functions of water supply, 

interior firefighting, search and rescue, and also be in 

compliance with occupational health and safety regulations for 

firefighters. 

 

So in other words, Mr. Speaker, the professionals are telling us 

that with fewer than four firefighters responding on an initial 

call to a fire, the best that the public can expect is an evaluation 

of the fire circumstances, an assessment of the circumstances 

that they find — in other words what the fire is doing, and 

preparation for a full component of four firefighters to appear. 

If we‟re going to see the circumstances relating to the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you to my colleague for granting me 

leave. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the members of 

this Assembly, on behalf of the member from the Athabasca, 

I‟d like to introduce to you seated in the east gallery a group of 

grade 9 students and their teacher. Also accompanying them is 

three chaperones. 

 

They‟re high school students in Pinehouse. They‟ve made a 

long journey to join us here today. I hope they find their visit 

here to be a great experience. I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these students and their chaperones from northern 

Saskatchewan to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as the 

record will show, the member from Cumberland constituency 

was just introducing some people in the Chamber from northern 

Saskatchewan. We are talking about a piece of legislation that 

recognizes needs of volunteer firefighters. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while my remarks were very much directed 

at volunteers who are within our cities and towns, Mr. Speaker, 

I want to say that the volunteer firefighters in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, provide exemplary service to this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to do all that we can to 

support the volunteer firefighters that are protecting 

communities, people, and the resource infrastructure that 

surrounds our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I want the students who are in the Chamber today, 

introduced by the member from Cumberland constituency, to 

know that the members on this side of the House are fully 

supportive of the volunteer firefighters in their communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on the Bill that we‟re talking about, Bill 72, 

An Act to amend the Traffic Safety Act, Mr. Speaker, I was 

talking and I think, briefly. But some members may think a 

little longer than I should but, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

important tie that I‟m trying to make to the volunteer firefighter 

services. 

 

So we have a situation where occupational health and safety 

regulations, Mr. Speaker, for our full-time service require that 

at least four fighters be available prior to the ability of a fire and 

emergency services worker, Mr. Speaker, to enter a burning 

building. Mr. Speaker, that means if you respond with less than 

four, you can‟t do suppression and rescue. 

 

Suppression, Mr. Speaker, is entering the burning building and 

pushing the fire out of that building, Mr. Speaker. If you have 

three or fewer firefighters on the scene, Mr. Speaker, you are 

simply working on the exterior of the building and perhaps 

pushing the fire into the building, Mr. Speaker, which might 

make circumstances worse. So, Mr. Speaker, occupational 

health and safety regulations require the two-in and two-out 

rule, Mr. Speaker. Two firefighters outside, two firefighters 

who can enter the building to provide suppression and rescue. 

 

So when we are talking about a community that has a volunteer 

service, Mr. Speaker, and you don‟t have firefighters arriving 

all at the same time to a scene, yes it‟s important, Mr. Speaker, 

that they get there as quickly as they can with the least 

difficulties, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s also important, Mr. Speaker, 

that if they don‟t all arrive at the same time, the public‟s 

expectation of the ability of that service to meet their needs, 

saving property and perhaps life, Mr. Speaker, then the 

expectations of the public certainly aren‟t met. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what has been proposed by the professional 

firefighters, Mr. Speaker, they have suggested that because 

firefighting is a municipal issue, and municipalities choose, Mr. 

Speaker, how they direct the dollars that are collected from the 

local tax base, sometimes without the full understanding of the 

value for money for fire and emergency services. Since this is a 

municipal issue, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important for the province to 

understand — the government especially — but important for 

the province to understand that if there was a pool of money 

available from the province to the municipalities to increase the 

numbers of staff that are available, Mr. Speaker, we can 

improve the ability of the fire and emergency services personnel 

to actually suppress in the case of a fire, and rescue people, Mr. 

Speaker. Two, three minutes makes a tremendous amount of 

difference in a fire situation. 

 

The essence of this legislation is to provide those two or three 

minutes of extra driving, to reduce the driving time to a fire 

circumstance by perhaps two or three minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

The province could take one step further and create an 

additional pool of dollars to ensure that municipalities could 

have an adequate and province-wide firefighting standard, Mr. 

Speaker, a standard that would mean that the expectations of the 

people in Estevan are the same as the people in North 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Battleford, and that they can be met, Mr. Speaker. So I would 

ask, Mr. Speaker, that the government take a page from the 

book that the New Democratic Party started to write four or five 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public will remember that a few years ago 

municipalities were saying that we have a deficit in our 

communities for sports, recreation, and cultural facilities. The 

province recognized, Mr. Speaker, four or five years ago that 

the province has some responsibility to assist municipalities to 

deliver a quality of life to the citizens who live within our 

municipalities. So from windfall revenues from oil and gas, Mr. 

Speaker, the former NDP government put $100 million aside 

and created the building communities fund. Communities had 

the opportunity to make application based on need for 

infrastructure money to support them with sports, recreation, 

and culture facilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why this government 

couldn‟t establish a fund from windfall revenues, from oil and 

gas or resource revenues. A fund, Mr. Speaker, that would be 

identified that municipalities could draw from so that they could 

then provide for increased staffing levels within their fire 

service, Mr. Speaker, and therefore improve the quality of life 

in those communities. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

improve the ability of the fire service to respond to fire calls 

and, Mr. Speaker, provide greater protection for life and 

property, Mr. Speaker. And I am sure the government would 

very much like to do this. 

 

The other alternative, Mr. Speaker, is to finally, finally settle 

the revenue-sharing issue with municipalities that improves the 

ability of provinces to have access to identifiable and 

sustainable funding. Mr. Speaker, that could provide them with 

a pool of money to greatly enhance their fire and protection 

services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to make a long story short, this legislation in 

front of us, Mr. Speaker, identified through essentially the 

courts and the media a need that communities have to address 

the ability of communities to meet the communities‟ needs on 

fire and emergency services calls, Mr. Speaker. What this 

government can do is take this as a wake-up call, Mr. Speaker. 

The lights can go on and we can identify that there is a greater 

need province-wide to improve the ability of our fire and 

emergency services personnel in meeting the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the government opposite that Bill No. 

72 is an interesting first step. Mr. Speaker, it is a Bill that we on 

this side of the House will review over the course of the next 

little while, Mr. Speaker. We will review this further and, Mr. 

Speaker, I know that there are other members on this side of the 

House who have an interest in speaking to this Bill, maybe 

about their own communities. Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of 

volunteer firefighters across this province, Mr. Speaker, who 

will be happy about this circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also communities like Estevan, a 

population of 10,000 people and growing, Mr. Speaker, who 

may want to take a look at upgrading their fire service, Mr. 

Speaker, from a volunteer service to a full-time, professional 

service, Mr. Speaker, realizing that that‟s the responsibility of 

the municipal government but, Mr. Speaker, with support and 

co-operation from the provincial government, these services 

could be significantly enhanced. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, knowing that the other members may wish to 

speak to this Bill, I would move that Bill No. 72, An Act to 

amend The Traffic Safety Act, that debate on this Bill be now 

adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that debate on Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2008 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before I begin my remarks on Bill No. 2, I also want to join in 

welcoming the students behind me in the gallery. I understand, 

as indicated by the member opposite, these are students from 

Pinehouse who‟ve travelled as much as eight hours to be here 

and I want to congratulate them for showing the interest in the 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to note that the changes we are introducing today 

strengthen our education system for our students and ensure that 

Saskatchewan is compliant with other jurisdictions across 

Canada. 

 

Many of the provisions we are introducing today apply to 

teachers who are not members of the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ 

Federation. 

 

I would like to start out by saying that teachers from 

Saskatchewan are some of the most highly skilled and 

well-educated teachers in the world. Together they uphold a 

very high professional standard of conduct. It is our hope that 

this legislation reflects this high standard. 

 

As members may know, in 1999 the ministers of Education in 

Canada agreed to an interprovincial protocol to include 

improvements to the process of identifying and disciplining 

teachers who have behaved in a manner that constitutes 

professional misconduct or incompetence. Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, the changes we are introducing today in compliance 

with the interprovincial protocol includes: firstly, a process for 

school divisions to report instances of teacher suspension or 

termination and share such information with the Ministry of 

Education, the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, and other 

jurisdictions; secondly, a ministry process for the investigation 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

and discipline of teachers who are not members of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, including independent 

schools, custody and care facilities, and adult basic education 

facilities. 

 

Saskatchewan is the last province in Canada to implement the 

1999 Council of Ministers of Education, Canada interprovincial 

protocol. This has allowed us to learn from other provinces‟ 

experiences in implementing this type of legislation. The 

Government of Saskatchewan has been working with our 

education partners, including the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ 

Federation, since the interprovincial protocol was agreed to in 

1999. Mr. Speaker, we value the strong relationships that have 

been forged between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

education sector. We rely on these ties when developing 

important legislation such as the changes to The Education 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association, the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, the Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials, the League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, and 

independent schools have been consulted. Based on our 

consultations with our partners, we made several amendments 

to address concerns and strengthen the Bill. The Government of 

Saskatchewan recognizes that additional concerns have been 

brought forward since the time of first reading. Mr. Speaker, I 

want our education partners to know that we look forward to 

discussing these concerns with them through the legislative 

process that provides opportunities for meaningful consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation retains the 

responsibility for the investigation and discipline of most of our 

province‟s teachers within a separate process. To ensure 

accountability and strengthen our communication processes 

with the federation, we are proposing a reporting and 

monitoring process in addressing public concerns between the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation and the ministry. The 

changes will also improve the sharing of information on 

teachers with the public, employers, and other jurisdictions. 

 

Other jurisdictions will be informed once a teacher has been 

found guilty of misconduct or incompetence and their appeal 

period has expired, or they have had any appeal concluded, Mr. 

Speaker. This will ensure teacher registration authorities across 

Canada will be better informed if a teacher has a certificate to 

teach cancelled in one jurisdiction for professional misconduct 

or incompetence, and is attempting to take up teaching in 

another. 

 

It will also help to improve teacher mobility. It will support 

Saskatchewan‟s school divisions in hiring teachers from out of 

province by ensuring that the teachers hired have not had 

certifications cancelled by another province. It will also support 

Saskatchewan teachers in applying for positions out of 

province. 

 

There are also additional amendments to the Act, including the 

following: updating the role of secretary-treasurer of school 

divisions; permitting elected members of boards of education to 

participate in board employee benefit programs; amending the 

date for notification of property taxes and when school 

divisions must prepare and present their public accounts; and 

clarifying how education property taxes should be allocated by 

companies without share capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes to the Act strengthen our education 

system and provide a measure of security for our students, 

families, and communities. I am pleased to move therefore that 

Bill No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise on second reading of Bill No. 67, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, 1995 and to make consequential 

amendments to certain Regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listened carefully to the remarks of the 

Minister of Education as he explains the Bill and some of the 

processes that he sees coming out of this Bill. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want the minister to know that I‟m very happy that 

he has raised the issue of consultation and process, Mr. Speaker, 

because that essentially is the essence of my opening remarks 

on this Bill to amend The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite says that this Bill essentially 

comes as a result of an interprovincial protocol. Other provinces 

have taken steps in this direction and, Mr. Speaker, he indicates 

that this gives Saskatchewan the opportunity to learn from the 

experiences in these other jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, I think on 

first reading, it appears that the minister has presented an Act 

that simply copies what has taken place in other jurisdictions, 

Mr. Speaker, but has failed to take into account the opportunity 

to learn from the experiences in the other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you have an opportunity to view what you 

would like to do when it‟s already in place, Mr. Speaker, you 

can indeed learn from the mistakes of others. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, from what I‟m hearing from some of the education 

partners that the minister refers to, in fact we have not learned 

from the other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. In fact it would 

appear that we have not even consulted the other jurisdictions 

on their experience in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also says that the government values 

the strong relationships that exist with the education sector. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House certainly agree 

that the government should value strong relationships with the 

education sector, and I think we can legitimately argue, with 

support from the education sectors, that that valued relationship, 

Mr. Speaker, has existed in this province for quite some time. 

Previous ministers of Education consulted regularly with the 

education sector and, Mr. Speaker, that consultation, that 

working with the education sector, has resulted in a number of 

good things over the past years and, Mr. Speaker, helped to 

establish this valued, strong relationship that currently exists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the approach to the Act currently in 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

front of us may jeopardize that valued, strong relationship with 

the education sector. Mr. Speaker, I hope that I‟m wrong, but 

the initial response that I‟m getting from the education sector is 

that this Act is certainly stretching their view of what 

consultation means. And they‟re telling me that the process that 

has got us to this point where the Bill is in our hands is certainly 

very flawed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister also said he wants our education partners to 

know they will be consulted through the legislative process. Mr. 

Speaker, what does that mean, consulted through the legislative 

process? Number one, it indicates to me that perhaps the 

consultation has not been as would have been expected. In other 

words the legislation, the ideas, the direction would have been 

shared with the education partners prior to the writing of the 

Bill, and that when the Bill is tabled in the House the 

expectation is that there is a consensus agreement on what it is 

in the Bill, and one could expect an easy travel, an easy time 

through the legislative process. But instead, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a Bill that some members of the education . . . most 

members in the education sector, Mr. Speaker, are saying that it 

doesn‟t reflect their ideas as to what should be in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the legislative process? It‟s debate at 

second reading. How much consultation takes place in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, with the education partners during 

second reading, Mr. Speaker, debate in principle? Mr. Speaker, 

we can go out to have our meetings and our discussions, and 

we‟ve come back with information that we can share in the 

Chamber. But, Mr. Speaker, the consultation with the 

government on the Bill doesn‟t happen at the second reading 

stage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once second reading is done and members have had an 

opportunity to express their opinions in principle, Mr. Speaker, 

the Bill moves to committee. Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the 

consultation process in committee? Is it the intention of the 

Minister of Education to ask the committee to invite public 

participation when this Bill is being heard? Does that 

consultation occur in the committee Chamber, Mr. Speaker? 

Will members opposite say that the consultation through the 

legislative process includes questions that can be asked and 

answered by the public in the committee stage? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that hasn‟t been the general practice. It is possible. 

But if we are going to do consultation through the legislative 

process, Mr. Speaker, that‟s somewhere where I would expect 

the minister to say yes, we will have the boards and the teachers 

and the LEADS [League of Educational Administrators, 

Directors and Superintendents] officials and the business 

managers, Mr. Speaker, coming forward and addressing these 

concerns in the committee stage. Then what happens, Mr. 

Speaker, if it hasn‟t happened through the committee stage, the 

Bill comes back at the third reading. Well, Mr. Speaker, at third 

reading if there‟s no amendment, the debate — if there is one 

— is simply to approve the Bill as written, as drafted. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, well what‟s the point of consultation then when 

you‟ve gone through this whole process? Mr. Speaker, it‟s just 

the government‟s will; the majority votes whatever they want. 

If there‟s no change desired by the government, Mr. Speaker, it 

doesn‟t matter what anybody said — the opposition, the sector, 

the public. Doesn‟t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consultation is important through the legislative process. Don‟t 

get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, and we on this side of the House, 

as the opposition, intend to consult broadly on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. Because what we are being told today, a preliminary 

reading by the sector, is that the process to this point has been 

flawed, that the legislation has been created in a vacuum, Mr. 

Speaker, without reference to the Saskatchewan circumstances. 

It has been argued, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation is not even 

workable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we will consult, Mr. Speaker. But the member, the minister 

opposite, said, with the valuable, strong relationships and the 

consultation through the legislative process, we will have a 

good piece of legislation here, Mr. Speaker. And I don‟t know 

how they intend to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the minister also says he wants to have 

a separate process with the teachers. And again, what does that 

mean — a separate process from the teachers, Mr. Speaker? 

Does he want to have a quiet meeting somewhere with a 

number of the teachers‟ representatives through the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation]? Does he want to have a 

more public . . . What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? He‟s going 

to consult with the sector and then have a separate process with 

the teachers. 

 

We can all read Hansard tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and we can 

see those were the words that the minister said. He‟s probably 

still got his written speech in his desk, Mr. Speaker. A separate 

process with the teachers, what does that mean? And what does 

it say about where this legislation is going, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We believe that it‟s important that there is consultation. That 

consultation should include the teachers, Mr. Speaker. It should 

be a transparent consultation process, and it should be a process 

in which those who are being consulted feel that their input, Mr. 

Speaker, is valued. Because of course there is value in having a 

strong relationship with the education sector, Mr. Speaker, all 

aspects of the education sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have work to do on this side of the House. 

We have work to do. We have consultations to do, Mr. Speaker. 

And we also have a number of members who, as they consult 

with representatives of the sector, will have some things to say 

at this the second reading stage of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Second reading is debate in principle on the Bill. We have a 

number of members who will want to speak on that. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move that debate on Bill No. 67, An Act 

to amend The Education Act, 1995 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that debate on Bill 67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

Bill No. 70 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008. The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 

1990 establishes the procedure for laying charges, the options 

for persons charged, and the enforcement mechanisms for 

provincial offences. It applies to all provincial and bylaw 

offences. Under this Act over 100,000 tickets are served 

annually on persons charged. Most of the tickets are for traffic 

offences, in particular speeding; however a number of other 

areas are enforced as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments we are proposing with this Bill 

address the enforcement mechanism provisions of the existing 

Act. These amendments will provide clear authority for the 

Ministry of Justice and Attorney General to enforce restitution 

orders on behalf of victims. These new provisions respecting 

enforcement of restitution orders will apply to orders that 

judges may make at the time of sentencing. This will include 

sentencing of people convicted of provincial offences and more 

commonly people convicted of criminal offences under the 

Criminal Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, collecting on a restitution order can be a long and 

complex process. These changes will assist victims in collecting 

on restitution orders. And by taking steps to enforce compliance 

with court orders that require offenders to pay their debts to 

victims, these changes will result in greater accountability on 

the part of offenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading on Bill No. 70, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords, 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak on Bill No. 70, 

An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act. And, 

Mr. Speaker, again as I have said on previous Bills, I appreciate 

the explanation given by the Minister of Justice just a few 

seconds ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the surface this Bill appears to be one that will 

provide a benefit to citizens in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re also aware that to ensure that the government is able to 

do what this Bill says, it is likely going to require the addition 

of human resources within the department. This will likely 

create some new jobs, Mr. Speaker, in government to ensure 

that we have the proper collection of fines and distribution to 

those that they are intended to go to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s a short Bill. The explanation is one that we accept on face 

value. We will do some research, Mr. Speaker, on the terms of 

the Bill to ensure that indeed the government is in a position to 

do what it wants to do. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, really 

without further ado on this Bill, we know that we have a little 

bit of additional work to do. I know that some members of my 

caucus are very interested in the provisions of this Bill and will 

want to speak after some consultation, Mr. Speaker, to the 

clauses in front of us. 

 

So I want to say to the Minister of Justice that again I take his 

remarks at face value. I appreciate the direction that the 

government seems to be moving with regards to this Bill. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that debate on Bill No. 

70, An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 

1990 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 70, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les 

professions artistiques 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 68, The 

Arts Professions Act is being presented to support professional 

artists in Saskatchewan and to encourage a thriving arts and 

culture sector in our province. The purpose of The Arts 

Professions Act is to stipulate written contracts between 

professional artists and engagers, thus promoting better 

business practices in this sector. 

 

Written contracts will require clearly defined elements and will 

ensure documentation of agreed-upon terms of engagements. 

Contracts between professional artists and engagers encourage 

better business practices and provide a measure of protection 

for all parties. This is particularly important in an age when the 

Internet and digital copying have made a huge impact on 

production and consumption of intellectual property. This 

government is committed to building a stronger Saskatchewan 

and a better life for all its citizens. A healthy arts and culture 

sector contributes greatly to our overall quality of life. 

 

We have so many gifted artists and performers in our province, 

and it is our responsibility to ensure that they are able to 

develop their commercial potential and are sufficiently 

equipped to succeed in the marketplace. We believe the 

individual creator or artist is central to the arts and culture 

sector. We must support artists in order to ensure that they live 

and work in Saskatchewan, and indeed want to live and work in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This legislation supports professional artists by providing a 

clear definition of the term professional artists, and by 

recognizing the contribution of artists to the cultural, social, 

economic, and educational life of the province. 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

An important aspect of this Bill regards to the intellectual 

property of artists. We are keeping our promise to protect the 

intellectual property of artists by promoting its inclusion within 

contracts when it is applicable. The Ministry of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport will continue to work with our major 

stakeholders such as the industry associations to assist in 

promoting the legislation and in providing assistance to artists 

in drawing up contracts. 

 

The proposed Act is scheduled to come into force June 2010. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 68, The Arts 

Professions Act, 2008. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

68, The Arts Professions Act be now read the second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader, the member from 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 

a significant pleasure of mine today to rise and speak on second 

reading of Bill No. 68, An Act respecting the Arts Professions 

and the Status of the Artist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to this 

legislation today, Mr. Speaker, and I also appreciate the words 

of the minister in providing some explanation to the Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, given that the legislation has taken some time to get in 

front of us and given that the legislation actually is multiple 

pages, I would have expected a greater explanation by the 

minister opposite, Mr. Speaker. But that having been said, I 

think it is relatively clear what exactly it is that this legislation 

does. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, I should just start with the name of the 

Act to begin with, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s recognize and understand 

that indeed there was a status of the artist Act, Mr. Speaker. 

This is actually a federal initiative that all provinces have 

engaged in, Mr. Speaker. And it is very interesting to note that 

while other provinces all have status of the artist Acts, Mr. 

Speaker. Only in Saskatchewan is the Act that does this sort of 

stuff, Mr. Speaker, called An Act respecting the Arts 

Professions and the Status of the Artist, Mr. Speaker. Only in 

Saskatchewan have we chosen to name the Bill something 

different, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It goes to the heart of the politics of the existing government, 

Mr. Speaker. Since the Saskatchewan Party was elected, we‟ve 

seen all sorts of initiatives take on a different name, Mr. 

Speaker. And so what we‟ve got here is, you know, same 

things, same programs, but different names attached to them, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s the branding, the Sask Party‟s branding of 

initiatives that Saskatchewan people have enjoyed to a certain 

extent, Mr. Speaker, and the desire of the Saskatchewan Party 

to name these things as their own. 

 

Now I am surprised, given that they‟ve changed the name, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Act actually isn‟t called artists first, Mr. 

Speaker, given that so many of the other name changes have 

taken us to something first, whether it‟s ForestFirst or Sask first 

or whatever else they‟ve got that‟s first, Mr. Speaker. The 

bottom line in all of this stuff, Mr. Speaker, is it doesn‟t matter 

what they call it. It usually means that Saskatchewan people are 

last, Mr. Speaker. So we‟ve got the artists first Act in front of 

us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for all intents and purposes the New 

Democratic Party in government worked very closely with the 

artists‟ community in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And the 

members opposite will know very clearly that an Act was 

introduced into this House. It went into committee. There was 

considerable consultation, Mr. Speaker. And interestingly 

enough, Mr. Speaker, that Act for one reason or another — and 

I‟ll get to that in a second, Mr. Speaker — that Act did not 

make it out of this legislature in the last, in the last . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

member currently recognized to speak, and other members will 

have ample opportunity in the debate. The member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

indicating of course that the Bill didn‟t make it out of the last 

legislature before the election. Government changed. And of 

course one would have anticipated that this new government 

would have reviewed the legislation that was in committee, 

consulted further with the arts community, Mr. Speaker, and 

have brought that forward. Mr. Speaker, to a certain extent, 

that‟s what‟s happened here. Some of that legislation now is 

coming forward in Bill No. 68. But this Bill of course, Mr. 

Speaker, can be considered a good half measure because it 

doesn‟t go far enough. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Act was introduced here just last 

week, independent journalists took a look at the legislation, did 

some phone calls to representatives of the artists‟ community, 

Mr. Speaker, reviewed the files from last year and the year 

before, Mr. Speaker, and wrote the following, Mr. Speaker, in 

an article in the Regina Leader-Post just last Friday, November 

21. One of the paragraphs is: 

 

The requirement for written contracts between artists and 

“engagers” was nearly put in place under the previous 

NDP government. 

 

. . . [But] that bill stalled in committee as the 

then-opposition Saskatchewan Party raised concerns with 

the collective bargaining portion of the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Bill stalled in committee not because New 

Democrats didn‟t want this to go forward or weren‟t committed 

to the artists‟ community, Mr. Speaker, but because the 

Saskatchewan Party refused to allow this Bill to move forward 

because of provisions relating to, believe it or not, collective 

bargaining. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Act comes forward and there is 

surprisingly no reference to the collective bargaining process. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in discussions with the executive director of 

the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, Marnie Gladwell, the reporter 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

for the Regina Leader-Post had this to say: 

 

. . . Gladwell said legislation to allow collective or 

“sector” bargaining for artists who are contract workers is 

something the arts group would still like to pursue. 

 

Quote from Ms. Gladwell: “We could see it as being the next 

place we need to go.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what we have in front of us is a good half 

measure, half of what the consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan said that we should be doing on their behalf, Mr. 

Speaker. We have half the way there done, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

got the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance indicating that the Bill itself 

looks positive, but that there is more yet to be done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, where that leaves us, Mr. Speaker, as New 

Democrats who have been very interested and supportive of the 

artists‟ community in Saskatchewan in ensuring that their 

ability to earn a living and maintain their quality of life in this 

province is enhanced, Mr. Speaker, we take a look at this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. We want to continue to support the artists‟ 

community, Mr. Speaker, and whether the Act is called the 

respecting arts professions or whether it‟s called status of the 

artist or whether it‟s called artists first, Mr. Speaker, we are 

very interested in consulting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you are able to hear comments that are 

being made throughout the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

the public should be aware that members opposite are saying 

the NDP didn‟t do this; didn‟t do it, Mr. Speaker. I just outlined 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker, did do this, Mr. Speaker. We did do it 

and the only reason it didn‟t get completed, Mr. Speaker, is 

because going into an election, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite stopped it in committee. The Saskatchewan Party 

stopped it in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to 

respect the member that has the floor. I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So as 

much as it‟s obvious that there could be some additional debate 

over this Bill, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of the time of the 

Assembly this afternoon and in the interests of the arts 

professionals in this province, Mr. Speaker, who I believe have 

asked for some time to review the Bill, we would like to consult 

further with them. And there are a number of, and a I think a 

large number of members in the opposition NDP caucus who 

want, Mr. Speaker, to debate this Bill at second reading. I 

would therefore move that debate on Bill No. 68, An Act 

respecting the Arts Professions and the Status of the Artist be 

now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has made a motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 68, The Arts 

Professions Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2008. The maintenance enforcement 

program was created in 1986. It is the sole provincial program 

whose primary function is to enforce the right of a dependent 

spouse or child to support payments. 

 

The director of the maintenance enforcement office is 

responsible for recording and enforcing orders and agreements 

that are registered with the office. The maintenance 

enforcement office manages close to 10,000 enforcement files 

and collected a record $34 million in payments for some 20,000 

dependent children in 2007 and 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Act provides a variety of mechanisms 

to assist the director in the enforcement of delinquent accounts. 

For example, the director may attach pension entitlements and 

RRSPs [registered retirement savings plan], place garnishments, 

suspend drivers‟ licences and federal licences, and also seize 

and sell personal property. However, to increase the office‟s 

effectiveness, additional enforcement tools are needed. This is 

what we aim to achieve with the passage of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when an individual is entitled to workers‟ 

compensation benefits for a period of at least 24 consecutive 

months, an annuity is created in the name of that worker. This 

proposed Bill includes a provision that will specifically allow 

the director to attach this annuity. If other enforcement 

measures have been unsuccessful, they can go ahead with this 

provision and this process. Currently the director is authorized 

to attach pension benefits and RRSPs. With this amendment, an 

annuity will be no different than a pension or an RRSP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the current legislation the director may also 

instruct SGI to suspend the driver‟s licence of a payer who is at 

least three months in arrears of support payments. Since 

November 1996, when the driver‟s licence suspension 

provisions were enacted, the maintenance enforcement office 

has suspended a total of 4,463 drivers‟ licences. Often after a 

first suspension, the payer will make payment arrangements and 

the suspension will be removed. If payments are not made, the 

maintenance enforcement office is forced to restart the 

suspension process, which can often take several months. This 

Bill will add a new provision that will allow the director to 

revive a suspension within 12 months following the removal if 

the payer fails to follow through with the payments to which 

they have agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill adds a new provision that will allow the 

director to seek an order from the court for security for future 

payments where no arrears are owing. This will be done in 

cases in which the payer has a history of chronically late or 

nonpayments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another new provision of this Bill will allow the 

director to enforce an amount that is less than that set out in the 

court order where the original order was made for two or more 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

children pursuant to the table amounts in the federal child 

support guidelines. This provision will be used in cases in 

which one child ceases to be a dependant. Presently when an 

order is registered with the maintenance enforcement office 

where it considers support for two or more children pursuant to 

the federal guidelines and one child is no longer a dependant, 

the director does not have the legislative authority to enforce a 

lesser amount of support. In cases such as this, a new order or 

an agreement between the parties must be secured. This new 

provision will authorize the director to collect a lesser amount 

where the Act‟s criteria are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also clarify the summons provisions 

to ensure that a payer is present at the first appearance and at 

every subsequent appearance before the court. Furthermore this 

Bill will ensure that if the payer fails to appear without just 

excuse or relief from the hearing, a warrant may be issued to 

direct his or her arrest. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will introduce provisions giving 

maintenance arrears priority for a period of one year over all 

other unsecured debts. The existing Act gives child support 

arrears one year priority over unsecured debts. However, this 

only applies where funds are realized through the writ process 

and not in other situations. As an example, where a payer dies, 

child support ranks equally to other unsecured debts of the 

deceased. These amendments will extend the one-year priority 

over other unsecured debts to situations other than those in 

which the funds are realized pursuant to the seizure of property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the enforcement orders 

amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak here at second reading on 

Bill No. 69, An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997 and, as the title suggests, to make related 

amendments to The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I have done throughout the afternoon so 

far, I listened carefully to the introduction at second reading 

here by the Minister of Justice with regards to this piece of 

legislation. And in addition to my other pre-thought remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to just make a comment on one of the 

minister‟s comments in regards to the Bill. 

 

Towards the end of his introduction, Mr. Speaker, on this piece 

of legislation, he talked about the changes that would provide 

one year of priority, Mr. Speaker. As I will say in a few 

moments generally about the Bill, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very 

important that we continue to ensure that the enforcement of 

maintenance orders process evolves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have to be very protective and understanding of 

unintended consequences, Mr. Speaker. And this provision that 

the minister has pointed out is one of those areas that we really 

have to look at very closely because it provides — I mean on 

the surface — the possibility that some debtors could be put 

ahead of some children, Mr. Speaker, and that would be an 

unintended consequence of an otherwise positive move, Mr. 

Speaker. So we want to take a very close look to ensure that 

under no circumstance, Mr. Speaker, in a priority of debt, Mr. 

Speaker, that debtors could be put ahead of children when it is 

not so desired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I work very diligently, Mr. Speaker . . . Some might argue to 

the contrary, but I work very diligently in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. And my constituency office is open, as most 

constituency offices are, all week long, morning and afternoon. 

And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, when people can‟t see us during 

the day, we meet with them during the evening. 

 

One of the sad statistics related to the operations in my office, 

Mr. Speaker, is about 80 per cent of the activity in my office 

centres around social services and around maintenance 

enforcement issues, Mr. Speaker. We live in . . . The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, is a community that‟s highly mobile, 

has a very active, young population, Mr. Speaker. And 

unfortunately a lot of those people have grown up in very 

vulnerable circumstances, Mr. Speaker, and have an attachment 

with the Department of Social Services or with provisions that 

require them to see maintenance orders enforced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

We try very hard to address these individual concerns that are 

raised by people, Mr. Speaker, and quite often the concern 

relates to communications. It‟s either a lack of education or a 

lack of ability, Mr. Speaker, to assume all information and 

being able to assess it in a way, Mr. Speaker, that allows people 

to respond positively to the information that‟s provided to them. 

 

So a lot of the Social Service cases, Mr. Speaker, are quite 

simply related to information provided at the office of the 

Social Services workers. It‟s provided in such a way that the 

public doesn‟t fully understand what‟s been said to them. They 

come to my office. We have a little more time to listen, 

understand all of the other circumstances that may be affecting 

them in their lives, and be able to provide them some support in 

the process of dealing with Social Services. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the same process is undertaken 

on enforcement of maintenance orders. The unfortunate 

circumstances are, Mr. Speaker, there are quite a number of 

people throughout this province — and the minister outlined 

some of the numbers — quite a number of people who rely on 

the enforcement of maintenance orders, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

quality of life for themselves and their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that many individuals do not take 

responsibility for their own actions, many individuals don‟t take 

responsibility for orders of the court that have been assigned to 

them. 

 

It has been my experience, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with these 

matters of people who have moved from other provinces who 

have found themselves in these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

my experience that the maintenance enforcement Act in 

Saskatchewan is the best in Canada. Mr. Speaker, over the years 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

this legislation, this process, the regulations have evolved to the 

point whereas we have exceeded what exists in other provinces. 

People who have come from other provinces will attest to that, 

where there are maintenance orders that have not been enforced 

in other provinces that are enforced in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Sometimes we have these interprovincial challenges and it‟s 

one of the areas that we need to do some more work on, Mr. 

Speaker. But we have, because we‟ve cared about people and 

particularly, Mr. Speaker, we care about children that we have 

evolved the maintenance enforcement process in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we see in front of us here is, we hope, a 

continued evolution of making this process better, meeting the 

needs of more people, and in fact improving the circumstances 

of people who may already be under order, but who can‟t find a 

way to ensure that all the benefit of that order comes into their 

household and supports those children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this process is about responsibility. It‟s also about 

people helping people. It‟s also about being able to ensure that 

the justice system within the province of Saskatchewan is there 

to ensure that when the courts have provided evaluation and 

order that people can ensure that they receive the benefit of that 

order, and don‟t have to continually fight, argue, and wait for 

the provisions of that order to be provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that my constituency office has dealt 

with quite a large number of cases like this. I have indicated 

that communications is often a challenge, Mr. Speaker. One of 

the problems about waiting is that you get a lot of different 

information when you‟re waiting and it is sometimes difficult to 

separate the good information from the not-so-good 

information. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our office has always been in a position of 

being able to help people sort through some of the information 

that is provided. And I think we know that coffee shops and 

friends who spend time in coffee shops don‟t always provide 

the best information when you‟re dealing with a legal matter. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our offices and the offices of the 

maintenance enforcement branch are there to ensure that people 

have access to the information they need to know. If they‟re 

waiting, why are they waiting. If they have needs that courts 

have ordered to be dealt with, why there are problems with that 

order, and what the province can do to assist in ensuring that the 

maintenance order is carried out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am hoping that the provisions of this legislation 

will in fact improve the circumstances for these vulnerable 

people in need. Mr. Speaker, I will consult further on this Bill 

including, Mr. Speaker, with my constituency assistant who 

deals with these people almost on a weekly basis, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know that my caucus colleagues, other members of the 

New Democratic Party opposition, have constituency assistants 

that have also been through this process of working with people 

whose court orders have not been enforced to the extent that is 

required. So, Mr. Speaker, that consultation process will 

continue and I know that other members will wish to engage in 

the debate on this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on Bill No. 69, An Act to 

amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 be 

now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved adjournment of Bill No. 69, The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 58 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

a pleasure for me to rise in debate on this particular Act or 

amendment to The Income Tax Act. And it‟s good to see the 

Saskatchewan Party government continuing the good work of 

the NDP in Saskatchewan with respect to monitoring various 

taxations and ensuring that we provide the right kind of tax 

levels for, not just people, but also for businesses and other 

enterprises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the Sask Party in its latest branding exercise is fond 

of saying that the NDP for 16 years did nothing — blanket 

statement about the NDP — 16 years did nothing, you know, 

did nothing. Well, Mr. Speaker, it must be remembered that the 

NDP led this province from bankruptcy to a boom. And we‟re 

sure hopeful that the members opposite don‟t lead us in the 

opposite direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the fact of the matter is that when they speak about the 

NDP not having any clear record, I think it is important and 

instructive to review that record, and remember that the first act, 

the first act of the NDP government when it was elected in 1991 

was in fact a massive tax change in Saskatchewan to reduce the 

harmonization of the provincial sales tax with the goods and 

services tax which would have imposed a very large tax 

increase on the consumers and people of Saskatchewan. And 

the first act of the NDP government was in fact to reverse that. 

So the first act of the NDP was a tax-friendly act for the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I think we need to 

remember that. 

 

It also should be pointed out that in all the years that the NDP, 

while struggling with a legacy of massive debt from the 

previous administration, nevertheless continued to make tax 

changes in Saskatchewan. Significantly some of the first tax 

changes were for business tax for small business. 

 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

One of the significant changes that the NDP made in 1995 — 

after balancing the budget in Saskatchewan, after finally dealing 

with the deficit that had been bequeathed to us by the previous 

administration — one of the first acts of the NDP was to deal 

with the question of corporate income taxes for those industries 

in Saskatchewan that were involved in manufacturing and 

processing, to lower the corporate tax rate for those industries to 

provide for a way of reducing their input costs through tax 

credits for any sales taxes they may have paid on some of their 

capital and other equipment. That was a significant act by the 

NDP. 

 

And it‟s interesting to note that after that time Saskatchewan 

has led the rest of Canada in terms of manufacturing and 

processing outputs. That‟s, you know, recognizing that we came 

from a very small manufacturing and processing base. We have 

seen expansion in that base, which is significant compared, you 

know, in relative terms to the rest of the country. 

 

So those were early significant acts by the NDP administration, 

contrary to this blanket rhetoric that we see from the opposition. 

 

When our financial situation improved further, the NDP set out 

to look at the question of income taxes in Saskatchewan. We 

established a commission to look at the question of personal 

taxes in Saskatchewan, headed by one Jack Vicq. Mr. Vicq and 

his committee toured the province, looked at questions of 

competitiveness of our tax rates with other jurisdictions, looked 

at the question of fairness in our tax system, how our tax system 

might be improved to introduce greater fairness for all those 

who are paying taxes, looked at the question of affordability 

which is a significant issue for the government in those days. 

Unlike the current government which came to power with $1 

billion-plus in the bank and has since, because of the increases 

in the price of oil, been able to add significantly to the amount 

of money that it has available now; I think something close to 

$2 billion in its Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 

So those are issues that Mr. Vicq and his commission looked at, 

then came with a report, made recommendations to the 

government. We implemented it. Those recommendations did 

not proceed to harmonize the tax with the federal government, 

did not — as he suggested — put a tax on restaurant meals, as 

he was suggesting, in terms of broadening the base for the 

provincial sales tax. But we made significant changes in income 

taxes in Saskatchewan with arguably, arguably far less in the 

way of resources available to it, but still accomplishing those 

changes. And one of the reasons that the government had to 

implement those changes over a number of years so that we 

could do it in an affordable way, unlike the current government 

which is so flush with money that it can make this change in the 

course of one year. 

 

And you know, they shouldn‟t talk in terms of that it‟s some 

great leadership on their part that‟s enabling that. We all know 

the reason for that, and that it‟s because of the price of oil 

which is providing historic, historic revenues for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The income tax changes were followed by changes to the 

royalty rates in some of our industries — significantly oil — so 

as to encourage more production in Saskatchewan. I think that‟s 

something that we saw, are continuing to see. Note that there‟s 

no changes in that royalty structure from the current 

government, indicating their happiness with that. So that‟s a 

change made by the NDP at a time that there was significantly 

less resources available from oil revenues than is currently the 

case. But those are changes made by the NDP, not by the 

current administration. 

 

NDP also moved to make changes with respect to potash 

royalty structure to encourage expansion of mines in 

Saskatchewan, something that we‟ve been seeing to a very great 

extent in the last year or so, at a time when the price that potash 

commanded on the world market was significantly less than it is 

today. We made those changes as a way of encouraging 

production, and I think that we‟ve seen that, Mr. Speaker. So I 

think a kind description would be that it‟s inflated rhetoric on 

the part of members of the government to talk about the NDP 

not having done anything. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well in this particular case when it comes to the issue of 

taxation, it‟s the NDP that has led the way in Saskatchewan in 

terms of ensuring that not only that we have a fair taxation 

system, but also that we have an affordable and a competitive 

taxation system, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s the NDP record in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s good to see that the Sask Party‟s using at least some of 

the massive surplus that they inherited from the previous NDP 

government to in fact undertake this tax change. We welcome 

that. Certainly as I indicated, the question of affordability is not 

really an issue in this particular case because the projections are 

that the government will have enough money in the future years 

at a cost or reduced revenues initially of $300 million. That‟s 

what the tax cut is going to cost when it‟s annualized that the 

government will in fact have the additional revenues to cover 

that. And so we don‟t have any concerns in that basis. 

 

On the question of competitiveness, we see this as a welcome 

step to ensure that we continue to be competitive — not the 

same as but competitive — with other jurisdictions when it 

comes to personal income taxes. That may not be a concern for 

many people in Saskatchewan, but that certainly is a concern 

for some of our highly paid professionals and for some business 

people who want to not pay more taxes than they have to in one 

jurisdiction as compared to another. So that may be a factor for, 

as I say, highly paid individuals, and we‟re supportive of the 

changes to ensure that our tax system continues to be 

competitive. 

 

The fairness question, we support the initiatives in this budget 

to take an additional number of people off the tax rolls, 

low-income individuals off the tax rolls. This is not the first 

time that will have been done in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

That was done under previous income tax changes by the NDP, 

but we welcome these changes as well, these further changes by 

the Saskatchewan Party government. We think that‟s a good 

thing. Also to add to the tax credits that some of our poor 

people who don‟t pay income tax, because their incomes are so 

low that they don‟t pay tax, are able to receive income tax 

credits to assist them with rising costs in our society — we 

appreciate those changes as well. 

 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

So I think on the question of fairness, I think these changes are 

measuring up to what we would have expected and to the 

expectation that we set for ourselves in government, Mr. 

Speaker. So we appreciate these changes. 

 

Having said that, I think we have to recognize that tax cuts are 

not some magic cure or a cure-all for all of the affordability 

issues that are facing many people in Saskatchewan. It‟s 

welcome to have a tax change for many of my constituents — 

and I have to just add parenthetically that the constituency I 

represent, Regina Douglas Park, probably has the highest 

concentration of renters in any constituency in Saskatchewan. I 

stand to be corrected on that, but if not the highest, certainly 

one of the highest concentration of renters in all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so in my office, we do get stories about people whose rents 

have been increased very markedly in the course of this last 

year or so, and it‟s raising affordability issues for people. When 

your rent goes up by some 200, $300 a month over the course 

of a year — you know, I‟m no great mathematician, Mr. 

Speaker — but when your rent goes up by $200 a month, 12 

months of the year, that‟s $2,400. And so a tax cut is welcome. 

But a tax cut doesn‟t begin to deal with the kind of imposition 

that our current economic climate is putting on those people and 

is putting on many other people. 

 

I‟m fortunate that I have a number of renters who are able to 

pay the additional dollar, although they don‟t much like it. But I 

also have other constituents that — how shall I say? — people 

who live on the margins of our society, who are massively 

disadvantaged in the competition for shelter and having to 

compete with people who can pay far more than they can pay, 

and that‟s a concern that we have in my area. 

 

It‟s also a concern that I noted in a visit to Weyburn and 

Estevan earlier this year where, I think it‟s fair to say, that the 

oil industry is busier in those areas than in any other place in 

Saskatchewan and probably many places in Canada and the 

competition on the part of people who work in the oil industry 

and others who are then attracted to this activity, the 

competition from these people for shelter in many communities 

in southeast Saskatchewan . . . and that is particularly 

troublesome in places such as Weyburn and Estevan where we 

find people who live on the margins of our society. 

 

People who live in very modest accommodation, people who 

pay very little in the way of rents are having to massively 

increase the amount of money to pay for the rents and they 

can‟t, or face eviction because you have someone who makes a 

lot of money — and many people do in the oil business — be 

able to take their place. So that is a concern in Saskatchewan. 

That is something that the provincial government should not 

lose sight of. 

 

I‟m concerned that the provincial government isn‟t taking 

advantage of its leadership role in this area to work with the 

industries in southeast Saskatchewan to see what it is that 

industries working together might be able to do to deal with this 

question of shelter for many of their workers. Recognizing that 

we have a number of small employers — this drilling company, 

that drilling company — that each of them working on their 

own, it‟s difficult for them to construct shelter for their workers. 

But you know if the provincial government and the Minister 

Responsible for Energy were to get off his duffer and exhibit 

some leadership in that area in working with the companies to 

see how these companies might be able to co-operate to deal 

with the question of shelter and to ease, to ease some of the 

extreme pressure that is being put on people of low incomes in 

some of those communities, I think that would be a welcome 

thing. 

 

And I‟m not arguing for any provincial government 

expenditure. I‟m just simply saying that in addition to 

governments spending money, governments are also in the 

position to provide leadership, and we‟re not seeing any of it 

here, Mr. Speaker. So that is a concern that I have, and I hope 

that the Minister of Energy and the cabinet doesn‟t lose sight of 

this opportunity they have to display leadership in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to go on much longer. I think I‟ve 

covered the major points that I wanted to make. We support the 

income tax changes. We think it deals effectively with the 

questions that we have with respect to competitiveness, 

fairness, and affordability. 

 

Having said that, we think that there are challenges that are still 

before us in Saskatchewan that I think the provincial 

government really needs to pay a little bit more attention to and 

provide more leadership for, so that those people who are left 

behind in the current boom that we have — so-called — in 

Saskatchewan, that those people who are left behind will not be 

left behind for long and will in fact also see their day in the sun 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I support this Bill. My colleagues support this 

Bill, and at this point we‟re certainly prepared to deal with the 

vote to send it to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

that Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

recommend that this Bill be moved to the Crown and Central 

Agencies. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill now stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Crown and Central Agencies. 

 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 64 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and speak to Bill 

No. 64. Mr. Speaker, that Bill is The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill is the last piece of municipal legislation in the 

province to put in place a province-wide assessment system. 

And it‟s a goal I think that all members in this House have 

supported for a number of years. We had the support of the 

members opposite when we brought forward the two first pieces 

of legislation that brought this system into place in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. And we will inevitably, Mr. Speaker, see the 

North come into the regular assessment process as the rest of 

the province over a period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill really updates the property assessment 

and taxation system in northern Saskatchewan communities, 

Mr. Speaker. It puts the entire province then on a similar 

assessment system. It ensures that the economic realities in 

property values in the real estate market in northern 

Saskatchewan can be reflected in a more understandable and 

transparent manner than they would be today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this property assessment process in northern 

Saskatchewan is a very complicated one, Mr. Speaker, because 

the properties in northern Saskatchewan have not been assessed 

in the same manner as other properties traditionally in our 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will in fact for the first 

time move them to a similar assessment system as the rest of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been under review for some time. We 

gave the northern municipalities some additional time, northern 

communities some additional time before moving forward with 

this assessment system because they needed a little longer, Mr. 

Speaker, to work with the system, to understand the system 

prior to being put in place. And that, Mr. Speaker, that is 

because of the unique nature of the North and having not had an 

assessment system like this in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because it‟s such a complicated and technical 

system — the assessment of property, Mr. Speaker — this Bill 

is very detailed and lays out the technical aspects of moving 

forward with that assessment. 

 

But firstly, Mr. Speaker, the new system, property assessors 

will be able to employ any of three internationally accepted or 

recognized methodologies for determining assessment — the 

sales comparison approach, Mr. Speaker, the replacement cost 

approach, and the rental income approach, Mr. Speaker. 

Because as you are well aware, in many northern communities 

the vast majority if not all the housing may be owned by Sask 

Housing or other partners with Sask Housing in providing 

housing in those communities, Mr. Speaker, so different 

approaches are required to be looked at in some of our northern 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, unfortunately, is the last 

jurisdiction in Canada to move to a market-value-based 

valuation system. This is a significant step for the economic 

development and attraction of new business in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because the previous government moved forward in both 

The Cities Act and the rural municipalities Act to ensure that 

that assessment process was put in rural Saskatchewan in the 

last years of its mandate, Mr. Speaker . . . and left the North 

because of its unique qualities and needs for some additional 

time, Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that those communities in 

the North and the town councils or village councils, Mr. 

Speaker, had the tools, understanding, and the experience to 

move forward and utilize the new system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act, which was introduced by the last 

government, and The Municipalities Act, which guides 

Saskatchewan‟s towns, villages, and rural municipalities, are 

organized very differently than northern municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker. And for those reasons that additional time was needed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We do appreciate though the fact that the new government 

when they came into power continued with the work we had 

undertaken for a number of years, continued working with those 

municipalities, and today they have in fact tabled legislation 

that reflects that work that was started four or five years ago 

with those northern municipalities and is coming to fruition this 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the members opposite, although they never like to 

recognize the work done by the previous government, it 

couldn‟t be said that in many cases, Mr. Speaker — if not all 

cases — the work that we‟re seeing today is a continuation of 

the work done by the previous government, and they‟re simply 

following through with the work and the groundwork and 

foundation that was built over many years by the previous 

government, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker. That is, 

Mr. Speaker, the way that you progressively make progress in a 

province, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker. It would 

just be nice if once in a while they‟d acknowledge that 

somebody else did some of this groundwork and laid the 

foundation that we‟re in fact working upon today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We all understand that we needed to consult with the northern 

municipalities and the people of the North prior to 

implementing that, Mr. Speaker. We understand the opposition 

have done some consultations with the people of the North. 

There were consultations going on prior to them becoming 

government. But, Mr. Speaker, we still need to meet with some 

of those stakeholders in the North to ensure that their issues 

were heard and understood as they brought forward concerns on 

this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to know that the people of the North feel 

that the unique circumstances in which they live and the 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

communities in which they live, Mr. Speaker, has been 

considered and looked at, and how they build their lives in their 

northern communities, Mr. Speaker. It must be recognized and 

respected. And we need to follow up with those stakeholders in 

the North, Mr. Speaker, and see if they feel that they were in 

fact heard and listened to through this process. 

 

We also though do recognize the need to pass this piece of 

legislation in order to have it in place, Mr. Speaker, in a manner 

to allow it to be used in the next taxation assessment, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not been able to today 

finalize our consultations with our stakeholders in the North. 

My colleagues from the constituencies of Cumberland, Mr. 

Speaker, and the neighbouring constituency of Athabasca still 

need to consult with some stakeholders in their communities. 

We hope that they‟ll be able to do that over the next few days, 

Mr. Speaker. But today, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not in a position to 

move this Bill forward. So I would move that we adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 64. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has made a motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 64, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Here we are, Mr. Speaker, everyone‟s 

favourite subject — the Senate of Canada. Mr. Speaker, when 

we last dealt with this Bill, I dealt with I think the three Es that 

we refer to when we talk about the Senate. One of the Es that‟s 

anticipated in this Bill is the question of elections, although I‟m 

not really clear that it is an election as such. 

 

If you have an election and you elect people to a post, then if 

they get the most votes then they should occupy that post, right. 

I mean I go into an election, I get more votes than the other guy, 

and I‟m elected member for Regina Douglas Park. But this 

particular Bill doesn‟t work like that. This particular Bill, as 

near as I can determine, is that you have an election and you 

elect people to become senators, but they don‟t become senators 

necessarily. What they become is the nominees from your 

province that a prime minister may consider when it comes to 

appointing a senator from this jurisdiction. But there‟s no 

guarantee that having won the election that someone is actually 

going to become a senator. 

 

So you have to wonder whether election is the right term here, 

what it is we‟re doing. But that‟s the reality of it; that‟s the 

reality in our situation in Canada. We would have, if you like, a 

popularity contest to see who‟s the most popular nominee to 

become a senator, and then if the prime minister were of a 

mind, then he might appoint that person. 

 

But in this particular case, in this particular case as my 

colleague from Regina Northeast knows, that if you were to 

elect someone in Saskatchewan through this process and that 

person were to be a Liberal . . . I‟m not sure about a New 

Democrat because I‟m not sure what our position would be in 

terms of becoming involved in anything like that. I rather think 

that we wouldn‟t be. But let‟s accept for a moment that it might 

be a Liberal, might be a Green Party member for all I know. But 

it might be a Liberal, as my colleague from Regina Northeast 

knows. It might be a Liberal. So here we are, the people of 

Saskatchewan, we‟ve elected a Liberal. But they‟re not elected. 

They don‟t have a specific seat. We simply put their name 

forward to the prime minister. 

 

But now, the current Prime Minister has a bee under his bonnet 

about the Senate blocking certain reforms. And he‟s taking the 

point of view that I may not accept anyone that‟s been 

nominated by the provinces pursuant to some election in those 

provinces. I may want to appoint the people that will do my 

bidding in that Senate to make sure I get the changes that I want 

to see in that Senate. 

 

So the question here is, what kind of election are we exactly 

having here? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Democratic. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well it may be democratic, but it‟s an 

election to what? How democratic is it to elect someone and 

then to not have that person be able to occupy the seat that they 

think that they are running for? What kind of a system is that? 

 

Well so when I said earlier that one of the three Es is the E of 

election, I‟m not really clear what kind of an election this is 

going to be, what it will result in. And what kind of election is 

that when you elect someone and the prime minister said well 

no, I don‟t want to take that person. That person may not do 

what I want to have done in a particular Senate, whether it‟s 

reforming the Senate in his vision or whether it‟s to make sure 

that he has a compliant Senate when it comes to certain kinds of 

legislation; that they not hold up legislation — which the Senate 

can do from time to time, although never forever and not very 

successfully, I might add. So that‟s a question that we have 

about what kind of election is this and is this then something 

that we should be rushing into sign on to. 

 

Having said that, I just want to briefly touch on the other two 

Es, so-called. And the other two Es are in addition to an 

election is the question of effective. So when we talk about an 

elected Senate, we also talk the same time about have an 

effective Senate. There‟s not much point of going through a 

huge expense to elect people to some post or seat when . . . And 

of course, we‟re not saying that‟s the way it works. You still 

have to be appointed by the prime minister. But if you elect 

someone to some body and they really have no effective power, 

there‟s nothing that they can effectively do . . . Well I mean 

they do things, and I‟ll get into that in a minute in terms of what 

senators actually do, but certainly there‟s a large budget 

component so they must be doing something. But the question 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

of effectiveness is something that I dealt with the last time we 

talked about this Bill. 

 

This is a body that cannot introduce legislation to increase or 

lower taxes, as the tax Bill we just talked about in this 

Chamber. Senators can‟t do that. Senators have no 

responsibility whatsoever when it comes to the question of 

money. So given that‟s a large area of responsibility for elected 

members, is to watch the public purse and to ensure that the 

government is getting the right kind of money, what kind of a 

Senate is that? And how effective is that when you can‟t deal 

with the question of money? 

 

And the other thing that they don‟t really do is with respect to 

legislation. The senators from time to time will put forward 

amendments, and some of those amendments may be accepted 

by the government, but they really have no ability to 

fundamentally change legislation or to say, you know, we want 

to veto this Bill; we don‟t want the Bill to go forward. We don‟t 

agree with this direction of the government. We don‟t agree 

with the direction of this government because a Bill would 

affect a region in certain ways. 

 

And an important responsibility for us and the reason that the 

Senate was constructed initially is so that there can be some 

regional balance so that a federal government can‟t make use of 

the majority it has which comes from a certain part of the 

country to put forward legislation that might benefit one region 

as opposed to another. You know, there‟s no effective way for 

the Senate to deal with that — none. 

 

And now I know that the members opposite are going to get up 

and do a song and dance about, well if we‟d only elect them, if 

we only elect them then they could become effective. Well I‟m 

not so sure about that. And I‟m not so sure about the transition 

of that and as to whether or not other provinces will want to 

sign on to that. So I‟m not so sure that it‟s an automatic leap to 

say, okay, we‟re going to elect them. Well we‟re not really 

electing them; we‟re going to elect them and then recommend 

their appointment to a prime minister who‟s still going to 

appoint them, but that somehow that‟s going to morph into a 

more effective Senate somehow. 

 

And I know that‟s the wishes and the dreams of the right. And 

they talk about it in glowing terms that if we just elect them, 

then the Senate will become more effective, but there‟s no real 

role definition in terms of what effective means here. Lots of 

different perspectives by those who support this approach about 

what the Senate might do, but there‟s no agreement by people 

in this country and their elected representatives as to what that 

role might be, if that‟s some change from the role that the 

Senate has historically been given to it and which they‟re not 

able to really do. So there‟s no real consensus here as to what‟s 

meant by consensus. If we were to morph from elected into 

effective, what that effective really means and what is it that 

Senate would do and what their responsibilities would be, 

there‟s been none of that. 

 

And I‟m sure we‟re going to get perspective from government 

members who have now signalled an indication that they want 

to weigh in this debate, which I might say parenthetically would 

be very welcome, would be very welcome because we‟ve had 

no real articulation of what it is that the government is doing 

here other than the straight mechanics of an election. There‟s 

been no articulation, no vision by this government as to why, 

why we want to go in this direction of electing people to be the 

nominees that we would recommend to the prime minister. No 

articulation at all. 

 

Now they may put up a backbencher to deal with, but that‟s not 

the same as the government articulating what its vision is, what 

its plan is in this regard, and we‟ve not seen any of that. So we 

would welcome the intervention by members, but we have to 

circumscribe that in terms of, you know, who do they really 

represent, who do they really speak for in this particular case. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the other question . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Now they‟re saying, well we were elected as government; 

we‟ve always kind of said we want to elect a Senate and 

therefore we should be able to do it and ram it through. Well 

that‟s a rather quaint notion, Mr. Speaker, that you take every 

little thing that you‟ve got on your agenda and lots of others 

that you‟ve decided to ignore, and that‟s democracy too. Others 

that you have decided to ignore, you take this one and say 

you‟re going to to do it — no explanation, no nothing. 

 

And I‟ll get to that, Mr. Speaker, about what kind of a Mickey 

Mouse operation is that, that you would take a serious 

fundamental change in some institution with all the 

constitutional overtones that it has and say, we don‟t really want 

any discussion because we‟re going to do it. We‟ve got the 

might and therefore . . . You know, we‟ve got the might, we‟ve 

got the most members, and therefore we had the right.  

 

That is no way to run a ship, Mr. Speaker. And you know, that 

is a majority then trumping over minorities. And that may well 

be a government trumping the real wishes of the people of 

Saskatchewan because there had been polls. There had been 

polls which suggest that . . . 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I‟ll remind the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest that he can enter the debate. It‟s just not 

going to be now. I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So we 

certainly would welcome the intervention of the members in 

debate, Mr. Speaker, and to weigh in on these particular issues. 

 

Again, we would appreciate it far more if the government of the 

day and not the backbenchers would state specifically why it is 

that this change would be good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

But we‟ve not heard that. All we‟ve heard from the Minister of 

Justice in moving the Bill is the mechanics of how we would do 

something. And that‟s a little bit different than the why. 

 

And now the members are taking this totally arrogant position 

— well, we were elected. We were elected, and we said 

somewhere that we support an election of senators, so we 

should get to do whatever we want. Which is, when you think 

of it, the height of arrogance especially given that constitutional 

changes, and any attempts that you might be making to provide 

for constitutional tweaking down the road, is really something 

that ought to be dealt with in a measured way, is something that 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

should be dealt with in a consultative way, not to simply ramp 

through a provincial legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the question of effective is a very real question that the 

government and not just the backbenchers need to deal with and 

to articulate. 

 

The other issue that I think people who take the approach that 

the Triple-E will work is the question of equality and the 

distribution of Senate seats. And I made the argument, and I‟ll 

make that point again that simply electing senators . . . Not 

really electing them, you‟re saying to the Prime Minister, these 

are our nominees for you to put in those seats. He may or may 

not accept that. And that somehow this might morph into some 

effective role as yet largely undefined for the Senate. It raises 

the question of how do we deal with the inequalities that are 

there in the current Senate? 

 

How do we deal with the fact that Saskatchewan has, at this 

point, six senators, but Nova Scotia has 10 senators, New 

Brunswick has 10 senators? How do we deal with that 

inequality? And having now elected, not quite elected but say, 

for the sake of argument, electing senators — and those 

senators are taking on to themselves a little bit more power and 

so on — please do explain to me and the people of 

Saskatchewan why it is then that those jurisdictions that have a 

far greater presentation or representation in the Senate would 

want to give that up? Why would you give that up? What is the 

incentive to give that up? 

 

Well I know that one of the incentives might be, is that if you 

make other fundamental constitutional changes, you might do 

some horse-trading. But I‟ll get to that in a minute. But, you 

know, here again like without any other things on the table, why 

would a province give that up? Can anyone answer that 

question? Why would you give up something that you have in 

terms of power at the centre? Why would you give it up? And 

that is a question that when we ask it, it just met with a stunning 

silence — not just here, but in other quarters as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we‟re not at all convinced that this approach that the 

government and the so-called Triple-E advocates are on is the 

right approach. Again, and all of it comes back to the fact that, 

you know, all of it comes back to the fact that if you want to 

change this organization called the Senate — which has been 

bequeathed to us by the Fathers of Confederation in something 

called our constitution — that you can‟t arbitrarily make 

changes to that structure through something called a Triple-E 

and not at some point at the end of the day arrive at a question 

of you know, whoops, a constitutional change is required here if 

you really want to have an equal, effective, and elected Senate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I certainly can appreciate where the right is coming from on 

this, but I don‟t quite follow the logic here as to how this is 

actually going to result in a reformed Senate as opposed to an 

abolished Senate. 

 

Now the abolition of the Senate, that‟s an alternative that the 

government hasn‟t put forward. That‟s something that had long 

been advocated by interests in Canada, the latest being the 

actual Prime Minister Stephen Harper, who‟s mused about 

abolishing the Senate. If the Senate didn‟t do his way in terms 

of what he was looking for, he said, well I would consider 

abolishing the Senate. He would join forces with Jack Layton, 

who favours an abolition of the Senate. And the Prime Minister 

might do the same. 

 

So you know, I see the member‟s scratching his head. He‟s 

right. I don‟t understand this either, how these things happen in 

Ottawa. But here you have it. You have a Conservative Prime 

Minister; you had a New Democratic Party leader. And both of 

them are both of the same mind in terms of the abolition of the 

Senate. And I say that by way of indicating that there had been 

voices over the years — in fact since the Senate was first 

established — there had been voices who have called for the 

abolition of the Senate because of a number of reasons. 

 

This is certainly because there‟s this tension between elected 

versus non-elected. That this is the same tension that the British 

House of Lords must be feeling in the British parliament when 

it comes to the House of Commons, and one of the reasons that 

the Blair government then moved to begin to reform the House 

of Lords. 

 

In some ways the Senate of Canada was constructed to reflect 

the same thoughts that people in Great Britain had about the 

House of Lords, where the House of Lords was put into place to 

ensure that there was a body of sober, second thought, so called 

— and something that people have certainly had a lot of puns 

with on, but I won‟t go there. 

 

But in the House of Lords the position was taken that, you 

know, you really couldn‟t have this popularly elected rabble in 

the House of Commons make all kinds of changes that might 

affect capital in our country. And therefore there needed to be 

some constraint on those popularly elected Democrats to take a 

run at the property classes in England. And that was an 

important role of the House of Lords in Great Britain, to act as a 

bit of a check and a balance on the House of Commons so as to 

ensure that the House of Commons didn‟t go overboard in 

terms of attacking capital in Great Britain. 

 

Well similarly here in Canada, the senators were expected to 

provide sober, second thought to decisions reached in the House 

of Commons which would otherwise have gone unchecked. 

And they were also expected to represent the interest of the 

property class, the landed gentry, hence the requirement that the 

senators own $4,000 worth of real property. And that was 

$4,000 of real property back in the 1800s, and that $4,000 

would have a little bit different value today. 

 

But even there the thoughts were, by the elites that controlled 

the country, that you know we really need to have some check 

and balance here. That properly elected representatives don‟t do 

things that affect capital in this country, and we‟ve got to have 

some check and balance on that. Well that‟s what they‟re 

originally thinking. I think that‟s probably the source of the 

tension that still exists in Canada about the question and the role 

of a Senate, and as to whether there should even be a Senate. 

 

And I know that the members opposite say the way to deal with 

that is now to elect these senators — well not quite election — 

but to elect senators in Saskatchewan that can then be 

recommended for appointment by the Prime Minister. And 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

that‟s the way to deal with that. But others take the point of 

view that it should be abolished. Certainly that has over time 

been a belief of the party that I belong to. 

 

The New Democratic Party has long taken the point of view 

that the Senate in Canada ought to be abolished, that we should 

not for one moment, not for one moment, accept a scenario 

where those who are elected by the people in democratic, fair 

elections — elected by the people to represent those people — 

should have in any way their considerations be trumped by 

those who are appointed. That that is not tenable in any kind of 

a democracy in fact makes Canada a bit of a laughingstock for 

the rest of the world, when they see this unelected, 

unaccountable Senate making use of the limited powers they 

have to try and subvert the popular will of parliament. 

 

So that has always been a considerable source of concern for 

my party, the New Democratic Party. I‟m pleased to see that the 

Prime Minister of Canada is now also now musing in those 

ways. That historically has not been the position of the Liberals 

and Conservatives federally because they‟ve seen the Senate as 

an important source of being able to appoint partisans, to 

appoint those people that supported them — the people that 

raised money for them in election, the people that did 

significant work for them in election. To use the Senate as a 

way of rewarding those political activists by appointment to the 

Senate for the prestige and, I guess in some ways too, for the 

salary that senators receive. 

 

And we‟ve certainly seen that in Saskatchewan where we‟ve 

seen a number of very, very partisan people being appointed to 

serve in the Senate. Eric Berntson is certainly one that comes to 

mind as a person that was appointed because of his political 

connections. Dave Tkachuk is certainly someone that comes to 

mind, given his very active role in the election of Grant Devine 

in the 1980s and his active work on behalf of the then 

Progressive Conservative Party, probably federally as well. And 

that was rewarded by his appointment to the Senate. And there 

are others from the other side as well. 

 

From time to time, the Prime Minister may make appointments 

that seem more independent, people who are not partisans as 

such, for whatever reason that might be the case. But in the 

main, the appointments to the Senate have been people who are 

being rewarded for their political contributions to the 

Conservative and Liberal Parties in this country. So we‟ve 

always seen a great deal of resistance from those parties to any 

change in that ability of theirs to reward their political activists. 

 

And my party takes the position that there shouldn‟t be a 

Senate, has never been in office in Ottawa either to be put in a 

position of what you would do with a vacancy in the Senate. 

But they‟ve taken the position that the Senate should be 

abolished. 

 

You know, what does the Senate do? What change would it 

really make to Canadians if the Senate were abolished? When 

you go to their annual report, their most recent annual report, 

they will outline a number of things that they‟re active in. For 

example, they say that they legislate for Canadians. And I read 

their annual report and it says: 

 

Senators considered 59 bills this fiscal year. Some bills 

they passed without amendment, they amended others 

where they perceived problems, and made observations 

about related concerns. They spent hundreds of working 

hours studying and debating legislation. And, not content 

to simply review cabinet‟s agenda, they introduced nearly 

half the bills they considered, addressing issues important 

to the citizens they represent. 

 

[16:30] 

 

No doubt. No doubt. But the question is, why should an 

unelected group of people be put in a position of doing that, and 

also recognizing that their ability to deal with legislation, even 

if they were elected, is very circumscribed, very limited, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So yes, they do deal with legislation, but again recognizing the 

major activity of the House of Commons when it comes to 

legislation, the Senate‟s activities in this regard might be 

considered to be a minor contribution overall to the 

development of legislation in Canada. 

 

Now I‟m sure that there will be arguments from senators on that 

point, and again I don‟t want to, at any point, have my remarks 

misconstrued as being critical of any of the people that 

currently serve in the Senate and the contributions they make to 

public life and have made to public life in Canada, and some of 

those contributions are significant, and I referenced that 

previously in my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that the Senate also does, they call 

investigating the issues. They have set up a number of 

committees. They have committees that deal with various 

policy areas. They say these committee operate like think tanks, 

independently pursuing research in areas that affect Canadians‟ 

lives. They‟ve spent thousands of hours in committee meetings, 

and I would agree that they do that. There‟s no doubt they do 

that. That‟s not to say that the House of Commons might not 

undertake a greater role in that respect, but the Senate certainly 

has committees. 

 

But again the question is, why should an unelected group of 

men and women be put in a position of passing judgment on 

policy matters in our country? And again, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to speak positively of the reception that people of Saskatchewan 

received by the Standing Committee on National Finance where 

we appeared on a number of occasions to speak to issues related 

to equalization. That has been a considerable source of interest 

and concern to that particular Senate committee. I think they‟ve 

done good work in that regard, and the other committees have 

done good work in that regard. But, you know, why have a 

Senate to simply do committee work and to review things that, 

you know, arguably, the members of the House of Commons 

could also undertake to do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So yes, they investigate issues. They advocate for change. 

There are other things that they do. Yes, they advocate for 

change. They bring Canadians‟ concerns inside parliament, they 

say. 

 

There have been special task forces that have been undertaken 

by senators. I made mention earlier of the Croll commission, 

Senator Croll, and his groundbreaking work on poverty in this 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

country. Other senators have done some very important work 

— Senator Kirby, if I remember correctly in the area of health 

care. All of them have made a substantial contribution to public 

debate. But it‟s a valid question as to whether or not you need a 

Senate as such to be able to do that kind of work and whether 

there are other ways, through royal commissions and the like, to 

also do that work. 

 

Now all of this work, there‟s a cost involved to Canadians of 

doing this. The financial statements for the Senate indicate that 

the total operations of the Senate is in the neighbourhood . . . 

cost to the Canadian taxpayers some $80 million a year. And 

that‟s not a small amount of change. That‟s $80 million a year, 

and it raises the question under abolition whether there are more 

effective ways for people to be engaged to do some of the work 

that Senators are doing at considerably less cost, and also to 

eliminate the tensions that we see there with respect to 

unelected versus an elected House of Commons. 

 

So there is not inconsiderable cost, and I know that somebody 

was suggesting that, you know, the Senate being the only other 

red Chamber in the country, if it was abolished, we might be 

able to get a deal on a second-hand, red carpet here because 

we‟re the only other Chamber in Canada, I think, that has a red 

carpet for reasons that I don‟t want to go into because you‟ll say 

you‟re straying from the topic at hand. But it‟s no secret that the 

carpet here is a little bit threadbare. And the question was, were 

the seats the priority or is it the carpet? But we certainly would 

be able to pick up a deal from carpet from the Senate. But I‟m 

joking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question of abolition though is a real question and one that 

when people have looked at this there is support for it. In 1998 

an Angus Reid poll found almost as much support for 

abolishing the Senate as reforming it. Only a very small portion, 

5 per cent, supported maintaining the Senate in its current form. 

So clearly there is a challenge as to what to do with the Senate. 

And it‟s also clear now that there are two differing approaches 

as to how to deal with it. 

 

One approach is to abolish the Senate. The other approach is to 

— through the back door, I guess — begin to elect people sort 

of and hope that that morphs then into a consideration of a more 

effective Senate, unstated what that might be and who might 

actually define that, and still begging the question of how you 

deal with the question of equality and equal representation for 

the provinces or for the regions. 

 

So those are the issues. And you know, where I land in all of 

this and where I keep coming back to is the question of whether 

this approach by the government or the abolition approach 

that‟s advocated by some, will either of these approaches work 

at the end of the day? 

 

There is considerable opinion that suggests that abolition of the 

Senate requires constitutional change, that the federal 

government cannot arbitrarily say we‟re going to abolish the 

Senate, and that at least 7 of the 10 provinces would have to 

agree to such a change. And yet we know that there continues to 

be strong support in the Atlantic provinces for the continuation 

of the Senate, whether those provinces would at any point agree 

to such an abolition. 

 

The same token, there‟s a question of whether the change that‟s 

envisioned I suppose by the government . . . although they don‟t 

articulate what that vision is and this particular change might at 

the end of the day also not result in the same expectation of 

constitutional change. That again if you elect or you elect to 

nominate people to the Prime Minister, you have an increasing 

number of elected versus non-elected senators, although what 

kind of system that would be I‟m not really clear, and that 

somehow this would then also translate through into a 

redistribution of Senate seats that might better reflect regional 

balance in this country, might reflect other considerations . . . I 

don‟t know, but certainly would have to deal with the 

inequalities that we are currently seeing in a Senate when you 

look at it from a provincial basis, again, where you have 

Atlantic provinces that each are entitled to 10 senators, but 

Saskatchewan is entitled to 6 senators. 

 

And again I think that if that particular part of the equation is to 

be changed, then I think you‟re looking at constitutional reform. 

And then the question is, if you‟re looking at constitutional 

reform at that stage, as the last stage of the Triple-E, what kinds 

of horse-trading would we have to do if we are wedded to that 

approach? What kind of horse-trading would we have to do as a 

province to be able to convince other jurisdictions, other 

provinces, to give up, relatively speaking, some of the power 

they now have in that Senate? 

 

And so I keep coming back to the question of the constitution 

and that you really cannot effectively reform the Senate unless 

and until there‟s agreement on the part of our leadership in this 

country — and significantly the premiers in this country and the 

legislatures in this country — to fundamentally reform the 

Senate and then to have some vision as to how to do that. 

 

And again I note the irony, the irony that the one attempt in all 

of our history to reform the Senate that was agreed to by the 

provinces was in the Meech Lake Accord and recognizing the 

. . . And that was a change that would have dealt with regional 

issues, would have moved us to an effective and elected Senate 

although none of it was spelled out, but there was agreement to 

move in that direction. I find it just so ironic that the right wing 

in this country, who valued the reform of the Senate, an elected 

Senate above almost anything else . . . and I don‟t know. We‟d 

have to ask what their primary reason is for that. But, you 

know, an elected Senate, an elected Senate as a check on 

parliament, raises questions about what kind of power a Senate 

would wield and how that might subvert the popular will of 

people who are elected to the House of Commons. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is the question as to how we would 

amend the constitution, but they did it through Meech Lake. 

There was agreement in the Meech Lake to reform the Senate, 

but the right wing said no. The right wing in Canada said, no we 

don‟t want to do that. Having argued for reform of the Senate, 

then said no, we don‟t want to do that. And the right wing, the 

Reform Party, significantly one Preston Manning — whence 

some of these members opposite come from, whence some of 

these members opposite from — also argued mightily against 

that Meech Lake Accord. So you have to question what is that 

they wanted with respect to an election of the Senate. 

 

So I see the Premier is speaking from his seat, interjecting 

himself into this debate. You know, I wish the Premier and his 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Minister of Justice would get to their feet in this debate and 

articulate clearly for the people of Saskatchewan what it is that 

they are seeking to do here, not just the mechanics of how we 

might elect a nominee to recommend to the Prime Minister but 

why we would do that, what kind of change that might result in 

at the end of the day in the Senate, how that might reform a 

Senate, and how all of that would better the situation for 

Canadians from coast to coast. 

 

And they‟ve been very silent on that. All they‟ve said is that 

we‟re elected and somewhere in our platform . . . although it‟s 

not something that factored heavily in the provincial election 

just passed. I don‟t remember that being an issue on doorsteps. 

But nevertheless they say, you check the fine print; we‟ve 

always favoured an elected Senate. So therefore we‟re going to 

do it. 

 

Well that‟s a real issue that I have, that you would in this way 

seek to introduce constitutional change in Canada and, I guess, 

in Saskatchewan in this way, that you would put a Bill before 

the Legislative Assembly and not really provide an explanation 

why you would do it and why it‟s in the interests of people in 

Saskatchewan to do it, simply say, in an arrogant dismissive 

way, well it was in our platform so you have to vote for it. 

That‟s what we wanted, and that‟s what we‟re going to do. 

 

Don‟t ask us for explanations. Don‟t ask us to outline our vision 

for a reformed Senate. Don‟t ask us to weigh in as to what an 

effective Senate might look like in Canada. Don‟t ask us for the 

hard questions on an equal Senate — what kind of 

representation we would seek to have from Saskatchewan 

versus other jurisdictions — don‟t ask us any of that. Just vote 

for the Bill, for a reformed Senate. Just move us down that road. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Don‟t ask us any of the hard questions. You know, we‟re just 

doing it because those guys in Alberta did it and what‟s good 

for them is good for us. What‟s good for the people of Alberta 

should be good for the people of Saskatchewan. Don‟t ask any 

questions. Well it‟s a good thing we have a Legislative 

Assembly to in fact ask some of these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I take the point of view that to proceed as we 

are doing with this motion — no explanation, just simply the 

mechanics of how we would do it, the mechanics of how we 

would do it, not why we would do it, not what the vision is — 

that this is a Mickey Mouse way to operate. And I think it‟s not 

worthy of the government to in fact deal with a constitutional 

change in this way. 

 

To deal with questions of constitution, to deal with questions of 

a constitution — and surely this is a constitutional issue at the 

end of the day, because I think the inescapable conclusion for 

anyone that‟s weighed on on this, at some point you come back 

to a constitutional change — then begs the question of where it 

is we‟re going, what our vision is, what kind of support we can 

get from people for that vision, and then take the hard decisions 

about, okay, what direction do we now go? And you know, 

we‟ve not seen any of that. 

 

We‟ve had other constitutional discussions in Saskatchewan. 

Some of them have been limited primarily to this Chamber, but 

there have also been other discussions that have been broader 

ranging. And I take the point of view that when you‟re dealing 

with the constitution that provides the framework for how we 

govern ourselves, it is always appropriate to consult, and to 

consult widely and to consult substantially, with the people that 

you represent to ensure that their viewpoints are being heard, 

that their perspectives, that their thoughts, their ideas, are also 

being listened to when it comes to changing the Senate — not 

just a question of, well we were elected and it‟s the fine print in 

our platform and if you don‟t like it, lump it. Well that‟s the 

height of arrogance as far as I can see, Mr. Speaker, and we 

ought not to move in that direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why I have been speaking on this matter. 

That‟s why I have concerns about this. I think that the 

government is moving in completely the wrong direction. I 

think there needs to be a debate as to what an effective role for a 

Senate might be before we start electing these senators — what 

our vision is. 

 

Is it a question of regional balance? Is the regional balance still 

an effective and a valid question in a country like Canada which 

many people have observed as being the most decentralized 

country in the world? You know, it might escape our attention 

because we‟re so used to it, but not every country in the world 

has these kinds of powers in provinces and states. The states 

south of the border have in many ways far less power than the 

provinces of Canada. We have a great deal of power resident in 

our provinces. 

 

And so the question is, are we seeking to enhance the power of 

the provinces at some central location in Ottawa? What is it that 

we‟re seeking to do? We need to deal with this question of 

regional balance. We need to deal with this question of 

decentralization. What kind of vision do we have for Canada as 

a country? And what kind of vision within that do we then have 

for its Senate, Mr. Speaker? And I frankly think that those are 

the questions that really need to be dealt with. 

 

I would strongly encourage, strongly encourage the provincial 

government not to continue to proceed in the arrogant fashion 

that it is without any explanation, to not proceed in the arrogant 

fashion that it is — to pull this Bill, to look at a consultative 

process as to where it is we‟re going when we elect senators. 

What is our vision for an effective and an equal Senate? What 

kinds of constitutional amendments we might be needing to 

look at down the road so that we are fully informed as to what 

the outcome is of this little piece of legislation, this Mickey 

Mouse Bill that‟s before us, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to rise in the Assembly today and to speak in support of 

Bill 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act. 

 

While I have much to say in support of this Bill and in response 

to members opposite in their intervention on this Bill, I 

appreciate the time constraints of the Assembly and other 



November 26, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

members‟ desire to debate this and other Bills today. So I‟ll 

keep my remarks brief this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come to this debate not at the behest of any 

individual, not another member of this Chamber, or any other 

citizen of this country. Nor, Mr. Speaker, am I simply adhering 

slavishly to any political thoughts as members opposite have 

come to believe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do support this Bill and its intentions because, 

yes, it is what I believe my party and most of my constituents 

agree with. But, Mr. Speaker, more than anything else I support 

Bill 60 and seek to add my voice in support in this Chamber 

because I believe that this is a small but important step in 

improving our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is, as the Justice minister said in his 

second reading speech, an important step in moving our system 

of government down the path of being a more democratic 

system. This Bill will ensure that the people of Saskatchewan 

have an increased say in who represents them in the national 

capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there is much debate and dissenting 

opinions on the role of the Senate in Canada, one thing is very 

clear. The Senate as an institution has served this country for 

141 years, and there‟s nothing to suggest that this will change 

any time soon no matter how many times members opposite 

chant words abolish, abolish, abolish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the abolition of the Senate would 

only happen under a federal NDP government. A federal NDP 

government and the abolition of the Senate are two things I 

would advise my constituents to not hold their breaths waiting 

for. So, Mr. Speaker, we as elected officials and as citizens of 

this nation, have really two options: retain the status quo or 

work to bring all of our democratic institutions into their 

rightful place into the 21st century. Mr. Speaker, I choose the 

latter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in opposing this Bill and the democratization of 

Senate selection, members opposite put forward the argument 

that there is no sense in changing how senators are selected 

because it is by its nature an ineffective body. The member for 

Regina Douglas Park, my hon. colleague, said quote “. . . why 

spend money to elect a senator when that senator has no 

effective role?” Mr. Speaker, he furthered his argument by 

stating that senators in Canada are largely ineffective because 

they have quote “. . . no authority to spend money, has no 

authority to vote on taxes, to raise or to lower taxes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, he is somewhat correct. According to section 53 

of the Constitution Act, 1867, “Bills for appropriating any Part 

of the Public Revenue, or for imposing any Tax or Impost, shall 

originate in the House of Commons.” So, Mr. Speaker, on this 

point he is somewhat correct that senators cannot spend money 

or raise or lower taxes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, does this in itself make the Senate 

ineffective? Mr. Speaker, here‟s another quote. Quote, “All bills 

for raising revenue shall originate in the House.” Mr. Speaker, I 

have taken this directly from another important document, 

section 7 of the United States constitution. Rules governing the 

United States Senate were adopted by the framers of the US 

constitution largely from the British parliament, just as was the 

case in Canada. Surely, Mr. Speaker, there is not a rational 

person who has ever taken a political studies course or a history 

class or, dare I say, no one who has ever read a newspaper 

would argue that the US Senate is an ineffective body. 

 

Further to this point, Mr. Speaker, if one of the bars for the 

member from Douglas Park in determining the effectiveness of 

a legislature or its membership is the authority to raise or spend 

money, then, Mr. Speaker, what does that say about that 

member‟s belief in his own effectiveness in this Assembly? As 

a private member, he does not have this very same ability in this 

Chamber to move a Bill that would spend money or raise taxes, 

yet I do not believe anyone would argue that the member from 

Regina Douglas Park is not an effective member of this 

Chamber despite the lack of authority, that surely this member 

believes that the people of Regina Douglas Park should be 

represented in this Chamber and should have the right to vote 

for their member of their choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, democracy and our form of government is ever 

changing. We‟ve seen changes to how this very legislature 

functions in terms of the role committees play and other rules 

and procedures. 

 

We have seen in our province and in other provinces and the 

national parliament how our system has adapted and changed, 

hopefully to better serve our citizens. Democracy is not static. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Douglas Park referenced the 

American and the Australian models of Senate. But they too 

have witnessed their share of changes. It wasn‟t until 1913 in 

the 17th Amendment that American citizens were allowed to 

vote for their members of the upper chamber, which had up 

until that time been chosen by the state legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our very own province has recently joined the 

rank of other provinces in having set election dates. Democracy 

is not static. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my time draws to a close, I want to conclude 

this by saying, with all due respect, I do not consider, as does 

the member from Regina Douglas Park, this Bill to be frivolous. 

I do not consider it a waste of time nor money. Mr. Speaker, nor 

do I consider any attempt to give my constituents and the 

people of this great province a little more say in who governs 

them frivolous or a waste of time. Democracy is never a 

frivolous exercise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does this Bill provide for a sweeping overall on 

how the Senate functions? No, it does not. Does it on its face 

improve the effectiveness of the upper chamber? Perhaps not, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, as legislators, we ultimately 

determine how effective this place functions. And I would 

submit to you that no law or Act or proclamation can dictate the 

effectiveness or efficiency of any legislative body as effectively 

as those who serve in it. 

 

With the passage of this Bill, I believe we are giving the people 

of Saskatchewan what they deserve — the opportunity to 

choose their own representatives. Mr. Speaker, a better 

democracy. 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, governments in a democracy don‟t always move 

swiftly, nor in always a progressive direction. Change is not 

easy. But that doesn‟t lessen our responsibility to try to make it 

better. Since declaring their independence from Britain in 1776, 

American lawmakers have amended their constitution 27 times, 

the last coming in 1992. That amendment, the 27th, made its 

way through the long and difficult process over the course of 

74,003 days. From the day it was first proposed in the 1st 

Congress by Madison and first ratified by the state of Maryland 

in 1789, it took some 202 years for it to be fully ratified and 

enshrined into law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Douglas Park called the 

ongoing Senate debate in our country the curse of our country. 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that we are today on a November 

afternoon in 2008 discussing the Senate, discussing how our 

democracy functions, just as I am sure Mr. Blakeney and Mr. 

Romanow discussed it some 30 years ago, just as 

parliamentarian David Mills spoke of reform in 1874 as pointed 

out by the member opposite, the fact that we can and are 

discussing this 141 years later is not, as the hon. member said 

last week, the curse of our country. That this ongoing debate, I 

believe, is not the curse of our country, Mr. Speaker, but a 

tribute to this great nation and to the strength of our democracy 

— that we can discuss it and maybe even, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

even change it for the better. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to join in this debate in large part because of the 

considerable thought that has obviously gone into the remarks 

of all the previous speakers, including the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy who I know was anxious to deliver his 

remarks today. And so I‟m glad for him that he had the 

opportunity to do that. I quite happily would have heard them, I 

would have quite happily heard them on Monday. I was quite 

happy to hear them today. 

 

As I said, my remarks, I expect — following such thoughtful 

submissions as were made by the three previous speakers — 

may be briefer because of the territory that‟s already been 

covered. But I suspect not so brief as to be entirely completed in 

the time left for us today. 

 

The previous speaker, Mr. Speaker, entered into the discussion 

as if we were debating a change to the constitution and, Mr. 

Speaker, of course there‟s a way that the legislature could do 

that. The legislature could pass a resolution to allow for 

constitutional discussion, constitutional amendment. 

 

I listened to the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy very 

carefully, and he was talking about amending, how the 

constitution was amended in the United States 27 times, and 

you make these incremental changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if we want to talk about constitutional change, there are 

ways that we can do that, Mr. Speaker. And they would be more 

democratic than what‟s being proposed by the government, 

which is not to talk about constitutional change but to avoid 

actually debating about whether we want to make a 

constitutional change and effect a constitutional change to the 

Senate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on the next opportunity to address this matter, I will want 

to talk about what the resolution does or the Bill does do and 

what it does not do, Mr. Speaker, but that will be another day. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 

tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1871 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1859 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1860 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1860 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1860 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1860 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 United Way Thanks Community Members 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1860 

 Kelvington Gold Hawks  

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1861 

 Room to Grow Auction 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1861 

 Get in the Game for United Way 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1861 

 Saskatchewan Poet Honoured 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1861 

 Member Elected to Executive of Pacific Northwest Economic Region 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 

 Multilingual Association of Regina’s 30th Anniversary 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 AgriStability Program 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1862 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1862 

 Environmental Issues 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1864 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1864 

 Funding for Proposed Bridge in Saskatoon 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1865 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1865 

 Financial Relationship with Federal Government 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1866 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1866 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1866 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1867 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1868 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1868 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1868 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1868 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1868 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1869 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1872 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1873 



 

 Bill No. 70 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1875 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1875 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1875 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1876 

 Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1877 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1878 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1879 

  McMorris (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1881 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1882 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1883 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1888 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1890 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


