




















































Hansard: October 23, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1337 

 October 23, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Hon. Assembly a group of people assembled in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, on October 23, for the first time, has been 

designated Saskatchewan Youth Entrepreneurship Day. To 

celebrate this day, we’ve announced partnerships with Junior 

Achievement of Saskatchewan, an organization that will train 

youth in business and entrepreneurship skills, and a new youth 

education centre in Regina donated by TCU Financial Group 

that will be managed by Argus Group Inc., a 

Saskatchewan-based marketing consulting firm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I would now like to 

introduce to the House the following executives and young 

people who are part of this great partnership. Representing 

Junior Achievement of Saskatchewan, Councillor Darren Hill 

from the city of Saskatoon. If I could just have the people stand. 

There’s Darren. Stand as I introduce you. Katherine Gagne, 

program director, Junior Achievement of Saskatchewan. 

 

And with Darren and Katherine today are eight students who 

participate in the Junior Achievement company program. These 

achievers have begun the process of starting their own business 

and they are: Cole Shaheen, Andrea Williams, Jesse White, Jeff 

Myers, Jordon McArthur, Nathan Brietenbach, Sean Myers and 

Victoria Oppenlander. Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members 

will grant a warm welcome to this dynamic group of young 

people. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce you to some members in the 

east gallery, members of the Saskatchewan Potash Council. 

 

The Saskatchewan Potash Council was officially formed on 

September 10 and made public at a press conference the next 

day in Prince Albert. As part of the press conference, the main 

participants signed the Saskatchewan potash mining initiative. 

The council believed the formation of this council is truly a 

historical event in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan labour and 

the Saskatchewan potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have with us today members of the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union Local 892 

from Esterhazy, Mosaic Potash, Doug Milham. From the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union Local 922, 

Lanigan, Potash Corporation, Rick Suchy and Robert Heinrich. 

We have from the Rocanville Potash Employees Association, 

Potash Corp, Derek Palmer. United Steelworkers Local 189, 

Patience Lake, Potash Corporation, Ron Greenwood and Neil 

Wolff. United Steelworkers Local 7458, Cory, Potash 

Corporation, we have Randy Rounce, Ben Medernach, and 

Gord Hiebert. United Steelworkers Local 7552, Vanscoy 

Potash, Agrium, we have Darrin Kruger, Glen Bauer, and Willy 

Prentice. 

 

From United Steelworkers Local 7656, Colonsay, Mosaic 

Potash, we have Bruce Koob and Vern Becker. From United 

Steelworkers Local 7689, Allan, Potash Corporation, we have 

Kim Wehner and Dennis Wutzke. Also joining this group are 

United Steelworkers staff representative Lee Edwards, United 

Steelworkers national representative Roger Falconer, United 

Steelworkers national rep Scott Lunny, and United 

Steelworkers District 3 director, Steve Hunt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to welcome these members to 

their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to join with the member opposite in welcoming the folks 

representing the Potash Council to the legislature here this 

morning. 

 

As you would know, Mr. Speaker, the potash industry 

represents a tremendous success story here in Saskatchewan. 

The industry contributes significant revenues to the province of 

Saskatchewan — unprecedented revenues to the province of 

Saskatchewan — and indeed the folks that represent that 

industry are welcome to the legislature. We appreciate the work 

that they do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 

revenues that are generated from it help the announcements of 

late in the last few days, and we welcome it. We continue to 

believe that there is a very optimistic future for the potash 

industry here in Saskatchewan and would want to take the 

occasion on behalf of the government to welcome them here 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a few guests to you and through you to the rest of the 

House here. I see in your gallery we have Bev Duncan, the chief 

executive officer for the Saskatchewan voice of those with 

disabilities, and so we welcome her here today. As well, people 

on the floor, Tammy, Mellissa as well. And I think this is going 

to be an important day for them. So I’d like to ask the whole 

House to welcome those folks to this House. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce 86 students from Vanscoy. I 

understand they’ve been up since 4 o’clock this morning to 

drive down to the legislature and to Regina. We had a photo and 

a brief discussion about the legislature and the duties of an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

I’d like to also introduce some teachers and assistants that are 

accompanying them: Kevin Derdall, Darin McKay, Amanda 

Schafhauser, Janet Jeffries, Betty Ferguson, Trish Van Damme, 

Lorrie Reichert, Kendra Danielson, and a number of parents 

that also have accompanied them, and also Gina Streisel. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, please join me in welcoming these students 

and teachers and parents to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly for leave 

for extended introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 

extension of introductions. Is that granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all the members of this Assembly, I 

introduce three students from Thom Collegiate: Stephanie 

Hewitt — do you want to give us a wave, Stephanie — Johnny 

Graham, and Major Wu. I think that’s the coolest name I’ve 

ever heard — Major Wu— don’t you? 

 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, they took upon themselves to 

carry out a very selfless project. While clearing up the 

schoolyard, they discovered planters where they thought was a 

waste receptacle. They decided to put them to use. They 

thought the problem through, came up with a plan, and took 

action. They raised funds, purchased the flowers, did the 

planting, and looked after the upkeep. 

 

But the story doesn’t end there, Mr. Speaker. You see, the 

plants were stolen. And although these three impressive 

individuals were undoubtedly very disappointed, they remained 

upbeat. They went so far as to say they thought whoever had 

taken the plants probably needed them more, and only hoped 

they were still being properly cared for. They chose to be 

positive, Mr. Speaker — better and not bitter. 

 

When the situation was made public, the community rallied 

around the three. New plants were supplied and the project 

revived. These three not only set a good example for the school 

and youth in general, Mr. Speaker, but also the city and the 

province. 

 

One thing I haven’t mentioned yet, Mr. Speaker, is that these 

three — Stephanie, Johnny, and Major — all have varying 

degrees of autism. And as a member of the standing policy 

committee on human services, I often hear at stakeholder 

meetings with groups representing people with disabilities . . . 

And they feel they are often marginalized by a society that does 

not understand their needs, and at times they are negatively 

judged and their parents are negatively judged by their skills. 

 

Today I want to acknowledge the effort and dedication the 

parents have made to these students. They have their teens 

respond in a caring and positive way regarding the theft of the 

flowers. I knew immediately that these are skills and values 

these parents have installed in their students and their kids. 

 

I want to publicly acknowledge the time and effort that the 

parents have invested in their children, and I want to say, a job 

well done. 

 

The parents of Stephanie, Ray and Jana Hewitt, are here today; 

the mother of Johnny, Bev Graham, is here today. Father, 

Greig, couldn’t make it. And Major’s father, Simon, is here, but 

his mother, Hanna, wasn’t able to attend today. 

 

Also with us today is our special ed teacher, Miranda Field, and 

teaching assistant, Glendyne Brown. I’d also like to mention, 

Mr. Speaker, the former teacher who helped encourage the 

students on this project wasn’t able to attend today — Ms. 

Michelle Grodecki. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Major is leaving us and moving to 

BC — Nanaimo to be factual — and he will be missed. He said 

he’ll email us, though. So I’d like to wish he and his family 

well. 

 

One other thing I’d like to add, Mr. Speaker. When I went to 

visit them at school, I asked what prompted them to take on this 

project. Both Johnny and Major promptly said, because 

Stephanie said to, and you do not say no to Stephanie. 

Stephanie, Johnny, Major, thank you for being you. We are all 

here very proud of you. May God bless you and your families. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good morning. I 

am wanting to introduce to you and through you my nephew 

who is in your gallery, Luc Préfontaine. He is one of our many 

young people that have left for Alberta and has come home to 

get educated and participate in our growth. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

through you and to you a member of my Rotary Club Nutana, a 

good friend of mine, Jim Gillis who is in your gallery, who has 

come down today. He’s also my lawyer. Not my criminal 

lawyer, my book lawyer. I’d like to introduce a good friend of 

mine to you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

2008 Circle of Honour Awards 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Good morning. I would like to speak this 

morning about the Circle of Honour Awards. It was a special 

night full of song, dance, and soulful notes of a flute. Pride and 

honour shone in the faces of those who watched recipients 

accept their FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

Circle of Honour Awards on Tuesday night in Saskatoon. 

 

The list of winners was impressive. The coveted awards were 

given to First Nations people who have taken opportunity 

firmly by the hand and pushed forward. A total of 29 awards 

were given out to recipients of all ages, those who have served 

their communities through the years, and youth who are just 

coming into their own. 

 

Honours were given out to stellar volunteers, athletes, artists, 

healers, leaders, teachers, and workplace coaches. Nearly 20 

chiefs travelled many miles to join the celebration. 

 

Citizen of the Year Awards were given to elder Edward 

Baldhead of One Arrow First Nation and Susan Wapass of 

Thunderchild First Nation. A posthumous award was accepted 

by family members of the late Senator Myles Venne of the Lac 

La Ronge Indian Band. 

 

Students who won for academic achievement were honoured 

for making their lives drug- and alcohol-free. Let’s join together 

to pay tribute to the incredible power of these awards and the 

role models that received them. Their service to community 

remains the backbone of our society. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Stresses on Saskatchewan Families 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

families across Saskatchewan are strained by an ever-increasing 

financial burden upon them. Strong middle-class families across 

Saskatchewan are increasingly stressed by the costs of living, 

and those living on the margins have an incredible pressure and 

many barriers placed upon them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is so important that families can access 

education and the labour market. Mr. Speaker, inadequate 

access to quality and affordable child care is a major roadblock 

for families. Current wait-lists across Saskatchewan are 

disgraceful. For example, one child care provider in Regina has 

a 400-person wait-list, a 200-wait-list alone for 21 infant 

spaces. This is not acceptable. It’s an injustice that the Sask 

Party is not even spending its federal transfer for child care 

spaces in entirety at a time of such need. 

 

As a province, we risk squandering important social and 

economic benefits of this strong economy without this strategic 

investment. Mr. Speaker, far too many Saskatchewan families 

are stressed, strained, and struggling as they are unable to find 

quality, affordable child care for their children. This limits their 

futures. This limits the future of our province. Action and 

investment is needed now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

This Year Country 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As today is Youth 

Entrepreneurship Day in our province, it is timely that I rise to 

highlight this province and the city I call home, Lloydminster. 

The CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] 

recently produced a report entitled Communities in Boom: 

Canada’s Top Entrepreneurial Cities. Our province captured 

four of the top 10, with Lloydminster ranking number one in the 

country by a fairly wide margin. Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 

Regina were also recognized for their openness to small 

business. 

 

The national study credits Saskatchewan’s dramatic competitive 

rise to this province taking over from Alberta as the country’s 

top performer. Mr. Mallett of the CFIB reflects, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan in general has had a rebirth not just because 

of its resources but a sea change at the provincial level . . . 

 

In addition to the change at the provincial level, I think we 

should recognize the work of the cities named as well as the 

chambers of commerce. Most of all, we should recognize and 

salute the women and men who make this happen with the oil 

on their hands and the mud on their boots. Their entrepreneurial 

spirit is helping make Saskatchewan stronger and a better life 

for everyone. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan truly is this year 

country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Quality of Life for Saskatchewan People 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

constituency of Regina Walsh Acres resides an extraordinary 

22-year old woman who, like many others her age, enjoys going 

out with her friends. Lately, however, she’s been unable to join 

them. After paying for her living accommodations, she is left 

with the paltry sum of $135 per month for clothing, personal 

hygiene supplies, and transport. In an effort to cut costs, she 

takes the bus, but too often it is unavailable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a story of the indignity suffered by the most 

vulnerable in our society, as the young woman I just described 

is quadriplegic and confined to a wheelchair. She lacks funds 

available through Social Services, and, even more 

disconcerting, the Regina Paratransit Service she depends on is 

overburdened to the point that even with a 14-day advance 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

booking, they cannot provide her with the caring service she 

needs to go out with her friends. Instead all she knows is the 

all-too-familiar walls of her group home and the compassionate 

attention of those who surround her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time for the Sask Party government to start 

caring about the quality of life of Saskatchewan people. Tax 

cuts don’t excuse a government that refuses to take 

responsibility for those left behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Saskatchewan People Benefit from 

New-Found Prosperity 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a historic 

week here in Saskatchewan. Acting on the priorities of the 

Saskatchewan people, our government took historic steps to 

ensure all Saskatchewan people benefit from our new-found 

prosperity. 

 

We are implementing the largest single income tax reduction in 

the province’s history. All Saskatchewan people, regardless of 

age or income, whether they’re married or single, will benefit. 

Mr. Speaker, these measures will give Saskatchewan people the 

resources they need for the cost-of-living challenges. 

 

We are committing a further $1 billion in debt reduction, saving 

the Saskatchewan people hundreds of millions of dollars in 

interest payments. In less than a year, we have reduced the 

provincial debt by $2.6 billion — almost 40 per cent. That 

money the taxpayers are saving can be used on priority areas 

such as health, education, and infrastructure. We are expanding 

our ready-for-growth infrastructure program by 50 per cent to 

$1.5 billion. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Moose Jaw North 

has the floor. Indeed the Speaker would like to hear him, if the 

members would come to order. Member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — $1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. This is the largest 

in Saskatchewan’s history and three times — three times — the 

capital spending of just four years ago under the socialist 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, in these uncertain times it’s 

important for the government to take steps to ensure the secure 

future of the people of Saskatchewan. We will maintain a 

balance of $1.9 billion in our Growth and Financial Security 

Fund as a financial insurance policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a stronger Saskatchewan means a better life for 

everyone. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Help for Low-Income Citizens 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, today I want to talk to you about 

one of my constituents. Randy is physically disabled due to a 

motor vehicle accident that occurred in 1996. Prior to his 

accident, he was employed, earning a good living, and had a 

bright future. Because of injuries he suffered as a result of this 

accident, he’s been receiving benefits from a Canada disability 

pension. The difficulty, Mr. Speaker, is that in the midst of a 

booming Saskatchewan and with the government sitting on a $3 

billion windfall, one of our most vulnerable citizens is barely 

able to survive. Randy is someone that needs assistance from 

this government and is receiving almost no help at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after he came to my office for help, we found that 

the only additional assistance available to him was a small 

amount in a rental housing supplement. So in order to add to the 

small amount he receives to live on, he can be seen struggling 

his way down the streets of Prince Albert, searching for bottles 

and cans to recycle so that he can get by for another month. 

 

At a time of increasing utilities, rent, fuel costs — all of which 

they’ve discussed having something to do with and helping to 

lower — something needs to be done now for low-income 

people. Forcing Randy to wait until next year for a tax rebate 

that’s already been eaten up threefold by increases is not the 

answer. This government should be ashamed that low-income 

citizens in Saskatchewan are living in poverty while they sit on 

a $3 billion surplus. 

 

Where is the help for these citizens, Mr. Speaker? Why are they 

being left behind? Why are people like Randy being ignored by 

this Premier and his misguided policies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Saskatchewan to Lead 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of a 

government for which the phrase, we were going to get to it, 

just doesn’t cut it. This week our government announced 

historic tax cuts, committed a further 1 billion to debt reduction, 

and committed to continuing to invest in an infrastructure 

system that will ensure Saskatchewan continues to lead the 

global economy. 

 

The reaction by members of the opposition to our historic 

initiatives? We were going to get to it, they said. When, Mr. 

Speaker? They had 16 years and they never got to it. 

 

For the first time in years, Saskatchewan people are optimistic 

about our future. We lead the country in retail sales. For the 

first time ever, land sales from oil and gas rights have passed 

the billion dollar mark. RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] says 

Saskatchewan will lead the country in economic growth for the 

next several years. As a matter of fact, Saskatchewan will be the 

calm in the economic storm, in part due to our prudent decision 

to set aside a $2 billion insurance policy securing the future for 

our people. 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

Mr. Speaker, for the NDP [New Democratic Party], it’s always 

all about them. They were going to get to it. Well for us it’s 

always about the people of Saskatchewan. We get that even if 

the NDP still does not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Support for Saskatchewan People 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier says that his MLAs have been out and about across the 

province listening to Saskatchewan people. Opposition MLAs 

have been out and about as well, Mr. Speaker — not only in our 

own constituencies but in many of the constituencies held by 

government members. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve 

been hearing some different things. 

 

So my question — in fact, Mr. Speaker, all of my questions 

today — will be to the Premier. My question to the Premier: is 

he aware of the immediate needs facing Saskatchewan families 

this fall and this coming winter, and can he tell this House what 

he thinks those immediate needs are? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, more than anything else I 

think the people of the province of Saskatchewan desire, need, 

they want their government to reflect their values. They want 

their government to reflect the confidence that they have in this 

province’s future. They want their government to be talking 

about Saskatchewan as a permanent member of the club of have 

provinces. They want their government to share what has been 

some time of prosperity in a long-term, sustainable, and 

permanent way. They want their government to reduce debt that 

will benefit future generations. They want their government to 

invest in infrastructure that has been long-neglected by previous 

governments. They want their government to make sure they’re 

looking after those who are most vulnerable among us, 

including those who have disabilities — intellectual and 

physical, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of the province of Saskatchewan will not have to 

wait. That action is under way today. And later this day, there 

will be more good news for those in Saskatchewan who need 

the help of a government that does reflect their values and 

understand their priorities, Mr. Speaker, 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me share with the 

House and with the Premier one immediate need that we heard 

repeated over and over again across the province from low- and 

middle-income families, from communities, Mr. Speaker, from 

small-business people. An immediate need. The people of 

Saskatchewan know that their natural gas rates are going up 20 

per cent. They also have been told that they can expect their 

electrical rates to go up a similar amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again my question to the Premier: what does the 

Premier intend to do to help these families and these 

communities and these small businesses to get through this 

winter with these high energy costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 

members of this House will know, certainly that member will 

know, that this government took immediate action in the wake 

of a report from the housing task force that the government 

implemented in the spring, and it moved to increase the 

employment supplement at historic levels. That’s providing 

immediate relief to those who need some help with those costs. 

It moved to increase the shelter allowances for Saskatchewan 

people. That is immediate help that was under way earlier this 

year, Mr. Speaker. It moved to provide immediate money today 

— the largest one-time increase for community-based 

organizations in the province of Saskatchewan who are helping 

those people.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what is refreshing, what we’ve heard in the 

last couple of days for the province, is that the people of 

Saskatchewan will not have to, as they did in the past, wait for a 

government to wait till the election year, the fourth year, to do 

the right thing. They have a government today that is acting in 

its first 10 months, and that kind of action is going to continue, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party was in 

opposition they demanded and they promised rebates in the 

event of rising energy costs. They consistently called the utility 

rate increases quote “tax grabs.” And they argued, Mr. Speaker, 

this Sask Party argued in opposition that any government that’s 

getting rich on energy resources ought to share that wealth with 

the people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the Premier, my question is this: why was it that an 

energy rebate was a good idea when the Sask Party was in 

opposition, but is a bad idea today? And why, Mr. Speaker, 

doesn’t this Premier simply reduce the dividends that his 

government is taking from the Crown corporations and provide 

real, real and immediate relief for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member will know 

that our government’s going to continue to direct our Crowns to 

operate in a businesslike fashion to provide the best possible 

service at the lowest possible cost, and we will be there. We are 

there today for people who are facing those high energy costs. 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

I direct the hon. member’s attention for example, Mr. Speaker, 

to some immediate relief. We’ve already talked about the 

employment supplement. For families making $25,000, relief 

has already been on the way to the tune of $1,440; for families 

at the $35,000 level — $1,210. 

 

And when you combine the initiatives we announced earlier this 

week, the historic tax cut brought down by our government, Mr. 

Speaker, those two families, the family making $25,000, 

certainly a lower income family, will save a combined savings 

of all the initiatives — $1,783. Much of that relief on the way 

now. And for a family making 35,000 — $2,348. Sharing the 

prosperity of the province, Mr. Speaker, and taking immediate 

action to help people with rising energy costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Christmas is on the way, Valentine’s Day in 

on the way, and a tax cut is on the way. We’re asking about 

today, Mr. Speaker. We’re asking about the immediate need, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations, our 

Crown utilities provide a significant tool to provide 

affordability for Saskatchewan families and communities. In 

fact no other province in the nation has such a powerful tool. 

But yesterday in the Throne Speech the Premier relaunched the 

old Sask Party attack on the Crowns. 

 

My question to the Premier this morning is this: why have you 

relaunched that attack? Is this government trying to justify now 

a plan to sell off the assets of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons why 

the hon. member is sitting over there — and now we welcome 

the former member for Regina South who might be inquiring 

about his job that’s opening up — but one of the reasons he’s 

sitting over there, Mr. Speaker, is I think his party failed to 

learn the lesson of the last election. 

 

That question is evidence of the fact that they didn’t learn a 

lesson from the last election, which is this, Mr. Speaker: that 

when you’ve got no substantive policy to offer, when you lack a 

vision worthy of this new Saskatchewan, you try to scare 

people. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work then; it’s not going to work 

today. The answer to the hon. member’s question is no, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Here we are a day after the Throne Speech, 

and the Premier is saying that families will just have to get 

through this winter as best they can, that communities are just 

going to have to meet the energy costs of their rinks and their 

community centres and their churches just as best as they can. 

Small-business people, farming people are just going to have to 

accept these energy increases as a cost of doing business, and 

everybody should just be patient and wait for a tax cut in the 

spring that’s supposed to provide relief for all of this. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s just not good enough. That’s not good enough 

for a government that has a surplus of $3 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another immediate need that we heard, talking to 

the people of Saskatchewan, is in the availability of housing — 

in our cities, in our towns, on First Nations right across this 

province, in Métis communities across the North — the 

availability of housing. 

 

My question this morning to the Premier: does he understand 

the immediacy of this need? And number two, why, why 

therefore would he have cut $6 million from the budget of Sask 

Housing in his budget just months ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well actually, Mr. Speaker, actually I think 

there’s about $8 million committed to that member’s 

constituency alone, just that member’s riding, in terms of 

housing development. 

 

I would also say to that hon. member that he ought to listen to 

some of the answers. He ought to listen to the fact that an 

employment supplement, that historic increase in the 

employment supplement for those who need it most to help 

with the high cost of housing, has been a part of the action to 

date. It’s already been increased, Mr. Speaker. It’s already part 

of the government’s plan. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? It’s an interesting series of 

questions about the number of months people may have to wait 

for the actual larger refund, even though these tax increases are 

retroactive to January 1, ’08. 

 

That party had 16 years to develop the right vision that’s worthy 

of the province’s history. It certainly had the last three or four 

years of a very robust financial statement to invest in people, to 

provide sustainable tax relief, to reduce the debt of the province, 

to fix the infrastructure deficit. They didn’t do it. In 10 months 

we’re getting it done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have an immediate need, an 

immediate and pressing need in the province of Saskatchewan 

for new housing availability opportunities. So . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, so what do we have in the 

Throne Speech? Well we have a commitment we’re going to 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

reorganize Sask Housing. And then we’re going to add more 

money to Sask Housing even though we just pulled $6 million 

out of Sask Housing. The need is immediate. 

 

This government has been in power now almost one year. Can 

the Premier document in this House this morning the housing 

projects — whether it be in student housing or whether it be in 

senior housing or low-income housing or First Nation or Métis 

housing — can the Premier document the projects that have 

been initiated by his government, not projects initiated by the 

former New Democratic Party government, not projects 

initiated by the federal government? Can he document this 

morning for this House the projects that he has initiated in this 

one year of office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday there was a 

document tabled in this Legislative Assembly that does 

document this government’s preparedness, our readiness to act 

on the top priorities of Saskatchewan people — priorities that 

had been ignored by that government when they had the 

financial means, not very long ago when they sat on this side of 

the House. But they refused to act at all, Mr. Speaker. For 16 

years, they formed the government and failed to address 

priorities. 

 

The document we tabled yesterday, for example, Mr. Speaker, 

talked about a waiting list of 400 women and men in our 

province with intellectual and physical disabilities who are 

waiting for programs, who are waiting for group home spaces 

— 400 people on that waiting list that that government when 

they were here ignored. It spoke, Mr. Speaker, that Throne 

Speech did, about the need to increase the seniors assistance 

benefit that hasn’t been increased since 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not prepared to wait any longer. This 

government’s going to take action on housing, on help for the 

vulnerable, and on securing the economic future of this 

fast-growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat, the need for 

housing availability is immediate. We’ve had a government 

now that has lost a year in tackling this challenge. And in the 

meantime rents have absolutely skyrocketed, families are being 

thrown out of apartments by these condominium conversions, 

and now all this government says is we’re going to reorganize 

and we’re going to add some more money — again I repeat, 

after pulling $6 million out of the housing authority. 

 

Another immediate need related to housing, Mr. Speaker, that 

our MLAs heard is the pressing need in our province today for 

long-term care availability, particularly for seniors. Again my 

question to the Premier: why is there absolutely no mention in 

the Throne Speech about long-term care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we inherited an 

infrastructure deficit from the members opposite. We inherited 

a waiting list for those who have physical and intellectual 

disabilities, who want services and a place to live 

independently, from those members opposite. We inherited a 

situation where for 16 years, for 16 years there was never an 

increase to the seniors’ assistance benefit. 

 

We also inherited a situation from those members opposite 

where there was no plan to deal with long-term care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We’re going to have to deal with 

that as well. The Minister of Health has already announced that 

that plan is forthcoming. 

 

What that plan will not include, Mr. Speaker, you can have 

blessed assurance of this, it won’t include historic increases to 

seniors in those long-term care facilities like that member tried 

to impose when he sat over here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Let’s move on to another immediate concern 

that we heard from families and people right across this 

province — again from small-business people, farmers, and so 

on. A few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker — you’ll remember this — 

the price of a litre of fuel at the pumps had exceeded $1.40 a 

litre. Now given the volatility of the price of oil and given the 

refining capacities available to us on this continent, who knows 

what the price of a litre of gas is going to be by the end of this 

session, by Christmas. Maybe it’ll be $1 a litre; maybe it’ll be 

$1.50 a litre — who knows? 

 

But I do know this. When the Sask Party were in opposition 

they used to say, when the price skyrockets — and I think by 

that they meant anything over $1 a litre — when the price of 

fuel at the pumps skyrockets and you have a government that’s 

getting rich on oil revenues, that government should step up and 

help the consumers. That’s what they said in opposition. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, what do they say? Well they say, no, 

there’s nothing a government can do and there’s nothing a 

government should do about the price of fuel at the pumps. So 

my question to the Premier this morning is this: was he wrong 

then or is he wrong now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit shocked, 

Mr. Speaker. Just a couple of days ago that hon. member was 

saying what a happy day it was in the province of Saskatchewan 

when we announced historic tax relief, and now he seems a 

little unhappy. But I want to speculate a little bit as to why he 

was happy a couple of days ago. 

 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

I think he was happy because he was looking at a government, 

notwithstanding the fact that it wasn’t his government, but he 

was looking at a government that was prepared to share in 

dramatic ways the historic wealth of the province of 

Saskatchewan — prepared to go beyond perhaps a gimmicky 

program that we’ve actually indicated would be in the best 

interests of the province and move towards permanent tax relief 

that will benefit in a concentrated way low-income people, Mr. 

Speaker, and middle-income people that will drop 80,000 

people from provincial tax roles altogether. That’s why he was 

happy two days ago. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, he should 

still be happy today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Another issue that our MLAs heard as we 

talked to the people in our province during the course of this 

past summer and this early fall, another immediate issue of 

affordability. We heard loud and clear from students, from 

students’ parents and their families; we heard it from educators, 

particularly those in post-secondary education. 

 

I read yesterday’s Throne Speech. We heard it delivered in this 

House. No mention, Mr. Speaker, in that Throne Speech about 

the cost of education, the cost of tuition, the cost of books, the 

cost of student housing. Now graduate tax credits are a good 

program, a good idea. I think we came up with it. 

 

But what about, Mr. Speaker, what about the tuition that allows 

a student to get into school? What about the costs facing 

students and their families as they try and get that education that 

they might earn a graduate tax credit? What, Mr. Speaker, my 

question again to the Premier, what does the Premier intend to 

do immediately to help students finance their education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, did I just hear the hon. 

member for Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition, take 

credit for coming up with our graduate recruitment plan? I think 

I just heard that. I don’t know what he’s going to say next. 

 

I know Al Gore has already taken credit for inventing the 

Internet, but his party seems to now be wanting to take 

authorship over absolutely everything this government has 

done. And I don’t blame them because, you know, I know we 

haven’t had an obviously a perfect record in ten months. We’ve 

made some mistakes, but it’s a pretty good record and there’s 

some pretty innovative initiatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I think that’s why he wants to take 

some credit, Mr. Speaker, and I guess fair enough. 

 

What we said in the Throne Speech yesterday is what we intend 

to do this session. We’re going to take something good — that’s 

the graduate retention program, where students can earn almost 

their entire tuition back if they stay in the province — we’re 

going to take a good program, we’re going to make it even 

better. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it becomes more and more 

obvious this morning, when the Premier does not want to 

address a question, he wants to divert the issue. On the question 

of a graduate tax and graduate retention programs, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, the people of Saskatchewan know a very, very 

viable and very progressive program was well in place before 

this government came anywhere close to government. And what 

did they do? In fact they reduced the benefits. They’ve reduced 

the benefits. They won’t extend the benefits to students who are 

graduating outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier does not want to talk about, 

obviously he doesn’t want to talk about his flip-flop in terms of 

helping consumers at the pumps. And he certainly doesn’t want 

to talk about this gap, this huge gap in his Throne Speech, 

which does not address the immediate, the immediate needs of 

students and their families in this province to get into 

post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me move on because questions of affordability 

are very directly related, very directly related to questions of 

income. Mr. Speaker, in this province we have a hog industry 

that’s in trouble. We have a cattle industry that is in some 

trouble. Fertilizer costs, fuel costs for our producers have 

skyrocketed. Beyond the generalizations that we heard in that 

Throne Speech yesterday which the Minister of Agriculture 

seemed unavailable to explain after the Throne Speech precisely 

— to the Premier: precisely what are this government’s plans to 

provide and deal with the immediate needs of our food 

producing families in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, once again this 

government did not wait when it came to the crisis facing the 

cattle industry. I think it was maybe a week and a half after we 

were sworn in, the Minister of Agriculture had before the 

cabinet of the province of Saskatchewan a $90 million loan 

program to help the industry, to help the hog industry, the cattle 

industry. I believe . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Which they 

asked for, which they asked for, I’d point out to the very helpful 

hon. member for Nutana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know this: that the industry requested 

that, they received it. Since then we have committed to funding 

upfront the federal-provincial farm program, something that we 

could never get from members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We have committed, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re already acting on a review of crop insurance to improve 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

the program. Their record was higher premiums, lower 

coverage. We think that should perhaps turn around. We’ve 

finally given the farmers, to deal with the gopher scourge that 

we have in southwest Saskatchewan, we’ve given them the 

tools we need. There’s the southwest infrastructure drought 

initiative the government has introduced. There’s bringing the 

AgriStability program back to Saskatchewan, where it can be 

more sensitive to our needs. As with every other case, Mr. 

Speaker, every other question that’s been asked, this 

government’s acting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this week some of us heard a 

small business person from northern Saskatchewan, a business 

that’s related to the forestry, explaining that his former work 

force of 42 people has been reduced to 10 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a mill in Prince Albert that sits idle. We 

have the communities of Big River, Carrot River, Hudson Bay 

very uncertain about the future of the forest industry in their 

communities. The short-line railroad at Meadow Lake is in 

some trouble. 

 

The need in the forestry sector of our economy is immediate, 

immediate and pressing, Mr. Speaker. So how can it be, my 

question again to the Premier: how can it be that he delivers a 

Throne Speech in this legislature that does not even mention the 

word forestry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, while it is true that our 

province is forecast now, I think by all the major chartered 

banks, to lead the country in economic growth and to be able to 

weather the current economic turmoil that we see, the storm 

around the world, there are sectors that are now and have been 

for some time under stress. The cattle industry is certainly one 

of those, Mr. Speaker, and the forestry sector to be sure is under 

a lot of stress as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to find the answers, 

sustainable answers around the issue of the mill closure in P.A. 

[Prince Albert]. And we haven’t heard the last on that one, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the meantime, we’re also working with communities through 

the community development trust funds that we have so that 

they can diversify away from a reliance on the forestry industry. 

That’s about $33 million that’ll be invested. We’re not waiting, 

Mr. Speaker; this government is taking action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s very, very anxious 

to talk about how next year country has arrived in 

Saskatchewan. Well I tell you what, next year country has not 

arrived for many of our families and many of our communities 

and their needs are needs this year — this year needs that 

should be addressed by a government that has a surplus of $3 

billion. Saskatchewan families don’t just want to hear what 

their Premier intends to do next year. They want to know what 

their government is prepared to do to meet their immediate 

needs. 

 

And so on behalf of all of those people of Saskatchewan, all of 

the people that we talked to this past summer, my question is 

this: what will this government do to meet the immediate needs 

of students, of low-income families, of workers in the forest 

sector, of producers on the land? What will this government do 

immediately to provide energy cost relief to our families and 

our communities and small businesses? What will this 

government do to deal immediately with the needs of 

availability of housing and long-term care? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the Premier to speak specifically what he 

intends to accomplish before this session rises in a matter of six 

weeks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’ll tell the hon. member exactly what this 

government intends to do, Mr. Speaker. We intend to make into 

law the changes we announced on Monday — historic and 

immediate relief for Saskatchewan people, the likes of which 

this province has never seen for low- and middle-income 

people. The biggest tax cut in the history of the province, will 

they vote against it or in favour of it? 

 

We will, Mr. Speaker — in terms of concrete action we were on 

track already to do it — we’ll pay down the debt by 40 per cent 

in our first full year as the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We’re going to invest $1.5 billion — three 

times what they invested just a few short years ago — in the 

infrastructure of our province to sustain growth. We’ll keep on 

the side about a $2 billion insurance policy that we will weather 

the storm. We will continue to act in the interests of those with 

disabilities; we’ll announce something today, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll continue to move to increase the seniors’ benefit in this 

province. That will also come this fall. 

 

And I expect that we’ll continue to get positive reviews from 

business and from unions. And from today, from the editorials 

that say, “Wall is making,” and I’m quoting, “. . . Wall [through 

the Throne Speech] is making the province a stronger, more 

confident place.” 

 

There’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but we’re proud of 

where we’ve come in 10 months. And we’re prepared to get the 

work done in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister . . . 

Would the members please come to order. I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

New Initiatives for People with Disabilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to rise today to inform the House about two very 

important initiatives in support of people with disabilities in our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Today our government is pleased to 

announce a $76.9 million investment in a four-year program to 

eliminate the wait-list for services currently faced by people 

with disabilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in 1990 there was no 

wait-list for services in our province. Since that time, a wait-list 

has emerged. Over the past five years, both the length of the 

wait and the number of people on the list has grown 

significantly, until today when there is a wait-list which totals 

440 individuals. 

 

This program will see our operating budget increase by $38.2 

million over the next four years to address the current wait-list. 

This increase will support the addition of 365 residential living 

spaces and 214 day program spaces. These day programs are 

becoming increasingly effective in supporting people with 

physical and intellectual disabilities to lead positive and 

productive lives. 

 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, our government is investing over 

$2.5 million to increase supports and services provided through 

the approved private care homes to ensure that this important 

segment of care for people with disabilities is appropriately 

funded. 

 

The third element of this initiative is an additional $7.7 million 

to enhance and standardize the day programs currently being 

provided across the province. To ensure that we have adequate 

homes and facilities to support this important initiative, we are 

also committing $27.8 million in one-time capital funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The second major initiative we are 

pleased to announce today is that we are beginning the work 

immediately to implement a new stand-alone income support 

program for people with disabilities. 

 

For years, Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities across 

Saskatchewan have been asking for a stand-alone income 

support program, one that affords dignified, equitable support. 

Until today, Mr. Speaker, that has fallen on deaf ears. Included 

in this program will be enhanced opportunities for individuals 

to earn income and fulfill their full potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a week of historic announcements and this 

announcement also represents the largest investment ever made 

in support of disability programming here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Our government is committed to a 

better life for people with disabilities and supports their 

inclusion and participation in their families, their communities, 

and our great province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure 

to rise and speak in response to the ministerial statement. And I 

do want to thank the minister for providing me the copy of the 

remarks prior to the House sitting today, and it’s very kind and I 

want to thank her for that. 

 

Of course this is a hopeful day and many of the points she 

makes are worthwhile, and it is a hopeful day for those living 

with disabilities in this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, with a $3 

billion surplus it’s not only the right thing; it’s the only thing 

she could have done. This is very important that they see the 

priorities. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was struck by . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Centre 

deserves the same opportunity to be heard as they respond to 

the ministerial statement. Member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact I was struck 

by some of the comments that the minister said. That in fact 

where she said, and I quote, “Until today, Mr. Speaker, that 

[request] has fallen on deaf ears.” 

 

And I appreciate that because we saw last year’s Throne Speech 

where not a word was mentioned about disabilities. And so 

she’s come a long way after kind of a rocky start with the 

disabilities community to do this kind of work. So this is very, 

very important. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the devil is in the details. She talks 

about a program, a four-year program. Will we see this in the 

year after the next election? The devil’s in the detail, and I’m 

very anxious to hear about this. 

 

And of course there’s other areas too that people who are living 

with disabilities see. In fact we heard the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres speak this morning about challenges around 

paratransit. We see that and we hear that in our communities 

right across Saskatchewan. This is something that this 

government could act on today. I was surprised not to hear 

anything about paratransit. 

 

Of course we talked about housing, affordable housing, and we 

know, for those living with disabilities modifications, home 

renovations so that the housing can meet their needs is an 

important issue. So I hope that becomes a part of her agenda as 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also access to services, whether it be legal 

issues or basic safety issues that many of us take for granted. 

Many people living with disabilities face issues of abuse and 

that type of thing, and they’re asking for that as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the design of these programs are 

very, very important. The first one around the wait-list is huge. 

I hope it happens more quickly than waiting to the fourth year 

to see what happens. 

 

The income program is very, very important. And I know that 

many of those who are advocates within the disabilities 

community want to be full partners in the design of that 

program. They don’t want it just to be given to them. And I ask 

the minister to make sure that they are full partners in that 

design. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my place. And I do want to 

say this is good news, a hopeful day for those with disabilities, 

and we look forward to more details. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Days of the Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, the Opposition House Leader and myself 

have some housekeeping motions to introduce by leave of the 

Assembly. First, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, November 6, 

2008, it shall stand adjourned until Wednesday, November 

12, 2008, at 1:30 p.m.; and further, 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3(3), the final day of the fall 

period of the parliamentary calendar shall remain 

Thursday, December 4, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved a motion by leave. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Moved by the Government House 

Leader, the member from Melfort, that by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 6(1) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, November 6, 

2008, it shall stand adjourned until Wednesday, November 

12, 2008, at 1:30 p.m.; and further, 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3(3), the final day of the fall 

period of the parliamentary calendar shall remain 

Thursday, December 4, 2008. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Leave of Absence for Members 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

a motion to present by leave of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, that 

motion would read: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview for Thursday, October 23 to 

Thursday, October 30 inclusive, to attend the 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Nova Scotia on behalf of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from The Battlefords, the 

Opposition House Leader, has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member from The Battlefords 

moves, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the leave of the Assembly be granted to the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview for Thursday, October 23 to 

Thursday, October 30 inclusive, to attend the 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Nova Scotia on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And finally 

by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for Thursday, October 23 to 

Thursday, October 30 inclusive, to attend the 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Nova Scotia on behalf of this Assembly. 

 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The Government House Leader has 

moved by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for Thursday, October 23 to 

Thursday, October 30 inclusive, to attend the 

Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Outreach 

Program in Nova Scotia on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure, a privilege, and an honour for me to be 

able to move the motion replying to the Throne Speech, and I 

want to thank the Premier for giving me this honour. And 

before I begin, I also want to welcome the new member for 

Cumberland to the House. I know what it’s like to arrive in this 

Assembly through a by-election and so I want to wish him all 

the best in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a moment to 

thank and pay tribute to the incredibly talented young people 

from Weyburn Comprehensive STARS [Singers Taking And 

Raising Spirits] choir, who performed for us in this Chamber 

and in the rotunda yesterday. The members of STARS choir 

under the direction of Colleen Weimer bring a great deal of 

pride to the people of Weyburn as they not only showcase their 

talents, whether it be during the opening of Telemiracle this 

past year or Weyburn’s annual United Way Communithon 

which is coming up this weekend or the vast number of 

performances that they give all across Western Canada and this 

province, Mr. Speaker. I can’t tell you how proud I was 

yesterday of the STARS choir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that they not only did an excellent job, 

but were in many ways the perfect choice for our musical 

entertainment for several reasons. First, they come from 

Weyburn. Need I say more? 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, I think that the growth and optimism 

that we’re seeing in places like Weyburn and area epitomizes 

what my colleagues and I are seeing across our constituents and 

across this great province. Mr. Speaker, right now the province 

of Saskatchewan ranks first in close to a dozen economic 

categories. And when was the last time that our province could 

boast of that? 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, their youthful exuberance, enthusiasm, 

and talent I believe represents another important measure, that 

being the fact that after far, far too long our young people are 

not only coming back to Saskatchewan — bringing with them 

their talents, their skills, their volunteer time, and their families 

— but they are finding more and more reason to stay in the first 

place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was a little hesitant, not too much but a little bit, to be the 

first speaker because in the past, in the few times I’ve had a 

chance to respond to budget speeches and Throne Speeches, I 

like to pick up what opposition members have been saying. And 

so I wouldn’t have had this opportunity. But with question 

period I do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s interesting that housing prices and the housing markets 

are concerns not only in my constituency but other places. But 

that’s an issue, Mr. Speaker, that that former government never 

had to face because when they were government, people were 

leaving this province, Mr. Speaker. There was no pressure on 

housing prices. So that’s a challenge for this government, for 

one, that we will meet with very good results, I am confident, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just finally on the choir. The third reason 

why I believe that the comprehensive STARS choir was the 

perfect choice is the name itself, STARS. S-T-A-R-S stands for 

Singers Taking And Raising Spirits. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe this is exactly what this Throne Speech is doing for the 

people of Saskatchewan, particularly after hearing over the last 

couple of days the number of phones calls and emails coming 

into my office, Mr. Speaker. The response, the positive 

response, from this Throne Speech has been just quite 

overwhelming, Mr. Speaker. I think I could go as far as to say 

that roughly 1.015 million people are very positive on this 

Throne Speech, give or take maybe 20 people in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members of this Chamber will know, and as the 

people of Saskatchewan will come to know even more in the 

days and weeks to come, this Throne Speech is entitled, “A 

Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” And I believe that this 

is exactly what this Throne Speech will accomplish. I will be, as 

I said, moving the motion in reply, and I’ll be doing that at the 

end of my speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Throne Speech, and the plans outlined in it and by the 

Premier, will truly make for a stronger Saskatchewan. At a time 

of unprecedented revenue flowing into provincial coffers, our 

government is decreasing the provincial debt by an astounding 

40 per cent from nearly $7 billion to 4.2 — the lowest level 

since 1988. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is particularly important when you look 

at what’s happening not only around our country, in North 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

America, but around the world. You look at the turmoil in the 

markets; you look at what even other provinces in this 

Confederation are having to do. I look at the business section of 

today’s Leader-Post, and Ontario’s announced that they’re 

going to have to run a $500 million deficit this year. Other 

provinces are going into deficit, and we are cutting our debt, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s very significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also outlines this government’s 

ongoing commitment to debt reduction with the goal of 

ultimately being a debt-free province. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s safe to say — not only for members of this government, 

members on this side, but the members on the other side of this 

House — that we are all elected with the belief that we want to 

leave things better for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember when I was first nominated to run as a 

Saskatchewan Party member. And I’m not sure where I heard 

this phrase, but something that always stuck with me, and I used 

in my first speech that nomination night, and it was this 

responsibility that I think we all feel — to put more back into 

this society than what we’ll take out, Mr. Speaker. And I 

believe that this goal and this work that we are doing towards 

becoming a debt-free province certainly meets this standard. 

 

And I’m sure members on the opposite side feel the same. 

Regardless of which side of this House we sit on, if we can 

achieve this as a government, as the province of Saskatchewan, 

then we’ll all be better off and future generations will be also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working to make Saskatchewan 

stronger by ensuring that, should the economic turmoil have a 

larger effect on our economy, that the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund has a cash balance of $1.9 billion. And I think 

that’s very prudent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a little bit of talk of, mainly 

from members on the other side of the House, that perhaps we 

could have done more on things like income tax cuts and debt 

reduction and had we spent more of this, basically the insurance 

policy for the province, Mr. Speaker . . . But I think it’s 

important, especially in the current economics that are going on 

not only in Canada but in the world economy, it’s very crucial 

that we be prudent in this matter and retain nearly $2 billion in a 

reserve, in cash reserves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not only . . . Maybe as another 

example of how important cash reserves are, Mr. Speaker, in 

today’s Globe and Mail there’s been talk over the last couple of 

weeks that General Motors is looking at buying Chrysler, which 

would be a huge change in the Big Three, obviously, the Big 

Three automakers in North America, but the entire car industry. 

And there’s probably reasons for it. They can be more efficient. 

Maybe there’s some Chrysler brands that GM [General Motors] 

would like to own. But the number one reason cited by people 

that know about the dealings inside and by analysts outside, the 

number one reason why GM is looking at buying Chrysler is 

that it would give them access to Chrysler’s $11.7 billion cash 

reserves — not only that, but billions in federal loan guarantees 

from the American government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So even companies as large as General Motors realize that it’s 

important to have cash reserves at this point in the world’s 

economy. So I think it’s very prudent for this government to set 

aside $1.9 billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think another important aspect of this 

government’s plan to make Saskatchewan stronger is the 50 per 

cent increase in this upcoming budget on infrastructure 

spending, up to $1.5 billion. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is 

important for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

pretty big infrastructure deficit in this province left over by the 

previous government. 

 

When you look at schools, and I know Weyburn 

Comprehensive in Weyburn for one example, the Weyburn 

Hospital is another, that is a really pressing concern in Weyburn 

and area. We’re a growing community and we have a quite old 

hospital facility and so I’m sure the Minister of Health will be 

listening very closely to this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, it’s not only in hospitals and schools. It’s 

highways. You drive around places in parts of my constituency 

and it’s quite evident that highways have had little if no, next to 

none, next to zero — which is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

No, basically none — maintenance or rebuilding over the last 

number of years, Mr. Speaker. And that’s important as we look 

at increasing, not only continuing on the good economics, the 

good boom that we have in this province, but allowing 

communities to more further take part in the economic 

prosperity of this province. 

 

Just as an example of what 1.5 billion means for this province. 

A couple of days ago, a few of my colleagues and I had the 

pleasure of being in Belfield, North Dakota for a trade corridor 

meeting, Mr. Speaker. And it was actually the day that the 

Premier made this historic announcement for the province. And 

I think that was probably the only bad part of being in North 

Dakota is that we weren’t in the province for it, but we were 

checking our BlackBerries to see how the announcement went 

and making phone calls back home. 

 

And later that night I had the privilege of being the keynote 

speaker. And so the Premier had already made the 

announcement, so I added that into my speech. And there were 

people from North Dakota and South Dakota and all the way 

down to, I think, there was people from Texas and Colorado 

and Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. And when I was 

able to share the news, not only of the debt reduction but the tax 

decreasing and this $1.5 billion, there was just a . . . I think my 

colleagues agree with me that there was just a buzz around that 

room of what Saskatchewan is doing and the things that are 

going on right now. And certainly people are certainly paying 

attention and want us to be involved in, you know, the broader 

regional markets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are some of the areas, the ones that I will highlight that 

will make Saskatchewan stronger. They’re particularly 

important to me, not only reducing taxes but the infrastructure 

— how they affect, you know, our constituents and our 

communities. But particularly for me the debt reduction, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s something that I’m very, very pleased that 

our government can do, something that I will be able to share 

with my constituents and people like my grandfather who’s 

been very important in my life and has been a debt hawk his 

entire life, Mr. Speaker, a small-business man. And just 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

something that I’m really proud to be a part of this government 

and a part of this province, Mr. Speaker, because this is 

something that we’ve done together. All of us in this province 

have been a part of realizing these amazing announcements, 

historic announcements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, also talked about making 

a better life for people in Saskatchewan. And certainly we 

heard, you know — just obviously a much better job than I can 

do — the Premier explaining to members of the opposition how 

people in Saskatchewan will benefit this. Everybody in the 

province will have a share in the prosperity, and that will be 

dollars going back into their pockets so they can decide how 

best to spend it. Rather than targeting certain areas, this is 

money in their pocket so that they can make the best decisions 

for their family. And that’s certainly an approach that I agree 

with, and I think members on this side of the House agree with 

— giving people money in their own pockets to make their own 

choices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of those positive things are 80,000 people completely 

removed from the provincial tax roll, Mr. Speaker. That is just 

an amazing number — 80,000 people. And not only that, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’re helping those that don’t pay income tax 

currently by increasing what was, up until a couple days ago, 

known as the sales tax credit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that there’s accurate 

information relayed to the people of Saskatchewan, to my 

constituents — the message that everybody will benefit. There 

seems to be some mixed messages coming from the other side 

that some people won’t benefit. That certainly is not true, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Everyone in this province over the age of 18 who files a tax 

return will benefit. That is over 700,000 residents of this 

province. If they pay taxes currently, they will have a 

significant tax cut. If they’re lower income and they don’t pay 

income taxes, they will see larger refundable tax credit 

payments, receiving those every three months. And, Mr. 

Speaker, some residents depending on their income will receive 

benefits from both measures. So this will touch directly 700,000 

tax filers and of course their children, should they have children 

in their families. So this will help everybody in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a few more comments that I want to 

make. I haven’t been paying too much attention to the time so 

I’ll just keep going until somebody tells me to stop. But, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And I appreciate the support from the members 

opposite; they want me to keep going. If, Mr. Speaker, you 

didn’t hear what they said, they want me to keep going because 

this is such great, historic news for this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that obviously I 

support the direction, the objectives of this government. As I 

said before, I’m very honoured to be asked to move the motion 

in reply to the Throne Speech. 

 

One thing that I’ve heard that I want to comment on, over the 

last couple of days when the Premier made his historic 

announcement for this province on Tuesday that there were 

some that thought — particularly on the tax cut side, but in 

general the surplus — that, you know, perhaps we should have 

a commission to see what is the best way to cut taxes for 

people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find that odd that on one account they want 

a commission or a study to, you know, determine how to best 

use this money, and yet they are critical that they believe that 

people won’t feel this immediately, although it is retroactive to 

2008, January 1, 2008. So, you know, it’s just an odd position 

to take. Do you want a commission that’ll take several months 

to study, or do you want immediate help? And we are helping 

people immediately. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I give a lot of credit to the Minister of Social 

Services who I believe right now is holding a press conference 

where she’s making some more historical announcements for 

the people of this province, people that need assistance from 

government. And so, Mr. Speaker, that certainly is great news 

for this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in judging over the last couple of days how 

my constituents would respond to this . . . And I’ve heard from 

quite a number of them actually, including through my wife, her 

mother who wanted me to pass on congratulations to the 

Premier. She was very happy to see what we’re doing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, judging from my constituents, how they’ll react to the 

record tax cuts, record debt reduction, record infrastructure 

spending, you know, I really don’t need and I don’t think my 

colleagues need a commission to tell us what the best plan was, 

Mr. Speaker, because what we’re doing makes sense. 

 

And my constituents, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m pretty free to say 

on their behalf that they can relate to the decisions that our 

government is making because it’s how they run their own 

households, Mr. Speaker. When they have a sizeable amount of 

extra income coming in — whether it be through an inheritance 

or some other gift or perhaps some lottery winnings or 

something of that nature, more than they budgeted for — they 

will pay off a part or all of their mortgage if they can. Or maybe 

pay off a car loan early. And they’ll renovate the basement with 

a bit of the money or maybe add on to the house or add that 

garage that they always wanted. And they’ll put aside some for 

a rainy day, for their kids’ university education, maybe for their 

retirement so they can retire a little bit early, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is exactly, I believe, exactly what this government is doing 

and why it’s being so well-received across the province and 

beyond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I talked about what we heard in North Dakota. You look at The 

Globe and Mail, the National Post over the last couple of days. 

I’ve been told it was even on CNN [Cable News Network] — I 

didn’t see it myself but that’s what I’ve been told — that 

Saskatchewan was featured on CNN not that long ago. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just one other, on a personal note, I just 

received an email from a friend inviting us to the baptism of his 

first child he and his wife just had in the last few months. And 

at the bottom of the email he gave the date of the baptism and 

invited Amanda and I to it, and then he said, PS [postscript], 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

thanks for the tax cut. So, Mr. Speaker, it just reinforces that 

this is what the people of Saskatchewan wanted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in particular what people in Weyburn-Big 

Muddy have been waiting for is competitiveness in taxes. And 

many of my constituents work in the oil industry and have spent 

time moving back and forth between southeast Saskatchewan 

and Alberta —my brother included, who is still in Medicine 

Hat, but we’re working hard to bring him back. And one of the 

reasons why this was happening was, despite at the time higher 

costs of living in Alberta, living and working in Alberta usually 

meant higher wages and lower taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today things are different for young families in my 

constituency, thanks in large part to the unprecedented activity 

in our oil patch and the new Bakken play that is just driving 

exploration, driving Crown sales. We’re past the billion dollars 

as we already heard today in the House, a billion dollars, and 

we still have one sale left in December. And it just is driving 

the economic activity in the southeast part of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But now that these changes that we brought in in the last week, 

that will provide for the highest family-based tax exemption in 

Canada. And young people in my constituency will have an 

easier decision to make, whether or not to stay in Saskatchewan 

or perhaps leave for elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few other things I want to touch on from 

the Throne Speech that particularly are of importance to my 

constituents. And one is, one is the line in the Throne Speech 

about starting in the ’09-10 budget that this government will 

enter into long-term, stable funding agreements with CBOs 

[community-based organization] across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have so many CBOs in the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy constituency, from Weyburn beyond into communities 

like Ogema and Coronach. And this is such a positive 

development and something they have been asking for longer 

than I have been elected, Mr. Speaker, but certainly since I have 

been elected, one thing that I have heard a lot about. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that is very positive for, I believe, 

not only Weyburn-Big Muddy but most of, if not all, our 

constituencies is the commitment to increase locally trained 

physicians and that being a priority and we’ve already . . . 

There’s talk in the Throne Speech about what we’ve already 

have accomplished in 11 months, but the commitment for future 

seats, for undergraduate seats for training our young people, and 

new residency positions going forward, Mr. Speaker. And also 

the part in the Throne Speech about the comprehensive 

physician recruitment strategy — I think that’s very important 

— and accelerating training and licensing for IMGs, 

international medical graduates. And I’m not the only one. 

 

Obviously if you’re a rural — not only rural but an MLA in this 

province, but particularly a rural MLA — you’ll understand the 

importance of international medical graduates and how vitally 

important they are for sustaining health care in rural 

Saskatchewan, and so very pleased that we’re moving in that 

direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to note in the Throne Speech something that will 

have a very positive effect on my constituents is our 

commitment to increasing broadband services in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is something that I have heard 

about for even longer than I’ve been elected, Mr. Speaker, when 

I worked in this building prior to my election, but that was one 

thing and that continues. Over the last number of months, one 

thing that when I’m talking to my constituents, that’s what they 

want to see, Mr. Speaker, from this government and we’re 

moving forward on that. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that’s very important to me is 

this government’s commitment to our young men and women in 

uniform who serve this country and those who make the 

ultimate sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. I can’t tell you how just pleased 

I am to be a part of a government that is willing to make this 

commitment and as the Throne Speech says, to introduce 

measures to honour returning soldiers as well as the sons and 

daughters of those who make the ultimate sacrifice, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — This is particularly an appropriate time that I 

mention, Mr. Speaker, that this Saturday I have the honour to 

participate in really a historical event in Weyburn. Not since 

World War II have we seen a military parade in Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re going to see one this Saturday as we honour 

four returning soldiers from the Weyburn area. And we’re 

going to have a flyover from the U.S. [United States] Air Force 

on Saturday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and these, the three out of 

the four young gentlemen that have returned from Afghanistan 

. . . One is my neighbour’s son and so you know obviously 

being our next door neighbour, we were, you know . . . talked a 

little bit with them as he was away and what that must have 

been like for them. And you know, he’s served his country 

proud. Another one is a member of our church congregation, 

Mr. Speaker, at the Weyburn Free Methodist Church. 

 

And so we’re very pleased to be able to take part in that 

ceremony and to honour others, Mr. Speaker, that have returned 

earlier — a young man from Coronach that returned a few 

months ago and I was able to take part in their celebrations; and 

also, Mr. Speaker, my wife’s nephew, Vincent Leippy, who 

returned about a year ago but served six months in Afghanistan. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, only told his father, didn’t tell anybody 

else in the family that he was going over. He’s a reservist and 

nobody knew that he was going to Afghanistan except for his 

father. We only found out when he returned safely home. 

 

So I’m very pleased that our government is going to recognize 

the accomplishments and the sacrifice and just the tremendous 

young people in our province. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

think I’ve come to the end of my time. So I’ll move the motion: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Weyburn-Big Muddy has 

moved, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — It’s still morning. Good morning, Mr. 

Speaker. I would like to thank the Premier for the honour of 

seconding this motion, and it is with great pride and excitement 

that I rise here today in this our Legislative Assembly. 

 

I am proud today. I am proud of our Premier. I’m proud of our 

cabinet. I am proud of my colleagues, and I am proud of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the feeling of excitement is on behalf of my 

constituents, the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

Saskatoon Sutherland is an extremely diverse constituency. We 

have a mosaic of cultures. Muskeg Lake urban First Nations is a 

thriving business area that houses the offices of SIGA 

[Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority Inc.] and the FSIN. 

 

We also host the beautiful University of Saskatchewan campus 

which includes Innovation Place where synchrotron, VIDO 

[Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization], and InterVac 

[international vaccine centre] are situated. I invite all members 

to have a tour of VIDO and InterVac and synchrotron as it may 

play a very, very important role in the future of the world. 

We’ve all heard of pandemics. Well lo and behold if a 

pandemic should break out, VIDO and InterVac may be the 

place that creates the vaccine that will save the planet. That’s 

quite an honour to have something like that in Saskatchewan. 

They are also building a state-of-the-art laboratory, and when 

it’s complete it will be the most advanced laboratory of its kind 

in the entire world. 

 

The other diversities in my constituency are, communities vary 

in income. One community earns $40,000-plus per year per 

household than another community. So it’s fair to say then that 

the diversity in Saskatoon Sutherland is reflective of the 

makeup of our province. 

 

There are challenges governing such diversity, and what has 

become crystal clear is that our Premier and our government is 

stepping up to meet those challenges. In our government’s first 

year in office we have taken major steps to fix the problems left 

behind by the former government. 

 

In March 2008, the Minister of Social Services, member from 

Humboldt, gave money and partnered with Egadz of Saskatoon 

and purchased two homes which provide vulnerable youth with 

safe, stable, and supportive place to live. Well what does this 

mean in real terms? What does this mean at the street level of 

the citizens of the province? What Egadz does is they counsel 

and work with sex trade workers and street youth. They don’t 

hand out needles as many people think, but they hand out 

sandwiches, hot chocolate, and try and counsel some of these 

girls who are doing survival sex to leave the street. It’s not a 

pleasant discussion; however it is an important part of having a 

government understand those issues and support the areas that 

have to deal with them. 

 

Our record, Mr. Speaker, clearly illustrates that we are 

providing support for community-based organizations, more 

support for person with disabilities — as our Minister of Social 

Services announced just today an increase in funding for people 

with disabilities. 

 

Let’s talk about the disabled and what really happens in the real 

world for them. I have a constituent who has a Down’s 

syndrome son. He’s 30 years old, and actually he came to our 

Assembly and was introduced in the spring session. The way 

that the disabilities are paid is that the disabled person is paid 

the same way as someone on social assistance. This 30-year-old 

Down’s syndrome gentleman lives with his parents, and as such 

went on a month holiday to Australia with them. 

 

Now of course we’re already saving money in the system 

because he’s living with his parents, but the way the previous 

government set up this social services and disabilities funding, 

this young man was refused disability payments for one month 

because he wasn’t in the country. And that to me is just not the 

way you’re supposed to protect our vulnerable people. And this 

is something that obviously this government and our Minister of 

Social Services is cognizant of. 

 

We have increased financial assistance to low-income 

individuals, families, seniors. We are creating communities that 

are safer. We are investing in child care and early learning, and 

we are protecting vulnerable children. 

 

A quote by Aldous Huxley says, “Facts do not cease to exist 

because they are ignored.” I have to say that the previous 

government did ignore the facts. And I have to say that this 

government is not. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, our government committed to create and 

support the completely outfitted police unit called ICE. ICE 

stands for Internet child exploitation. And I would like to talk 

about what that really means in explicit terms. We have had an 

example here in our own province, in Swift Current, where an 

Internet pedophile lured a child, and the result of that 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

investigation was that the child was reunited with the family 

before too much damage was done. 

 

Years ago I was attending a police investigation course 

regarding this topic, and the instructor showed us seized 

magazines that these pedophiles and Internet lurers have. This 

magazine had a photo of approximately a 10-month-old child, 

where the pedophile took a marker and made chains on the 

hands to bind the hands, and chains on the feet to bind the feet. 

As per Huxley’s quote, we are not ignoring the facts; we are 

addressing these very ugly issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past spring our Premier directed his caucus to 

go out to our constituencies and talk to our citizens. I’ve been 

following politics for some time and I’ve really never heard of 

such a thing. This request, Mr. Speaker, is a request from a true 

and strong leader. Woodrow Wilson said, “The ear of the leader 

must ring with the voices of the people.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

voices did in fact ring and our Premier and our government 

responded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — We responded by giving the largest 

single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan history, the 

largest amount of debt reduction in Saskatchewan history, the 

largest investment in infrastructure. The translation of these 

policies is that more money will be left in the hands of our 

citizens, and our citizens are on their way to a brighter future, a 

stronger Saskatchewan, and a better life. 

 

Yesterday in the Speech from the Throne our government 

addressed provincial diversity and ensured the sharing of 

provincial prosperity and the protection of our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s behaviour is one of blaming, 

shaming, and name-calling. Members opposite have used words 

like callous, mean-spirited. They had a 16-year opportunity to 

listen to the people of this province and to act on what the 

people requested. They did nothing. They failed to do so. 

 

Our government’s behaviour is caring and clean-spirited. Our 

Premier, our government is forward-thinking, innovative, and 

cognitive of the diverse needs in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

we are in a new time. We need to let loose the past. Albert 

Einstein said, today’s problems cannot be solved if we think the 

way we thought when they were created. I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that should be taken to task by the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’ve said is why I am proud of our Premier, 

I’m proud of my cabinet, I’m proud of my colleagues, and this 

is why I am excited for my constituents. All that I have 

mentioned is why I wholeheartedly support the Throne Speech. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is an honour as always to stand in this Chamber 

representing the people of Riversdale and have the opportunity 

to participate in a debate around the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they often say that imitation is the sincerest form 

of flattery. Well in the past 48 hours, Mr. Speaker, watching the 

government opposite initiate a variety of actions patterned, 

patterned very directly on actions of the former New 

Democratic Party government, I suppose that means that New 

Democrats across the province today should be, could be 

flattered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for more than a decade, for more than a decade 

now New Democrats have been paying down debt. Again the 

member for Moose Jaw North has much to say from his seat 

and very little from his feet. 

 

For over a decade, Mr. Speaker, for more than a decade New 

Democrats in government have been paying down debt. It is the 

right thing to do. In our last term we paid down over $1 billion 

in debt. Now this conservative government, this Sask Party 

government, is now paying down debt. Well it’s appropriate, 

given that they were the authors of this debt in the first place. 

 

For years now, Mr. Speaker, as our fiscal flexibility permitted 

— and that grew — New Democrats in government have been 

investing in infrastructure and innovation. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

listened with interest yesterday as His Honour read that list of 

innovative investments that are now so key to our province, 

whether it be the synchrotron . . . We just heard again about 

VIDO, the petroleum research park here in Regina — all 

infrastructure and innovation investments made by New 

Democrats in government. Well now, Mr. Speaker, the current 

government is as well investing in innovation and 

infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the past seven years, New Democrats in 

government have been lowering the taxes in this province. The 

single largest income tax cut to its time was instituted by this 

government in 2000 to 2001. We lowered property taxes. 

We’ve lowered the property education portion of the property 

tax on farm lands. We instituted the most significant business 

tax review and reduction in this province’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we selectively — selectively and importantly — 

changed royalty rates, and we lowered the provincial sales tax. 

For the past seven years we’ve been lowering the taxes of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now the Saskatchewan Party is lowering taxes 

as if it were a Saskatchewan Party idea. And you know, 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the greatest imitation of all is that this 

Sask Party government now believes in the prudence of a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund — a rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the very fund, the very principle that the 

Sask Party opposed when they were in opposition. It’s the very 

fund, when it stood at $700 million, the Sask Party labelled 

nothing but a political slush fund. A mountain of cash, they 

called it. It was a concept they promised to get rid of if elected. 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, what has the fund become? Well I’ll 

tell you what it’s become. It has become the rock on which we 

are going to build our future. It is insurance and that no one in 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

Saskatchewan should see any part of this fund having anything 

to do with being a political slush fund. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this party, this party has had a 

conversion-like call. It was a conversion on the road to Regina. 

So what have they done, Mr. Speaker? Well they imitated the 

former New Democratic Party government paying down debt, 

imitated the former New Democratic Party government in 

providing infrastructure and innovation, imitated the former 

NDP government in tax cuts. And now they’ve completed the 

quadrant by saying, and we too are going to have a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, there are some very significant 

differences in terms of this imitation of good, solid New 

Democratic Party policy. Just note the history, Mr. Speaker, just 

note the history. And I invite colleagues to do the same. Just 

note the history. 

 

When New Democrats inherited the government of this 

province from the party opposite in 1991, New Democrats 

inherited a province virtually on the verge of bankruptcy. I can 

recall, I can recall the member at that time from Melfort 

standing in this House on the government benches — I bet the 

member from Kindersley can remember it as well — that hon. 

member, Mr. Grant Hodgins, standing in this House and telling 

the people of Saskatchewan that this province is on the verge of 

bankruptcy. When New Democrats inherited government, we 

inherited a province on the verge of bankruptcy and an 

economy in some very significant difficulty. 

 

Now when our colleagues opposite inherited government, when 

our colleagues opposite inherited government, what did they 

inherit? Well they inherited a treasury with a surplus of almost 

$1.9 billion, and a global economy and a provincial economy 

where commodity prices are dramatically rising, and a 

provincial economy stronger than it’s ever been before. And so 

through no effort of its own, Mr. Speaker, this government 

inherited a surplus of $3 billion. 

 

So again let me just illustrate the difference, Mr. Speaker. When 

New Democrats in government provided for the people of 

Saskatchewan in 2000-2001 an income tax that very closely 

replicates the dimension of the income tax cut now announced 

for next year, when New Democrats implemented that savings 

to the people of Saskatchewan, the surplus of the province at 

that time was what? — $9.4 million; $9.4 million. Million with 

an “m.” 

 

What this government implements . . . Oh, and by the way, in 

2000 and 2001, the price of a barrel of oil, Mr. Speaker, was 

between 20 and 22.50 a barrel. This government institutes a tax 

cut of about $300 million, not on a surplus of 9.4 million but on 

a surplus of $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now you can do the math and I can do the math. When you’re 

implementing savings for the Saskatchewan public, with a 

surplus of 9.3 or $4 million, the savings is 30 times the size of 

the government’s own surplus. When this tax being 

implemented next spring occurs, it’s about 10 per cent of the 

government’s surplus — 10 per cent. That’s what they’re giving 

back to the people of Saskatchewan — 10 per cent. Meanwhile 

in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund — which they used to oppose 

— their own bank account, they’re keeping 60 per cent of the 

surplus. So 10 per cent to the people of Saskatchewan through a 

tax cut, and 60 per cent going into their own bank account. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier in the Throne Speech is 

certainly right about one thing. This money, this $3 billion 

surplus belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. They earned it. 

They worked for it. They sacrificed for it. And the resources 

which are now fuelling this buoyant surplus, those resources 

belong to the people of Saskatchewan. And those dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, fundamentally, fundamentally should benefit the 

people of Saskatchewan today and tomorrow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no debate here. There’s real benefit in 

paying down debt. There’s long-term benefit in paying down 

debt. There is real benefit and long-term benefit in 

infrastructure investments, and now is the time to be building 

for the future. 

 

But where, Mr. Speaker, this government has failed and where 

this government is off the mark is that many of the immediate 

needs of the people of Saskatchewan are not being addressed 

and therefore they are being left behind in this economic boom. 

Let me repeat again for the member from Moose Jaw North, 

only 10 per cent of the surplus is being returned to the people of 

Saskatchewan in a direct benefit through a tax cut that’s to 

arrive next spring, while 60 per cent of the surplus is being held 

in the government’s bank account. 

 

Now the whole premise, Mr. Speaker, of this Throne Speech — 

you heard His Honour read it — the whole premise of this 

Throne Speech is that next year country has supposedly arrived 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now in some ways I will agree with the 

Premier and his government that there is a sense of next year 

country having arrived. There is a sense of a great future in this 

province. There’s no denying it. And some of us worked very 

hard to get us here. 

 

But the problem, Mr. Speaker, the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that 

next year country has not arrived for many, many of our people. 

Many, many of our people have not seen yet the benefits of next 

year country — many families, many communities and in fact 

some sectors of our economy. And according, Mr. Speaker, to 

this Throne Speech now under debate, according to this Throne 

Speech, well those who have not yet experienced next year 

country quite yet are just going to have to wait till next year. 

They’re just going to have to wait till next year. 

 

So the tax relief package, the income tax relief package, which 

is supposed to erase all of the burdens of affordability being 

faced by Saskatchewan people, when does it arrive, Mr. 

Speaker? Well it arrives next year. Property tax, we’re now 

told, property tax relief will come maybe next year, or maybe 

the year later. The improvements for seniors that are talked 

about in this Throne Speech, when are they to arrive? Well in 

the . . . 

 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

The Speaker: — I recognize the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes we’ve seen 

in housing identified in this Throne Speech, now we’re told will 

come next year. Assistance to our farm families, for the food 

producers of our province, we’re told, well we’re in discussions 

and something may happen next year. The immigrant nurses, 

Mr. Speaker, which we were told and the people of 

Saskatchewan were told would be at work in our health care 

facilities this summer, now we’re told by the Throne Speech 

may be at work next year, at the end of March. 

 

Initiatives to tackle the climate change issue, Mr. Speaker. Now 

we’re being told, well we might see some of those initiatives 

next year. And, Mr. Speaker, of significant concern is that 

nowhere in this Throne Speech do I see identified or read the 

words, duty to consult and accommodate. It’s not in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. When will the First Nations and Métis 

communities of this province, when will the First Nations and 

Métis communities . . . I’m going to ask the minister to point to 

me the word, duty to consult and accommodate, in her Throne 

Speech. Point to the words. Point to the words. Mr. Speaker, 

they now say to the people of Saskatchewan, well we may get 

to that, we may get to that next year or maybe the year later. 

 

What share of the $3 billion surplus has gone directly to the 

First Nations and Métis peoples of Saskatchewan? And can you 

believe this, Mr. Speaker? With half of the land mass of our 

province covered by a forest, covered by a forest, Mr. Speaker, 

with a forestry industry in significant hurt with communities in 

the North and the Northwest wondering about their future, how 

can it be we have a Throne Speech that doesn’t even mention 

the word forestry? How could the minister responsible for the 

forestry permit this to happen? How can we have a Throne 

Speech that doesn’t mention forestry? And our forest industry is 

being told, well don’t you worry, we’ll deal about this next 

year. 

 

This government, this government is raising utility rates on the 

people of Saskatchewan — SaskEnergy rates, natural gas rates 

— by 20 per cent, and who knows how much they’re going to 

raise the rates on electricity this year. Fertilizer costs this year 

are gone up. Fuel costs this year are gone up, and the 

government says, well just wait for next year and we’ll get 

around to it. 

 

They have a $3 billion surplus. They are returning 10 per cent 

of that surplus to the people of Saskatchewan in direct benefit. 

They’re keeping 60 per cent of that surplus in their own bank 

account. And so I say to the government today, with the very 

same pen that they used to give the increases to their political 

staff, the dramatic increases to their political staff, with the very 

same pen they used to sign that paper, why don’t they sign a 

paper today and provide some immediate relief on energy 

costs? Why don’t they take that same pen and sign a paper 

today that could immediately begin the benefits to our seniors? 

Why don’t they sign something today that they could and 

provide some real relief to our students who are trying to get 

post-secondary education? All of this could be done today. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, if there is an indictment of this 

government and an indictment of this Throne Speech, it is that 

they have failed. They have failed with all of the resources 

available to them, the resources that belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan, to meet the real and immediate needs of the 

province and its people today. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

precisely why at the close of my remarks I will be bringing 

forward an amendment to this Throne Speech, and at the close 

of my remarks and at the end of the debate will be voting 

against this Throne Speech. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place I want to make a 

broader observation about this Throne Speech and this time in 

our province’s history. Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve sat through quite a number of Throne Speeches in 

this Chamber and had the opportunity myself to write a number 

of Throne Speeches, and this is very likely the last Throne 

Speech debate that I’ll participate in as the leader of a political 

party in our province. And I regret, Mr. Speaker, I regret that 

this Throne Speech — and admittedly, Mr. Speaker, other 

Throne Speeches in recent times — has not really lifted us to a 

higher or a broader or a nobler vision for this province; a higher 

or broader or nobler vision for Saskatchewan’s place in Canada; 

or a higher, broader, and nobler vision of Saskatchewan’s place 

on the globe. 

 

Recently I read with some interest — actually I read with some 

amusement, maybe some relief — what the Premier said to Roy 

MacGregor of The Globe and Mail. He said to Roy MacGregor 

that his political mantra was, don’t mess it up. Now for some of 

us who remember, the memory that many of us have of his 

party in government in the 1980s, to hear the Premier and the 

leader of the Sask Party say that his mantra is, don’t mess it up 

— that should be some relief I think. It should perhaps be 

encouraging. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at least my colleagues I think know my 

mantra. My mantra was, let’s build a have province with a 

heart. Let’s build a have province with a heart. That was my 

mantra, Mr. Speaker. That there cannot be, there cannot be 

social progress without economic progress, but there should 

never be economic progress that doesn’t result in social 

progress. 

 

So the Premier’s mantra is, don’t mess it up. My mantra was, 

let’s build a have province with a heart. But you know what, 

Mr. Speaker? Where this province stands today, where we have 

come, my mantra is not sufficient. Not even my mantra, I 

believe, is now sufficient to the dream. 

 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, it was this province, it was the 

province of Saskatchewan that gave to all Canadians the gift of 

medicare. It was the Douglas and Lloyd governments here in 

Regina and, to his credit, it was the Diefenbaker government in 

Ottawa that gave to all Canadians medicare, Mr. Speaker. So 

what is it that we, as the people and province of Saskatchewan, 

could do today? 

 

Given where we are, given the potential of our future, what is 

our place in this country? And what could we be doing today? 

What could we be reading in the Throne Speech today that 

someone 50 years down the road might be saying, 

Saskatchewan led the way. Saskatchewan gave us that. 

 

Well I hear from members opposite they think that the highest 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

vision . . . I just heard from two members opposite that the 

highest vision is debt paydown, debt reduction. From the party 

that gave this debt to the people of Saskatchewan, now their 

major goal, their broad vision is to pay it off. Well that’s a 

vision all right, Mr. Speaker. That’s a vision all right. But it 

hardly, it hardly reaches the vision of our forefathers, Mr. 

Speaker, and our foremothers in this province. 

 

Could we, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It would only be respectful to allow 

the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to be heard in the 

Chambers today. I recognize the member, the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So my question I 

guess and my point is, given where we are as a province today, 

is there an opportunity for Saskatchewan to again carve a 

unique place, a leadership place, be it in Canada or on the 

globe? And I actually think there is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, could we, Mr. Speaker, with the kind of resources 

that we have and are available to government today and are 

available to the people of Saskatchewan today, and with this 

resource, going forward, could we decide, could we decide 

today that we are going to build a jurisdiction where there are 

no children living in poverty? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. Be plenty of time for other 

members to enter the debate without interfering with even their 

own member trying to enter the debate. I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well could we, Mr. Speaker, given the kind of 

resource potential that we have and what’s happened in our 

province, could we today, could we today determine that we are 

going to be the jurisdiction in North America that will lead the 

way and show the way of how we could end child poverty? We 

haven’t accomplished it. We didn’t accomplish it when we were 

government. But could we set that as a defining goal and then 

lead the way and actually show how it can be done? 

 

I think about environmental stewardship, Mr. Speaker. Could 

we, could we as a province, again with our high energy 

demands and our cold climate, could we demonstrate for, could 

we demonstrate for the continent how it could be done? 

 

Now I know we’re going to debate cap and trade, and we’re 

going to debate carbon taxes. But I don’t think we can, I don’t 

think we can wait for those debates to be over. And I know 

we’re going to debate the nuclear generation of electricity in 

this province. But you know, Mr. Speaker, no matter how that 

debate comes out, if we do decide to go there, it’s still going to 

be 10, 15, 20 years. And you know, Mr. Speaker, and members 

know, I’m a strong supporter, proponent of carbon dioxide 

sequestration, carbon capture, and clean coal. But even if we 

succeed there, it’s too late in some ways. 

 

What can we be doing today? What can we as a province and a 

people be doing today that could really, really be the tipping 

point in North America? Really show the kind of leadership. I 

mean, we’ve got wind resources and solar resources. We’ve got 

those technologies. Could we not, with the resources we have, 

dedicate enough of those resources to become a leader, a 

continent-wide if not global leader, in conservation of energy 

and show the world again how we could do it? Could we do 

that? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what about a notion that says — you know, 

we’re a food-producing province still; we’re still rooted to the 

land — what about a notion that says this province could take a 

leadership like no other place on the globe in terms of dealing 

with some of the world hunger that we see around us? 

 

You know, this recent financial crisis has brought this into 

focus. On the same day I read a report from the United Nations 

Food and Agriculture Organization, a report from the United 

Nations that says with an annual investment of $30 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, an annual investment globally of $30 billion we could 

eradicate, we could eradicate hunger on the globe. 

 

We could provide the necessary food for 850 million people 

who today are without for $30 billion a year. And then I read, 

same day, from The Washington Post, that the Wall Street 

executives last year, in the year 2007, Wall Street executives 

were paid bonuses of $33.7 billion — bonuses alone. That’s out 

of a compensation package of over 120 billion. 

 

You know, there’s something wrong in this economic order. 

There’s something wrong in the way we’ve engineered the 

economic order of the globe. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 

to change the economic order in the globe in this province. But 

you know what? We are as people still rooted in the land. You 

know, we are a people that still care, and we have some 

resources. Could we show a province that’s going to reach out 

again into the globe? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point is just this, my point is just this. And 

admittedly it’s not just this Throne Speech. And let’s speak to 

other throne speeches. We think a lot about ourselves. Can we 

lift our vision again to Saskatchewan’s place in the nation and 

Saskatchewan’s place in the globe as we build for our own 

families and our own people? I think we can. And it’s my hope 

that this government, or the next government of the New 

Democratic Party, will again seize that vision for the broader 

and the bigger. 

 

That all said, Mr. Speaker, that all said, there are some 

immediate issues, immediate issues that face this government, 

immediate issues that face the people of our province, 

immediate issues that need to be attended to by this legislature 

in this fall session. And so to draw to that focus, I want to 

conclude my remarks by moving the following amendment to 

the Throne Speech, and this will be seconded by the member of 

Rosemont: 

 

That the motion be changed to read as follows, quote: 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 

the Assembly because their spending choices ignore their 

major responsibility to address the immediate needs of 

Saskatchewan people such as high utility rates, high gas 

prices, high property taxes, and lack of affordable housing 

and child care. 

 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, has 

moved, seconded by the member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That the motion be changed to read as follows: 

That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 

the Assembly because their spending choices ignore their 

major responsibility to address the immediate needs of the 

Saskatchewan people such as high utility rates, high gas 

prices, high property taxes, and lack of affordable housing 

and child care. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do rise in the 

Assembly to second the amendment put forward by our hon. 

leader of our opposition. I’m also honoured to just take a 

moment and welcome our newest member, member from 

Cumberland, to this Assembly. I know that his voice and 

advocacy will be sincere and strong, both within our caucus and 

within this Assembly here most importantly, and that the folks 

in Cumberland are going to be better off for the experience of 

us having a new member join us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, due to the healthy 

financial circumstance of our province, we are rightfully 

addressing debt, infrastructure, and taxes. We don’t disagree 

with these principles. It’s important that Saskatchewan families, 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan businesses be recognized, 

and they should feel incredibly proud in their contributions to 

this strong economy in allowing us to address some of our 

provincial needs. 

 

Our Premier focuses on a message of next year country 

apparently finally being achieved. Well I can assure the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, with certainty, that the majority of 

Saskatchewan families and individuals are very aware of what 

next year continues to bring, and that is financial strain and 

burden that far outweighs any realized gain from his tax cut. I 

can assure the Premier that the strength of our economy has 

been worked towards by Saskatchewan people; strategically 

built by sound, responsible, economic strategies of a New 

Democrat government responsive to world demands; and that it 

is insulting to try sell our hot economy and his plan as 

achieving next year country for Saskatchewan families because, 

Mr. Speaker, where the tire hits the pavement, Saskatchewan 

families are concerned by their ever-increasing cost of living, 

by their debt loads, and by their recently devastated savings. 

 

It is an enviable circumstance that our provincial treasury finds 

itself in. It is notable that, as New Democrat government, we 

have been focused on infrastructure investment, debt reduction, 

and tax reduction for many years — on a shoestring budget, I 

might add. 

 

It’s notable that New Democrats brought tax relief, tax reform 

every bit as significant as this new announcement, and we did 

so when there were modest surpluses of several million — 

several million as a surplus opposed to $3 billion that we are 

proud to experience here today. The investment comparatively 

is a fraction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as New Democrats we set an economic track 

record of success, and we punched well above our weight for 

the good of Saskatchewan people — that always being our 

focus. So as New Democrats we are certainly incredibly proud 

of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

The health of our economy, in fact, and the pride in this regard 

is no partisan issue. Saskatchewan people deserve credit and its 

due. Saskatchewan’s economy is of envy. The Sask Party has 

been gifted, in trust, by the people of Saskatchewan the 

management of this economy for which they have had no part 

of building. 

 

The NDP’s economic stimulus plan of corporate tax cuts, 

business cuts, and royalty tax reductions have created a 

dynamic and robust economy within Saskatchewan which is 

experiencing a perfect storm of resource demand. 

 

It is notable that the Sask Party government has not changed a 

single economic policy since taking office. When the Premier 

was pounded by industry regarding his planned royalty review, 

he retreated and retracted from his statements very quickly, Mr. 

Speaker, while reassuring that he and his Minister of Energy 

and Resources had misstepped and would not be changing the 

NDP plan that had been so incredibly successful. 

 

But with this economic boom comes pressures, comes demands, 

and comes needs. There’s a wonderful opportunity before 

Saskatchewan people and communities, but without planning 

and investment by this Sask Party government, this opportunity 

will be squandered and immense pressure placed on families 

and communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is very apparent that the Sask Party is lacking vision. They 

are stuck trying their best to maintain a status quo of New 

Democrat government and our principles. The problem is, Mr. 

Speaker, that the world changes quickly. New needs and 

opportunities emerge and the status quo doesn’t cut it. 

Responsive government is required. 

 

There’s a significant problem, Mr. Speaker, a major disconnect 

between the Sask Party’s government riches and the financial 

circumstance of families across Saskatchewan. Because as the 

Sask Party government is collecting record revenues and sitting 

on billions of surplus dollars, most families are going the other 

way. They’re experiencing a tightening of their finances, a 

strain on their ability to access the quality of life that they so 

deserve and expect in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

real concern. 

 

I reference a letter from the Regina and District Food Bank. The 

picture on the envelope is that of an adult holding a baby, with 

an extremely distraught look in the adult’s eyes. The caption 

across the envelope reads, I quote, “If our economy is thriving, 

why am I hungry?” Affordability of quality life is a significant 

issue. 

 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, it is an incredibly common theme from residents 

across Saskatchewan that our booming economy is passing 

them by and in fact placing new pressures on their quality of 

life. They refer to the pounding of road infrastructure, the extra 

demand on public infrastructure, and the enormous new weights 

on their individual family’s finances realized through 

significant increases in housing, in utilities, through 

skyrocketing power, gas bills, food, gas, fertilizer, and feed, just 

to name a few. 

 

A housing strategy needs to be undertaken. Families and 

individuals are significantly hurt by the demand placed on the 

short supply of housing in Saskatchewan. For example, while 

some newcomers to Estevan with the oil industry might afford 

excessive rent increases, they can not necessarily find adequate 

housing. I’ve heard of story after story of workers forced to 

bunk together in tight quarters with each other, offering little 

opportunity for a full life, including family. Meanwhile 

middle-class, hard-working professionals, blue collar families 

cannot keep pace. Those living on the margins, Mr. Speaker, on 

fixed incomes — seniors, the disabled — are squeezed like 

never before. 

 

I will reference a letter to the editor on October 8, 2008, of the 

Estevan Mercury. I’ll read from the Mercury: 

 

Rental prices concern writer. 

 

[This is something I find . . . And I’m quoting here.] This 

is something I find totally ludicrous, rental property in 

Estevan is totally insane. 

 

One of the guys I work with got a notice on his door 

saying that his rent is going up in January by $430. Now 

that’s insane. How are young people supposed to make it 

here? . . . If you have to pay $1200 a month for an 

apartment you’ll never get people into Estevan to fill the 

job vacancies. 

 

[12:15] 

 

So this exemplifies some of the struggles we have as a 

province. And we need leadership to make sure that we can fill 

those job vacancies and that quality of life is sustained in places 

like Estevan. It is evident that these actions do not address the 

immediate strain on families. And as identified in the article, it 

will only get worse for many in next year country. 

 

In next year country in fact, families and individuals will be 

facing rent increases such as $430 a month referenced in this 

article. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s $430 a month. That’s a huge 

increase, a huge burden. With the new tax relief measures 

offering individuals 400-and-some dollars a year, well the rent 

alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, eats up that cut 10 times over. 

That’s a net loss just on rent alone of $4,700. 

 

This is not the kind of next year country families and 

individuals of Saskatchewan are looking for. Without 

addressing the housing crisis, significant social ills will 

infiltrate our communities. When packing people into more 

dense living circumstances, into inadequate housing, challenges 

will occur and flourish. This places strain on a community from 

a perspective of policing, emergency rooms, and community 

safety. 

 

A reference, a major theme that recently headlined in the 

October 1, 2008, copy of The Estevan Mercury, the headline 

reads, and I quote: “Boom times for Estevan mean busy times 

for police.” It begs to question, what do we want our 

communities to look like and to feel like 5 years, 10 years, 15 

years, 20 years, or 50 years from now, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

With the sort of economic growth that is occurring, it provides 

us the opportunity to be in front of these challenges and ensure 

we realize our economic opportunities while capturing and 

enhancing the Saskatchewan dream as the place to live, work, 

and raise a family. 

 

There are clear examples that exist displaying what the 

gas-pedal-down, hands-off-the-wheel, lack-of-planning style of 

government which our Premier and the Sask Party are 

employing does to communities. The province has a financial 

circumstance that allows them to put forward a plan that 

addresses the infrastructure and housing needs of 

municipalities, towns, and cities. Without doing so they are 

risking developing undesirable communities, attacking our 

quality of life, and stifling business growth which requires 

attracting and retaining families within Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have experienced worldwide market 

collapse. At these times of global economic turmoil, 

Saskatchewan families need our commitment and they deserve 

a government that understands the root causes of this turmoil 

and devastation. 

 

But this Sask Party government doesn’t get it. They’re driven to 

blindly take us down the same road that has led to the collapse 

of these markets. It’s been said that our Premier is an 

ideological and fanatical free enterpriser who has committed to 

unfettered free market solutions and has made his life’s work 

deregulation and privatization. 

 

For our Sask Party Premier to speak of regulation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is like a long-haul truck driver calling for higher gas 

prices. Our Premier and the Sask Party are out of line with the 

hard economic lessons that have been learned around the globe. 

Saskatchewan people are dramatically affected by these world 

events. They too feel the anxiety and strain that has been placed 

upon the shoulders of families the world over. 

 

They see it in their savings, the very savings that are providing 

many retired residents just enough to get by month to month, 

have been attacked — the very savings that so many families, 

so many residents have collected for years. A lifetime of work 

put away as investments, as pensions, have been hit incredibly 

hard. It is changing the plans and decisions of so many families: 

postponement of retirement plans, picking up of extra work to 

have the safety that’s needed. 

 

Families, baby boomers, seniors are stressed within our 

province. Despite the pressures and strain emergent on the 

finances of families and retirees around this province, the Sask 

Party is ratcheting up the costs in their lives: skyrocketing costs 

of energy and power, property tax increases. 

 

So we’ve learned the world over the wrong-headedness and 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

devastation of conservative right-wing economic policies of 

unfettered free market approach to economics — the very 

approaches that call for massive deregulation and privatization. 

And here in Saskatchewan we have elected a Premier, a 

government who believe in this very approach, the very 

methods that are now pointed to by economists around the 

world is the reason for a massive financial collapse. 

 

As Saskatchewan New Democrats, we understand the market 

economy. We believe in working with it and business 

co-operatively. We believe in ensuring that safeguards are in 

place to protect our economy and the financial circumstance of 

the people of our province. The Sask Party wants to reverse 

these very protections and safeties. 

 

At a time of such financial strain and stress on our families, our 

Crown corporations owned by the people of Saskatchewan for 

the people of Saskatchewan, are of huge value to our province. 

It is a shame that our Sask Party government is too ideological 

to provide assistance as retirees and families struggle to pay 

their increasing utilities. 

 

I hear members opposite saying something about the election. A 

lot has changed in one year, I might remind the members. And 

we have constituents across this province that are facing 

increasing costs like crazy, and they’re not getting the answers 

from the members opposite. This lack of response exposes a 

fundamentally different role for government that we espouse 

and that we believe in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, current wait-lists for child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan are disgraceful. A child care provider in Regina 

currently has 400 children on a wait-list, 200 alone for 21 infant 

spaces. This is an issue across Saskatchewan, and it’s 

preventing engagement with our labour market and educational 

opportunities. The social and economic dividends that are lost 

by our province in families, without meaningful action, are 

enormous. Even with the increase in funding announced in the 

Throne Speech, which was a modest amount, the Sask Party is 

not spending its federal transfer for child care in entirety — a 

complete injustice at a time of such need. 

 

When we’re talking child care, we can’t just talk about 

operational funding. We need to be talking about capital for 

facilities and for expansion. We need to make sure we have the 

training spaces in our colleges, and we need to make sure that 

we can offer compensation that will attract and retain those 

professionals to work in those facilities. 

 

It’s no doubt that it’s unwelcome news for all across 

Saskatchewan that significant, long-term property tax reduction 

was not presented by the Sask Party. Property tax, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, was once stated to be their first priority. Now the Sask 

Party bides its time, sits on resources, and evidently property 

taxes will be increasing across Saskatchewan in 2009. I know in 

Regina, reassessment statements are in people’s mailboxes for a 

couple of weeks now. Saskatchewan families cannot afford 

these increases. 

 

Our Premier is too often the puppet of Stephen Harper. Let’s 

examine. He dropped the legal challenge over equalization. He 

offered relentless, partisan propping for a federal election using 

his position as Saskatchewan’s Premier to spit incorrect 

information to reporters and influence the public, only trying to 

secure his federal cousins’ electoral fortunes. 

 

And our Premier still continues to try sell his clean coal project 

to Saskatchewan people as a sweetheart deal. Well this project, 

this funding, is a one-time fraction of the cost federal 

contribution while sticking the bill to ratepayers across 

Saskatchewan. The benefits of this project are far too huge to 

stick the cost on the ratepayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m going to share a few quotes though because it certainly . . . 

We have a lot of frustrated residents with the lack of backbone 

and leadership from our Premier. And so I’ll quote one here and 

this is from The StarPhoenix on September 20, 2008, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . Mr. Wall and his ministers turn their back on the 

province . . . by dropping the challenge they promised over 

the federal Conservatives breaking an equalization 

promise to Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ll move onto another quote also in The StarPhoenix, 

September 20, 2008. Quote: 

 

. . . to suggest, as Mr. Wall has, that the offer by Mr. 

Harper to contribute a miniscule share in the expensive 

experiment to find a way to separate and sequester carbon 

dioxide is a gift to the province rather than what it is — a 

huge risk with associated costs — makes it appear the 

premier’s political allegiances have blinded him to the 

welfare of the province he has sworn to represent. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite seem to be 

incited by this, and probably for a good reason because there’s 

quote after quote after quote in publications across 

Saskatchewan that scathe the actions of the Premier. 

 

Saskatchewan people are concerned with the incompetence of 

this government when tested. As highly dangerous escaped 

inmates, in fact alleged killers, roam through our communities 

Saskatchewan deserves more than a mumbling, fumbling, 

bumbling Minister of Corrections and Public Safety and 

Policing. I’ll share a few quotes with you because it’s certainly, 

it’s certainly . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Okay. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So again the other side’s incited, and 

they’re frustrated as well. They’re frustrated. Well I’ll share a 

few quotes with you. From August 29 in the Leader-Post, I 

quote: 

 

But there were three basic things we should have expected 

our elected officials to do . . . 

— Alert the public as soon as possible; 

— Provide the public with as much information as 

possible . . . and; 

— Honestly acknowledge there is a problem related to 

gangs. 

 

Hickie failed on all three counts. He may have failed more 

miserably than any Saskatchewan cabinet minister in 

recent memory. 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

I’ll move on to some other quotes. In fact there’s some words 

from an August 29 article in the Leader-Post. I quote, 

“egregious,” “damning,” and “unforgivable.” I move on in that 

article. It also took Hickie to task for, I quote, attempting: 

 

. . . to bamboozle reporters with . . . [his] nonsense that 

there’s no gang problem in Saskatchewan jails . . . 

something that speaks either to the honesty or the 

competence of the minister. 

 

You know, to recap, an utterly incompetent minister hidden by 

the Premier with no regard for transparency or accountability. 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 

Further demonstration of incompetence in action is the 

treatment and politicization of the civil servants. I’ll read a 

quote here. Leader-Post, August 23, ’08, and I quote, “Krawetz 

doesn’t get that firing anyone without cause is a massive waste 

of money.” I move on quote: “Nor does Krawetz seem to grasp 

the simple concept that it’s wrong, inefficient and stupid to fire 

nonpartisan career civil servants.”  

 

It moves on: “He doesn’t get that a true professional career civil 

servant absolutely shouldn’t be “sharing the political view” of 

the government of the day.” 

 

We expect good government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We’re not getting it. Municipalities are looking for 

leadership. Further delay of new revenue sharing is unfortunate. 

Annexation delays are a concern across the province. SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] has 

submitted proposals to a minister who has not even responded 

back to them. We have concerned folks in municipalities. We 

have concerned folks in SARM. We need leadership from our 

minister of municipalities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, stronger vision is needed. A booming 

economy should ensure progress within the lives of 

Saskatchewan people. What does Saskatchewan need? What do 

Saskatchewan people deserve? Nimble, responsive, effective 

government. Government that is accountable and transparent. 

Government with due process that is responsible that the public 

can trust. A government and a Premier who will put their needs 

first and stand up for them when those needs are challenged. 

 

Saskatchewan people are not receiving this from this Sask Party 

government. It is our belief that growth alone does not equal 

progress but that economic growth is crucial to achieving 

progress. The end goal must be progress, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And although we’re proud of our economic gains as a province, 

the Premier’s simply wrong to suggest that the people of our 

province have achieved their own financial and social goals. 

 

It’s nice to make promises, but the problems are here and now. 

With 10 per cent of the surplus being invested back into the 

people, our Premier sits on over 60 per cent of the funds that 

our surplus provides. So many issues could be addressed here 

and now with the stroke of a pen — affordability, agriculture, 

child care, seniors, the disabled — but they have chosen 

otherwise. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an Assembly, let’s cut the posturing. Let’s 

reduce the pumped-up rhetoric of next year country, and let’s 

place our focus on sincerity, our resources, and our energy into 

achieving the potential gains and addressing the important 

needs that rest before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech and am 

proud to second the amendment of non-confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise and enter the debate on the Throne Speech. 

It’s very interesting to hear comments from the other side in 

their reply to the excellent Throne Speech that was presented 

yesterday. But I have to make a couple of comments about 

some of the remarks from the other side of the House. 

 

The amendment is kind of a joke that they no longer enjoy the 

confidence of this Assembly. Well my colleague from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy put it very aptly that there is 1,015,000 

people that very, very, very much enjoyed the contents of the 

Throne Speech, and there was 20, there was 20 on the other side 

that didn’t. Those numbers are a little bit out of focus. So 

there’s 20 people that didn’t enjoy the Throne Speech, but the 

people of Saskatchewan did. So the amendment to me is very 

much a sad tale. 

 

The other thing I’d like to comment about from remarks made 

on the other side was, they were talking about a successful NDP 

plan. I wonder where it’s hidden, because I honestly think that 

if they had a plan at all, that might have been considered a 

success. But what do they do? Their plan is fear and smear. And 

even in their reply so far to the Throne Speech that is all they 

have is the fear and smear. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have endured 16 years of 

incompetence. They want to talk about incompetence. Lord 

knows that this province has lived through 16 years of 

incompetence until we got elected in 2007. Now this province is 

looking at growth. There’s a rebirth in this province, and 

growth, and they just don’t like it on the other side that we’re in 

this growth. We have gone from stagnation Saskatchewan to a 

Saskatchewan that is looking forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to make a comment in general. We have 

come forward with some great ideas in the last year and there’s 

a lot of great ideas in this Throne Speech. But how many times 

have we come forward with something and we hear from the 

other side of the House, we were going to do that? But they 

didn’t get around to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a . . . It’s shaped like a coin. It’s a round 

circle and on it it has the letters T-U-I-T. And I think every 

member should have one of those on their desk because what 

that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a round TUIT, and when they 

say they don’t have a round TUIT or didn’t get around to it, we 

should have one for every one of them on that side of the 

House. 

 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re looking at a 

Saskatchewan today that there are more people working. 

There’s more people working in this province today than there 

has been in the history of this province. Our population is 

growing and it’s growing very, very fast. I think it’s faster than 

the last 50 years. Younger people are choosing to stay here. 

 

Now let’s just do a little bit of comparative analysis to what 

happened under this 16 years of no leadership. People were 

leaving the province. Why were they leaving the province? 

Because one, there was no jobs here. We were under a socialist 

regime that really hurt job growth in this province. They were 

moving to a jurisdiction that promoted job growth. 

 

Now lo and behold, we have a government in this province that 

is forward thinking. Jobs are being created because we put the 

framework for businesses to start up in this province. One of the 

things that companies now, when they go on the Government of 

Saskatchewan website, they do not have to read the Regina 

Manifesto. That in itself, that in itself adds an incentive for 

companies to want to come to this province. 

 

Under the previous regime, when they went on and they saw the 

Regina Manifesto, what did it say in there? We are against 

business. We are totally against business. Eradication of 

capitalism. 

 

Now if you were a business person from outside of this 

jurisdiction, how would you like to enter this province with that 

hanging over your head? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not 

there any more. We do not have anything like that on our 

website that they had for a number of years. And granted it was 

published many years ago, but it was still sanctioned by the 

current administration, or the current NDP. 

 

Also on that, people that wanted to do research into setting up a 

business in Saskatchewan, all they had to do was come across 

the potash Bill that allowed the government of the day to 

nationalize an asset within this province. As you know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we removed that. That Bill has been rescinded, 

repealed. Therefore that sends a very strong message to 

businesses that we in this province today are open for business. 

 

Some of the initiatives that we have done . . . The Premier 

announced this week the single largest single-year income tax 

reduction in the province’s history. Now we hear from the 

Leader of the Opposition in his ramblings that, we lowered 

taxes, we lowered taxes. Well you know what, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Right after an election they’d raise taxes, and right 

before an election they’d lower them. So where were the people 

of Saskatchewan? How were they making out? They suffered 

through higher taxes for a period of time and then through this 

magic thing called an election they’d say, are we ever going to 

be good to you; we’re going to lower taxes. 

 

Well you know, that happened except for 2003 when there was 

not an appetite for tax increases in this province. People on the 

other side of the House at the time when they were 

campaigning, they would say, there’s no appetite for taxes. 

Then what did they do? They had the commission go out to 

look at the school education grants. And the report come back 

— it was the Boughen Commission — and the report come 

back and it said, well we could fund education by upping the 

PST [provincial sales tax] by one point and using that money to 

lower the education portion of the property tax. And we all 

remember what happened. Right after the election, what 

happened? The PST went up, but we forgot about giving any of 

it back to the people of Saskatchewan in the form of education 

tax relief. 

 

So the members want to talk about education tax relief. They’re 

the ones that jury-rigged the system by upping the PST and not 

providing tax relief to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another part of the announcement was $1 

billion in debt reduction. That’s saving people of this province, 

over the year, hundreds of millions of dollars. We have reduced 

the debt by the neighbourhood of $2.6 billion — almost 40 per 

cent of the debt. And look at the amount of money that that’s 

saving for people in this province and for the future. 

 

$1.5 billion in capital commitment, and the largest in 

Saskatchewan’s history. That’s about three times what was 

spent just a mere four years ago. But look what this allows: 

roads, infrastructure, schools. 

 

Now we have to keep in mind the record of the 16 years that the 

NDP were in power because all of these things suffered 

immensely. Hospitals were deteriorating. Schools were 

deteriorating. What was their solution to the hospital problem? 

They closed them. Fifty-two rural hospitals, they closed. What 

do they do with schools out in the rural area? Hey, rather than 

fix them up, close them. What are we doing? We’re putting 

money into infrastructure for hospitals, schools, and roads. 

 

You know, I had a 16-year-old student the other day that told 

me, he said this is the first time in his life he’s ever seen a 

paving machine. We’ve never had any in our area for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — And you know what? He’s there now. 

We do see it now. But for 16 years he had never seen a paving 

machine. No wonder our rural roads are in the condition they 

are. 

 

Do the people across really care? They obviously did not. They 

thought for southwest Saskatchewan, they thought that was that 

area just south of the airport here in Regina. Thank goodness 

there’s a change. 

 

And another thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have done is 

like an insurance policy. It’s 1.9 billion in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund — 1.9 billion. Now I’ll tell you what 

the difference is between our policy and that of the socialist 

government of the past. Ours is real cash. It’s real money in 

there. 

 

It’s not a Fiscal Stabilization Fund that says, oh we’ve got 

money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund; guess what, we’re going 

to draw from it. So we go to a bank in New York to draw it and 

. . . because now the debt is increasing but they call it the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund at that time, but there is no dollars in it. 

 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

$1.9 billion is hard cash that we have in our Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 

comment on that because we’ll hear rhetoric from the other side 

of the House saying, well this money you have, you know, we 

could be spending it on stuff, kind of. All that they would have 

done is wasted it. But really, really if you consider your own 

business, your own house, isn’t it nice to have an insurance 

policy? And we talk about the turbulent times in the world 

economies right now. We are positioned probably in 

Saskatchewan as the best of any place in the world to withstand 

this and so it’s an insurance policy against further fluctuations 

by having this $1.9 billion in an insurance policy. 

 

Innovation. We have a group of women and men on this side of 

the House that are very forward-looking. And one of the ways 

of forward looking is through innovation, and again I will use 

that phrase again. We’ve gone from stagnation of the NDP past 

to innovation in the Saskatchewan Party future. And this is 

something that I think is very, very positive for the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear from the other side about areas 

where they claim that we’re not putting enough money. And 

education is one that we’ve heard them talk about. Well I would 

like to comment that so far, over $117 million has been 

committed in the budget to new construction and refurbishing 

existing schools. An additional 60 million was announced after 

the budget for projects that will begin in 2009. That is a lot of 

money. Had that ever come from the other side of the House, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? The answer is no. 

 

Now when we get talking about building a better and a stronger 

Saskatchewan, one of the ways is through infrastructure, as I 

mentioned. Highways — so far, so far, in the 10 months that we 

have been government, 1400 kilometres of work has been done 

in this construction year, 1400 kilometres and more to come, 

more to come, with the largest, $1.5 billion toward 

infrastructure — 1.5 billion — the largest that this province has 

ever seen. 

 

But building a stronger Saskatchewan, we want to talk about the 

Crowns. And I know the Leader of the Opposition had some 

comments about the Crowns and again trying to use the fear 

tactics that just don’t work any more. People are wised up to the 

fear tactics of the socialists. So we have directed that a clear 

focus be provided on the Crowns for the best possible service to 

Saskatchewan people at the lowest possible costs. And I know, 

I know we’re talking about a Saskatchewan-first initiative. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And I would like to quote from today’s paper where it says the 

Leader of the Opposition said that, and I’m quoting, “. . . he had 

already directed the Crowns to focus first on investing in 

Saskatchewan and that most of the money-losers . . . [be] 

disposed of.” Again, the round TUIT — when were they going 

to get around to it? Well he should have one now. 

 

But I would like to talk specifically about some of their 

investments. And I think some of them may surprise some 

people, but it just doesn’t surprise me. And I’ve talked about 

this before. Let’s look at some of their investments that they’re 

touting as, why, why do you want a Saskatchewan-first when 

some of these are great projects that we have outside of the 

province? 

 

I’d like them to come up with one that actually was good. But I 

would like to tell you some that were not. Tappedinto.com lost 

$6.7 million — a dot-com. Persona lost $9.4 million. Navigata, 

gosh, we don’t even know what Navigata lost. Navigata was up 

to about 70 or $80 million loss, and the reason we don’t know 

now, under the NDP rule it was incorporated within SaskTel’s 

total budget so you didn’t know where the loss was. And so 

now, now one from that side of the House may say that, well 

Navigata is actually showing a profit this year. Well is that 

based on over and above the 80 or $90 million loss? No, no. 

The loss was hidden. The loss was hidden. So now they’re 

showing maybe a little bit of a gain, but it sure doesn’t cover 

the $90 million loss. 

 

How about, how about Retx.com? Isn’t that another nice one? 

Dot-coms are really, really popular with the NDP. That was 

only a $26 million loss. Craig Wireless, $10 million loss. NST 

[NST Network Services of Chicago], a $16 million loss. 

Clickabid, $1.9 million loss. Soft Tracks, $2.2 million loss. Ag 

Dealer, $8.9 million loss. 

 

But now that’s out-of-province investments. But now we have a 

government — had a government — that, well they’d say we 

like to invest in the province also. We’d like to invest in 

potatoes. That was only a $35 million loss in SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], another 

one of the great gurus from the other side of the House that 

decided that would be a great investment. 

 

And you know, we look at other in-province investments that 

the NDP wanted to prop up some of their own area. Let’s look 

at the Meadow Lake pulp mill and how many millions of 

dollars — I think the last tally was about $800 million — that 

went into the Meadow Lake pulp mill. What was that for? 

Political purposes. That’s the NDP philosophy, political 

purposes. We can use $800 million to prop up the pulp mill. 

 

Well I think somebody sat and figured it out that if you took 

that $800 million you could’ve give every employee something 

like 250 to $300,000 and said just don’t bother to go to work. 

The taxpayers of this province would’ve been better off if they 

would have done that — but an $800 million loss. 

 

Then we have $100 million committed to Domtar — $100 

million that they committed to Domtar for the P.A. pulp mill. 

And now they talk about we’re not investing in certain areas, 

but we know where they were investing. They were investing in 

equity positions in companies. 

 

I would like to go on with another couple, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Here we have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member from Wood 

River has the floor. There’s been a couple of side conversations 

going on. I would appreciate if I could hear the member from 

Wood River. He has the floor right now. 



October 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll 

speak louder. Mega bingo was another one. Can you imagine? 

We have an NDP government at the time that thinks that they 

can take over the bingo of this province. Taking over bingo? I 

mean that’s just totally unbelievable. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it only lost $8 million so it didn’t even come up even close to 

SPUDCO. 

 

There’s others. We all remember the sod-turning ceremony at 

Belle Plaine for the fictitious ethanol deal, but that was only — 

what? — $750,000. That was a small one. 

 

I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to touch base on 

agriculture, but I also want to talk about municipalities, because 

I think one of the members opposite had talked about 

municipalities and revenue sharing. And I think it should be 

reminded to the people on that side of the House that during the 

16-year reign of the NDP they cut $680 million from 

municipalities. That’s a 6-8-0 million dollars for municipalities, 

about 300 million to SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], 300 million to SARM, and the rest 

to sundry cuts. Now that is, that is absolutely deplorable. 

 

And for them to have the gall to stand up and say that we 

haven’t come up with a revenue-sharing plan as yet . . . I know 

our minister is working very closely on it and it will be 

announced in the very near future. But think of it. What 

happened for 16 years? How many times did that caucus talk 

about revenue sharing? Probably none because they were 

talking about making cuts. 

 

Now so far, so far we have increased, we have increased 

municipal funding to levels that have never been seen in this 

province and we’re putting more into it as funds become 

available — $75 million was used for interest-free loans for 

building communities. That’s a huge plus. 

 

I do want to talk just a little bit about tourism, and the reason I 

want to talk about tourism is because the number of visits to our 

parks has jumped by 11 per cent in 2008 to over 3 million 

visitors. Now I wonder, I have to wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

if the wiener roast tax that we repealed had anything to do with 

that. Remember the wiener roast tax? That was kind of 

disgusting for the people of the province. 

 

But the other thing that we did not do that the NDP were doing, 

you remember, remember, colleagues, when they wanted to 

shorten summer? They wanted the parks to stay closed until 

into June. Boy that’s really good for the people of this province. 

We’ll keep the parks closed. Well we didn’t do that and we’ve 

seen a huge jump in people visiting our parks. 

 

I do want to get on to agriculture in the last few minutes that I 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because again, I do want to compare 

a little bit what we’ve seen in the past to what we’re doing 

today. We do know, we do know that the NDP attacked rural 

Saskatchewan. They attacked rural Saskatchewan. There’s no 

doubt about that whatsoever. Off-loading costs, remember they 

cut the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program. 

 

They increased crop insurance premiums and decreased the 

coverage and wondering why people were getting out of crop 

insurance. Well if your coverage, if your premiums are going 

up and coverage are going down, who would want to stay in it? 

 

Do you remember that they closed 22 rural service centres? And 

I think we all on this side of the House remember how it was 

very difficult to get CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 

stabilization] monies committed by the then NDP government. 

Every year they’d wait and wait and wait and wait, and then 

possibly at the end of the year, at the last moment, they would 

fund CAIS. That’s just not acceptable to the producers out in 

our rural areas. 

 

So I’d like to go over what we have done since we’ve been 

government on this side of the House. And our Minister of 

Agriculture instituted a crop insurance review. That has been 

done. Promise made, promise kept. And you know, we are 

moving the administration of this program back to 

Saskatchewan. Currently — and this is unbelievable — 

currently there’s $15 million that goes to the feds for the 

administration of this fund. And members that are now sitting 

on that side of the House did not want to bring that 

administration into Saskatchewan. I have no idea why they 

didn’t want to. Well gosh forbid, it might have created a few 

jobs in the province and brought a few forward-thinking people 

to this province, and maybe that’s why they didn’t want to do it. 

 

I would also like to talk about the farm and ranch water 

infrastructure program. We listen to the people. Now from the 

southwest of this province we have been in a drought condition 

for a period of time. And so we have gone out and listened to 

the people of this province and in the Southwest specifically. 

The water program, 6 million was announced in May. And this 

was to cover emergency projects, community wells, and 

on-farm projects. And also the ministry worked with the federal 

government to get an additional $9 million for this program. 

 

Now let’s compare that to what the NDP government did when 

it was in power. All it did was fight with the feds. Well you sure 

don’t get some money from them if you’re going to fight and be 

antagonistic with them. So there’s a whole new attitude change 

with the relationship between the province and the federal 

government, and thank goodness it’s a good attitude change. 

 

Even the water infrastructure program, even as recently as 

October, enhancements were announced to the program where 

on-farm funding was increased from 50 to 65 per cent, 

community wells from 66 to 85 per cent, power installation to 

$30,000, and the province will cover dugouts up to 65 per cent. 

 

So that being said, there is a whole pile that we have done to 

help our producers in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And as I see the time coming close, I would like to also talk a 

minute about the tribute that was paid in the Throne Speech to 

our fallen comrades, and I think with my particular background 

it’s very touching to myself. And again, I would just like to read 

from the Throne Speech: 

 

And thank you to Sergeant Prescott Shipway, Corporal 

Dustin Wasden, and Master Corporal Josh Roberts, all of 

whom made the supreme sacrifice this past year while 

serving our country in Afghanistan. 

 

[And we will be honouring] returning soldiers as well as 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 2008 

the sons and daughters of those who have made the 

ultimate sacrifice. 

 

This will take the form of a scholarship for post-secondary 

education. 

 

I think it was a very touching tribute to our fallen comrades. 

 

On that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s pretty obvious 

that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I am very 

proudly supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River has 

made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Motion carried. I recognize the 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House Leader has made a motion 

that the House now stand adjourned until Monday at 1:30. Is 

that motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. The House now stands until 

1:30 p.m. on Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:59.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1337 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1338 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1338 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1338 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1338 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2008 Circle of Honour Awards 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1339 

 Stresses on Saskatchewan Families 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1339 

 This Year Country 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1339 

 Quality of Life for Saskatchewan People 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1339 

 Saskatchewan People Benefit from New-Found Prosperity 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1340 

 Help for Low-Income Citizens 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1340 

 Saskatchewan to Lead 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1340 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Saskatchewan People 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Initiatives for People with Disabilities 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1346 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1346 

MOTIONS 

 Sitting Days of the Legislative Assembly 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1347 

 Leave of Absence for Members 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1347 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1347 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1348 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1352 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1357 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1360 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


