




















































Hansard: April 10, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 24A  THURSDAY, APRIL 10, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 787 

 April 10, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, it‟s my pleasure today to introduce 20 students 

that are joined us in the west gallery. They come from Canada‟s 

hotspot, Yellow Grass, Saskatchewan. They‟re students at 

Yellow Grass School, and they‟re accompanied by their teacher, 

Jane Peters, and chaperones Dee Garvin and Sharylyn 

Weisgerber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to meet with them after question period ends, and, 

Mr. Speaker, I noticed that before the proceedings the member 

from Regina Rosemont and one of the students had a 

conversation about hockey teams, and that student said his team 

was the Vancouver Canucks. But I know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

students I‟m sure have an interest in what happens with the 

Boston Bruins, seeing as the hometown hero, Peter Schaefer, 

starts in the playoffs this evening with the Boston Bruins. And 

so I‟ll be meeting with them afterwards, Mr. Speaker, and I ask 

all members to help me welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you it‟s my pleasure to introduce in your gallery a 

good friend of mine, Norm McIntyre. Norm‟s a farmer from the 

Wiseton area. He‟s also been a long-term school board member 

and is currently the Vice-Chair of the Sun West School 

Division. And I‟d like all members of the Assembly to please 

give him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s with pleasure I rise to present a petition on behalf 

of Moose Jaw residents that seeks the government‟s support in 

improving health care and health care services in the Moose 

Jaw and surrounding district. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present petitions 

today on support for Station 20 and in opposition to the 

government‟s withdrawal of funding. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people of Saskatoon and area. Mr. 

Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. Mr. 

Speaker, the petition deals with the government‟s Bills for The 

Public Service Essential Services Act and Bill 6, the Act to 

amend The Trade Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

That we respectfully request the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw Bills 

5 and 6 and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today a petition 

in support of expanding options for student housing. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to aggressively working with 

partners to expand on-campus and off-campus housing 

options for Saskatchewan students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners are from the Queen City of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

2008 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Starting 

tomorrow Prince Albert will play host to the 19th Annual 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards this weekend. This is a 

chance for residents of Prince Albert and all of Saskatchewan to 

see and support this province‟s homegrown talent. Mr. Speaker, 

the event is really about promoting Saskatchewan country 

music artists and providing recognition for what they have done 

throughout the year. 

 

The weekend starts off with a kick-off party Friday night 

followed by a weekend long showcase leading up to Sunday 

evening‟s award show. The award show will include 

performances by top country artists and winners from last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

for Prince Albert Carlton, I can guarantee that Prince Albert 

will host an unforgettable weekend that is sure to highlight the 

city‟s most and many attractions. This year there are dozens of 

Prince Albert and area residents up for nomination including 

Rich McFarlane, Dennis Adams, Larry Krause, and Garry 

Larson, just to name a few. 

 

I‟m looking forward to being a part of this weekend‟s events 

and seeing what Saskatchewan artists have to bring to the 

country music scene. I encourage residents all across 

Saskatchewan to make the trip to Prince Albert this weekend to 

support and enjoy your local country music talent. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to join me in wishing all the 2008 

Saskatchewan Country Music Award nominees the best of luck 

this weekend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords, I just want to ask members if you could refrain 

from speaking across the floor. It was difficult to hear the 

member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, so it would be 

appreciated if we could at least acknowledge and give the 

person on the floor the ability to speak. Member from 

Battlefords. 

 

Annual Meeting of Provincial Fire Chiefs Association 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. North Battleford fire 

chief, Mike Saunders, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Fire Chiefs and members of the North Battleford 

fire and emergency services organized and hosted the 2008 

annual general meeting of the provincial fire chiefs association 

this past weekend in The Battlefords. 

 

At that meeting, Chief Saunders, who was honoured with a 

distinguished service award, talked about the association‟s 

government relations lobby days for MLAs. Among the things 

that the fire chiefs of Saskatchewan are lobbying for include (1) 

provincial government funding of fire service initiatives; (2) an 

expansion of the role of the office of the fire commissioner; (3) 

the expectation of a mandatory level of fire protection; and (4) 

the development of a long-term inter-operability 

communication strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Fire Chiefs was 

formed in 1950 and is made up of approximately 200 chief fire 

officers from across the province. It is the only association that 

speaks for all aspects of the fire service in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the association‟s AGM [annual general 

meeting] was a huge success. I congratulate Chief Saunders and 

the organizers for making it so. I urge the government and all 

MLAs to review carefully and take steps to address the pressing 

issues outlined by the fire chiefs as their priorities for 2008-09. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Junior Achievement Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

honour of attending the Junior Achievement awards for 

southern Saskatchewan, to present the Volunteer of the Year 

Award on behalf of SaskTel. 

 

Junior Achievement was established in Saskatchewan in 1977 

by the Saskatoon Rotary Club, Ken Sawatsky, Ross Harwood 

and Wade MacBain. Today it now has offices around the 

province and its programs are delivered to more than 5,000 of 

our young people. I have had the privilege of sitting on their 

board and helping to deliver their programs into the schools. It 

is vital that our youth learn the skills involved in being an 

entrepreneur, and the experience gained by running their own 

business will benefit them throughout life. 

 

I am especially proud to note the achievements of students from 

the high schools within my constituency, Riffel High School, 

Winston Knoll Collegiate, and a wonderful teacher at Winston 

Knoll, Tracy Houk also walked away with the Educator of the 

Year award. 

 

I would like all members to join me in congratulating the 

coordinators, the volunteers involved in this event, but most 

importantly the young people who, through their hard work and 

dedication, are the real stars of this event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Outdoor Hockey League Celebrates 15 Years 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to thank 

the Outdoor Hockey League otherwise known as the OHL here 

in Regina. It was my pleasure to attend its 15th anniversary 

celebration with the member from Elphinstone and the mayor of 

our city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the OHL provides accessible recreational hockey 

to Regina‟s inner city. It removes the cost barriers of hockey 

such as equipment and ice time. The OHL is facilitated through 

Ranch Ehrlo‟s sport venture library and is led by director, Ms. 

Kim Langston. The league supports over 400 players each 

season. The rinks are staffed by a dedicated group of volunteers 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

from our community. 

 

Next year, Mr. Speaker, the OHL is planning expansion to the 

Rosemont community within my constituency. I‟ve served the 

OHL many years as a volunteer coach. I look forward to skating 

with my constituents. Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing more 

beautiful than a crisp game on a cold outdoor sheet. The very 

level of skills even allow a hack like me to pop the odd goal. 

The OHL has a rich history of corporate support from within 

Regina as well as support from the NHL [National Hockey 

League] Players‟ Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the OHL melds all which is wonderful about 

sport: the basics of sportsmanship, challenge, and team. I am 

proud to thank Ms. Langston, Ehrlo‟s sport venture, outgoing 

title sponsor Conexus, the many dedicated volunteers, 

participants, donors — past and present — for their meaningful 

contributions to our community. I ask all members to join with 

me in extending thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Peacock Collegiate Students Win 

Junior Achievement Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

delighted to rise and speak on the aspirations of the Junior 

Achievement Awards last night and to reiterate the comments 

of my colleague who spoke eloquently on the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Junior Achievement program is expanding 

throughout schools and should be encouraged throughout the 

province as the province‟s economic momentum increases. 

These talented young individuals gain valuable experience on 

building business concepts from the idea, the planning, the 

growing, and understanding of business challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you‟re worried about the future of our province, 

it‟s in good hands if you look at what these young people have 

accomplished. I was especially excited about the 11 students of 

Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw. It was the first time that they 

entered the program and created a company called 

Chug-a-lug-a-Mug. Chug-a-lug-a-Mug. Peacock Collegiate 

won five awards including the Company of the Year Award. 

Their company produced and sold gourmet gift mugs packaged 

for the Christmas season. Community members took notice, and 

the local businesses chipped in helping Chug-a-lug-a-Mug set a 

record of 1,000 units. 

 

I‟d like the members to join me in thanking the company‟s 

members: Paul Belisle, Brayden Broadis, Bryden Casemore, 

Ashleigh Gawley, Sam Heisler, Morgan Johnson, Brandon 

Keays, Joey Lavallee, Desiree Markewich, Sarah Wicks, and 

led by the encouragement and enthusiasm of their teacher, 

Barbara McKinnon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

Protesting Homophobia and Intolerance 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I stand in the Assembly today in 

full and unequivocal support of the goals of the B team, a group 

of Saskatchewan citizens — gay, lesbian, straight, bisexual, and 

transgender — who protested in front of MP [Member of 

Parliament] Tom Lukiwski‟s office this week. Like the B team, 

I note the very clear disconnect between Mr. Lukiwski‟s 

comments on a now infamous video tape, his voting record in 

the House of Commons, and the attitude of tolerance that he 

now says characterizes his opinions of the lesbians and gay 

people. 

 

In 2005 during the equal marriage debate in the House of 

Commons, Mr. Lukiwski spoke of the same-sex marriage as 

being quote, “. . . a slippery slope . . . [that] could affect societal 

change in a very adverse way.” Mr. Speaker, those words of 

Mr. Lukiwski‟s are neither tolerant nor accepting. And along 

with this truly awful team A, team B comment, they underline 

an essential truth that cannot be ignored — that too many 

people in this country still consider gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 

transgendered people to be second-class citizens, undeserving 

of the same rights as others. 

 

[10:15] 

 

That is the reason why members of the B team called on 

present-day politicians to show through actions, not just words, 

that they don‟t share the views expressed on that tape. That is 

why the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposition is 

challenging this provincial government to heed the call of the B 

team to end bullying in schools and to provide funding for 

health services for people who have suffered emotional trauma 

as a result of homophobia. 

 

Talk is cheap, Mr. Speaker. The B team said that apologies 

need to be backed with concrete actions to end homophobia and 

all forms of intolerance once and for all. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

opposition agrees. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Amendment to Extended Hours Motion 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the members 

opposite got a little punchy after two days of listening to the 

member for Regina Dewdney. I find it passing strange that, 

after two straight days of that member rallying against working 

till midnight, the NDP moved an amendment to work until 1 

a.m. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the flip-flops and the stunning incompetence 

didn‟t end there. Last night the NDP members stood in their 

place and voted against their own amendment. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

really at a loss to explain the leaps of logic the NDP had to take 

to vote against their own amendment. 

 

I can only guess that it‟s this. Last November the majority of 

Saskatchewan people voted against the NDP. We all see now 

how much better off Saskatchewan is. So now even the NDP is 

voting against the NDP. Mr. Speaker, I‟m actually happy for the 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

members opposite. Last night they got to enjoy something so 

many of us have been doing for years — voting against the 

NDP. Now that the members opposite know how much fun it is, 

I look forward to the NDP continuing to vote against 

themselves in the future, as this government continues to 

introduce policy and legislation to move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

heard yesterday about a Ministry of Labour document which 

contradicts just about everything that the minister has ever told 

us about essential services, by referring to Bill 5 as the broadest 

in Canada. 

 

As is often the case with this minister, he pleaded ignorance 

both during and after question period. But after he left the 

rotunda, it was revealed that the individual who wrote the 

document was John Boyd, the former executive director of 

planning and policy for the Department of Labour. You heard 

right, Mr. Speaker, I did say former executive director. 

 

To the minister: when was the note written? When was the 

decision made to fire Mr. Boyd? And were the two incidents in 

any way related? And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, how 

many officials did he have to fire before he got the answer he 

wanted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I can reassure this House 

and I can reassure the people of Saskatchewan that there was no 

connection between the dismissal of the individual in question 

and his view. In fact what I‟d like to do is introduce that on 

December 5 the said official actually said: 

 

Our essential service legislation does not remove the right 

to strike or eliminate any bargaining provisions of a 

collective agreement. Accordingly, we feel that it is fair to 

all concerned. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, that minister‟s excuses don‟t 

hold any water. This wasn‟t the opinion, Mr. Speaker, of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour or the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses. This was the opinion of the executive director of 

planning, policy for this government‟s Labour ministry. The 

government is now claiming that Mr. Boyd‟s comments refer to 

an earlier draft of Bill 5. 

 

But Mr. Boyd‟s comments weren‟t the only ones released 

yesterday. There was also an email calling Bill 5, quote, “quite 

broad” and specifically mentioning CBOs [community-based 

organization]. That email was sent by an official in the 

afternoon of December 18, just one day before the legislation 

was introduced in this House. Is the minister honestly claiming 

that during the 24 hours between the sending of the email and 

the tabling of the legislation, Bill 5 went through quite broad to 

really just middle-of-the-road? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The key element of the question really 

relates to what makes this Bill moderate, and, Mr. Speaker, 

there are four criteria. First, it doesn‟t take away the right to 

strike, Mr. Speaker. Second, it applies primarily to public 

services and there are four key criteria that we can then point to, 

that is, focuses on the right to safety and security of life, 

property, environment, and the courts. As well it allows for 

unions and employers to have the opportunity to negotiate. 

 

In fact the way to conceive this legislation is actually as an 

enabling piece of legislation that offers greater security and 

predictability for the people of this province so that their public 

safety, in balance with the right to strike, we can actually begin 

to see before a labour disruption. 

 

Finally, we can see that this legislation is based on best 

practices from other provinces in Canada. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

the public . . . Mr. Speaker, I‟ll just say for those four criteria, 

this legislation remains very moderate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s a curious double 

standard at play here. The Minister of Agriculture yesterday 

announced the details of his crop insurance review. The review 

includes, Mr. Speaker, a targeted website, a toll-free telephone 

line, and an outside auditing agency, a producer survey, and a 

series of public consultations. 

 

Compare that to the Minister of Labour who introduced his 

legislation without talking to a single stakeholder other than the 

president of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and whose 

legislation actually breaks a Sask Party promise. Apparently 

consultations aren‟t good enough for the Minister of 

Agriculture but good enough for the Minister of Labour. 

 

To the minister: why was he not able to secure public hearings 

for this Bill? Doesn‟t he have much clout at the cabinet table as 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

the Minister of Agriculture does? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to having 

clout, Mr. Speaker, I wish the member opposite would have 

some clout. Maybe he could have reinforced to his colleagues 

that they shouldn‟t be voting against themselves last night. But, 

you know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — To the point, to the point, Mr. Speaker, 

we said that we would table legislation. We did that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

come to order so that we can hear the response to the question. 

The minister responsible. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. Order. The member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. The minister responsible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

we tabled the legislation, we said that we would hold 

consultations. We went forward with consultations, Mr. 

Speaker. We advertised in nearly 100 newspapers. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister responsible, conclude remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll simply say 

that the consultations were quite extensive. In fact, one of the 

members opposite last night in her remarks even hinted that 

there were consultations under way. So, Mr. Speaker, what we 

can say is they were extensive. They stretched right across, 

right across the policy community, Mr. Speaker. And from that, 

Mr. Speaker, we said that we would be moving forward with 

amendments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, consultations for agriculture, 

but not for labour. Mr. Speaker, this part-time Minister of 

Labour keeps digging himself deeper and deeper. They admit 

that they spent over a year in their backroom studying this 

legislation. They met with stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, only after 

introducing the legislation. And they‟re treating their 

amendments like a state secret. 

 

What‟s more, there‟s a huge disconnect between what the 

minister has been telling the public and what his advisers, some 

of whom have since been fired, are telling him — all the more 

reason to shed some light on all these discussions; all the more 

reason to get out of the Chamber and bring this debate out into 

the open. Will the government finally listen to reason and hold 

public hearings on Bills 5 and 6? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the consultations were 

actually quite extensive. They were very helpful. And again, 

you know, the members opposite may have trouble actually 

getting out of the legislature, but when we go out we talk to 

stakeholders right across the community. We heard from people 

that have favourable things to say about this legislation. We 

heard from people that don‟t have favourable things to say 

about the legislation. In fact I even went to a certain convention 

and heard directly. And, Mr. Speaker, we are out hearing about 

this legislation. That‟s why we came back and we said that 

there would be amendments to this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Liquor Store Closure 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there was an article in the Moose Jaw media the other 

day that the Minister Responsible for Liquor and Gaming might 

find interesting. The title was “South Hill businesses expect 

closure of liquor store to impact on trade.” I‟ll give the minister 

two guesses whether that impact is good or bad. 

 

Members of the South Hill business community say the 

unexpected closure of the South Hill liquor store is a big hit for 

the community. The members opposite say they are 

pro-business . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member has the 

right to place her question. The member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite say they are pro-business, but I guess the 

temptation to make vindictive cuts and play partisan politics is 

just too great to resist. To the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Prince Albert 

Carlton will allow the question to be placed. Thank you. The 

member may place her question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well the members opposite say they are 

pro-business, but I guess the temptation to make vindictive cuts 

and play partisan politics is just too great to resist. To the 

minister: why is he making decisions that are hurting business 

in Moose Jaw? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I read that same article as well and the businesses that 

were interviewed were commenting that they expected this to 

happen at some time, that they had been expecting this for a 

number of years because a new liquor store had been built on 

Manitoba Street, Mr. Speaker, which more than met the size of 

both of the previous stores. The businesses in that area were 

expecting changes to happen. 

 

With the economy happening the way it is, Saskatchewan, with 

the growth in the economy of Saskatchewan, there will be new 

business opportunities in that building that will benefit all of 

Moose Jaw, not just the Liquor Board store, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker. While the 

minister talks about lots of opportunity in a growing economy, 

he‟s doing his best to stifle it in Moose Jaw. Yesterday in the 

House, or the other day in the House he used some information 

from 14 years ago, talking about the new liquor store being 

opened and the possibility that the South Hill liquor store would 

close. But, Mr. Speaker, over the years that liquor store has 

been profitable. Could the minister please explain why he‟s 

using 14-year-old information to make a business decision, and 

can he please table for this House a list of Saskatchewan Liquor 

and Gaming‟s least 10 profitable stores across the province for 

this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I used 

14-year-old information because the business case hasn‟t 

changed in those 14 years. Mr. Speaker, this was a very small 

store. In 1999 the previous administration built a 

13,000-square-foot store in Moose Jaw, closed a 

6,000-square-foot store. This was a 4,500-square-foot store. 

There‟s more than a 20 per cent increase in total SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] size in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

The members opposite believe that economic development in 

this province is SLGA and government businesses, Mr. 

Speaker. The economy of Saskatchewan is proving them wrong 

right now because it‟s private entrepreneurs that are the driving 

force in this province in growing the economy, not that previous 

minister‟s SLGA stores. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the minister tables 

the information that we requested in the House, which I‟m sure 

he will willingly do, then we‟ll see if the store was profitable or 

not. 

 

Not long ago, Mr. Speaker, SLGA under this government‟s 

administration was having a record year and the South Hill 

store was bringing in double-digit increases year over year. But 

now it seems that the minister is scrambling to cut costs in this 

booming economy, closing profitable and — I may remind you, 

Mr. Speaker — freshly painted stores. In just four months, in 

just four months SLGA has apparently gone from having a 

banner year to being in need of having drastic cuts. Clearly the 

minister has mismanaged SLGA to the point where store 

closures are necessary. 

 

To the minister: can he please commit today to letting someone 

else call the shots in SLGA, perhaps someone who makes 

decisions based on accurate information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if anybody or anything needs a new coat of paint, it‟s 

the campaign signs of those members opposite because they 

have been faded for the last 16 years of their broken promises, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess that type of, the question of the member opposite 

kind of indicates why, because there is no concern about being 

efficient. There is no concern about maximizing the potential 

return. Blow out $150,000 a year because, well that liquor store 

is in her constituency. It‟s not about the efficiency of the 

system. It‟s not about service to the people. It‟s about her 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, and that is not an acceptable way to 

run a government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

The Government’s Performance 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the honeymoon seems to 

be drawing to a close. This week things have gone from bad to 

worse for a Sask Party laden down with bullies and incompetent 

ministers. 

 

Since the beginning of the week, we have seen a Premier who 

will bully the media the moment he doesn‟t like something 

they‟ve done. We heard about a petty move to close a liquor 

store in Moose Jaw. We learned that the Government House 

Leader, who also happens to be the Finance minister, doesn‟t 

seem to be able to add and multiply. And we witnessed a Sask 

Party that is so inept that they couldn‟t even axe — axe, cut — 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

the Aboriginal connections program properly. 

 

To the Premier: do you have any confidence in these ministers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the hon. member for the question because I very much 

enjoy her weekly wrap-ups. She always provides a nice 

summary of what is, in her view, the week‟s events here in this 

Legislative Assembly, and I want to thank her for that. We may 

agree to disagree on what was actually the truth about the 

summary that she has just provided. 

 

The wrap-up for the week that most people in this province 

would be familiar with would include things like continued and 

unprecedented economic momentum for the province of 

Saskatchewan. What that summary would also include, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly, is the fact that this government is 

working very hard to maintain the support of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to represent them well. We‟ve seen 

a recent poll where our support‟s gone up. We had a leader‟s 

dinner this week — a record-setting leader‟s dinner — in 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I would also say, I would also say an adequate summary of 

this week‟s events, Mr. Speaker, is that tired, old opposition has 

as recently as last night voted against themselves on a 

procedural amendment in this place. That‟s the summary for 

this week‟s activity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what else happened this 

week? We learned that almost 2,500 people walked through the 

streets of Saskatoon and that wasn‟t enough to change their 

mean-spirited decision about Station 20. We heard the 

incompetent mixed messages from two cabinet ministers that 

could cost the people of Prince Albert their pulp mill. And then 

we even witnessed the Minister of Labour that can only respond 

to questions with scripted answers. 

 

Now, we‟re in the middle of an economic boom. The actions of 

the government do not demonstrate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I‟m just having a little difficulty 

actually hearing the question and the member isn‟t far from the 

Chair. The member may place her question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re in the middle of an 

economic boom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The actions of this government this week do 

not demonstrate confidence . . . The actions of this government 

do not demonstrate confidence and competence, so I would ask 

this question: when are they going to get their act together so 

that the people of this province can have confidence in their 

government leaders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. Speaker, I think 

two important measures, two important measures of 

competence that my friend the Deputy Premier will be 

interested in are whether or not you‟re keeping promises that 

you made in an election campaign. I think that‟s a pretty 

important measure of competence. Now 60 promises kept since 

the last election by this new government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That‟s a pretty good measure. I also think in 

a growing economy a good measure of the competence of a 

government is to whether or not it‟s preparing, it‟s readying its 

province for the growth that is coming now and will be coming 

into the future. Is it investing in infrastructure? Is it dealing with 

an infrastructure deficit left behind by who, Mr. Speaker? Left 

behind by the previous government. On both of these counts, 

Mr. Speaker, our government is moving forward — 60 

promises kept, historic investments in infrastructure, ready for 

the growth of the province of Saskatchewan, ready to lead the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can spin it all 

he wants, but the reality is that taxpayers of this province are 

going to see increases in education property taxes. They‟re 

going to see increases in their municipal taxes, Mr. Speaker. We 

had a government that promised hope for these people. They 

give us a $27 pizza rebate on education property taxes, and we 

know darn well that our taxes are going anywhere but up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a government that promised the community-based 

organizations that there is some hope for them. And, Mr. 

Speaker, with the growing cost of doing business in this 

province, all they could give them was 2.3 per cent. And we‟ll 

have more to say about that next week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So my question is this: why, why at a time of 

unprecedented revenue in our coffers, why can‟t these people 

show some competence when it comes to running this 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think a measure of the 

effect of a government is whether it‟s keeping its promises, and 

I take every opportunity to repeat the fact and thank the member 

for Nutana for her rodomontade, the rant that we just heard, 

because it‟s a chance for me to say that we‟ve kept 60 promises 

that we made only months ago in the election campaign. It‟s a 

chance for me to say on behalf of the government, we‟re 

working hard to make sure this province‟s economy is ready for 

growth. 

 

She mentions property tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have kept the 

letter, the letter of our commitment on property taxes, and we 

will keep our commitment for a long-term solution for property 

taxes, and that solution will include not just people that live in 

urban Saskatchewan but it will include farmers, a group of 

people they were prepared to throw over the side with respect to 

their property taxation. 

 

On community-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is prepared to compare its track record already in 

five months against theirs, including $5 million in new money 

for CBOs on life skills training and employment skills training. 

I‟m looking forward to the next question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Budget Provisions 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I‟m pleased to hear the Premier, I am pleased 

to hear the Premier say he‟s looking forward to the next 

question. And I hear in his last response he talks about a rant. 

Well I tell you, it takes one to know one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very telling, it is very telling, Mr. Speaker, 

that over the course of this past two weeks this government has 

spent an immense amount of time defending against their 

mean-spirited cuts as opposed to talking about the virtues of 

their budget. We have seen, with a government that has 

something like a billion and a half dollars in the bank, we‟ve 

seen cuts to northern Saskatchewan. We‟ve seen cuts to 

literacy. We‟ve seen cuts to social programs. We have seen cuts 

to inner-city projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: how can he defence 

these kinds of cuts to the people of Saskatchewan in a budget 

that is unprecedented in its wealth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader of 

the Opposition for the question. He mentions some specific 

items there. I think they bear a response, including his reference 

to some cuts in northern Saskatchewan. Let‟s be very clear what 

we were talking about here, Mr. Speaker: a closure of a 

government-operated kitchen that supplied a very important fire 

service for the province and a continuing of a trend, by the way, 

started by who? By their government. When they were sitting 

here, they made the same cuts exactly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He also mentions a number of other things in his question, does 

the Leader of the Opposition, including a question of funding of 

education. In this budget that he and his members voted against, 

an unprecedented $250 million increase in education. Now 

there‟s more work to be done there, to be sure, because what 

we‟ve seen from that party opposite when they were in power is 

downloading on to municipalities and underfunding in 

education. We are making progress on dealing with what was 

left behind by that member opposite when he sat over here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, people across this province are 

saying that there‟s a mean streak, that there is a mean streak in 

this government, that they are mean-spirited. They look at what 

happened when they came to government. They fire long-term, 

valuable public servants. They give their political staff big 

increases. They get rid of a competent Labour Relations Board. 

They appoint their political friends. They attack a project in the 

inner city of Saskatoon. 

 

People in Moose Jaw are saying the only reason that the Liquor 

Board store in South Hill is closing because it‟s in an NDP 

constituency. People in Saskatoon are saying . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatoon are saying 

that the only reason Station 20 has lost its funding is because 

it‟s in an NDP constituency. People are, across this province, 

are saying there‟s a mean streak in this government, that they 

are mean-spirited with the kind of cuts they‟re inflicting with 

the kind of resources they have available. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier: don‟t the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve something better than this mean-spirited government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I 

know the NDP will just keep saying something over and over 

again, even if it‟s simply not true, in the hopes that people will 

believe it. The budget is evidence of the fact that the premise 

for the Leader of the Opposition‟s question are false. 

 

We see in this budget a significant increase in the school-based 

anti-child-hunger programs — additional money, more 

investment that was needed when they were in office but never 

provided. 

 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

We see $5 million, $5 million in a new investment for 

community-based organizations like food banks to provide life 

skills training. We see new child care spaces in record numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. We see addictions treatment, additional 

investment in addictions treatment. 

 

We see more police resources to fight gang activity in our inner 

cities, to make sure we‟re stopping predators on the Internet — 

those who would prey on our kids. Mr. Speaker, that‟s the 

record of this government. 

 

Now the surest way to make sure we have a tax base that can 

afford to provide that quality of life for Saskatchewan people is 

a booming economy. And in just minutes we‟re going to hear 

how this government‟s policies with respect to energy are 

paying off in terms of new oil and gas development, in terms of 

securing the future of Canada‟s best province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Record Sales for Oil and Gas Exploration Rights 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟ve recognized the 

Minister for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning I‟m thrilled to announce an overwhelming vote of 

confidence by the oil and gas industry in our province, in our 

economy, in our new government, and in our new Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, up until the end of 2007, the 

all-time record for a single oil and gas sale, rights sale, was $85 

million. That was set back in 1994. That record stood for 14 

years until it was shattered back in February. The February land 

sale more than doubled the old record, coming in at $197 

million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that record only lasted for two months. This 

morning, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I‟m 

pleased to announce the April land sale raised an astounding 

$265 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — What‟s more, Mr. Speaker, the $265 

million collected in one land sale is more than the $250 million 

collected in all six land sales in 2007. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The Bakken oil play, one of the hottest oil 

plays in North America, continues to attract a lot of these 

exploration dollars. That‟s reflected in over $207 million in 

bonus bids for dispositions in the Weyburn-Estevan area alone. 

But the industry is continuing not just to look at that area but 

other areas as well. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Swift Current is a significant play as well. The Lower 

Shaunavon oil play it‟s called. Companies have invested nearly 

$53 million for dispositions there. There was healthy activity in 

the Kindersley-Kerrobert area — $3 million. Lloydminster area, 

$2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that my officials and myself have 

been absolutely astounded by what we have witnessed in the 

revenue generated in the two last land sales. We joke that we 

are now grasping for the right words to describe the land sale 

records that are being set in our province. Do we use the word 

astounding, or do we use the word amazing for the record 

$2,725 for the average price paid on a per hectare basis? And 

what word will we describe the $26.3 million paid for a single 

parcel in the Lampman area or 32,500 per hectare paid on 

130-hectare parcel near Stoughton? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can call it amazing. You can call it 

astounding, fantastic, unprecedented. We on this side of the 

House just simply prefer to call it growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s also remembering that the 

economic activity and investment in our province does not stop 

with the land sale. In fact it‟s only just the beginning. Each of 

these land sales will result in more investment in our province, 

more jobs, more economic activity for the surrounding 

communities like Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current, Kindersley, 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this level of interest is unprecedented and speaks 

to the incredible optimism that abounds across this province for 

the economic prospects for our province and for our now 

number one industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and I have been delivering this province‟s energy 

messages to audiences across Canada and the United States. 

Investors nationally and internationally are looking to 

Saskatchewan, and they‟re liking what they see. They‟re not 

only seeing energy, but they‟re seeing opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. And their confidence in us, in our province means 

only a bright future for the oil and gas industry, but for jobs and 

prosperity for all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all members of the Assembly would join 

with me in thanking the companies and their investors who 

comprise our oil and gas industry. Thank them for making the 

April land sale the best ever. And it‟s just more to come, and I 

wish everyone involved the best in their exploration activities 

and their investment efforts on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords, 

the Opposition House Leader. 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

thank the Minister of Energy and Resources for providing me 

with a copy of his remarks prior to delivering them in the 

Chamber. I appreciate that practice and welcome the 

information. 

 

When I received the information, Mr. Speaker, I was looking 

for a new announcement or a new program to be brought 

forward by the government because traditionally, Mr. Speaker, 

ministerial statements are about new programs, not necessarily 

about what‟s happening in the province, Mr. Speaker. So I was 

expecting something new. The only unhappiness I have right 

now, Mr. Speaker, is there‟s no new program, no new direction. 

What the member opposite is doing is simply announcing that 

the programs that were put in place by this government over the 

last four years have resulted in some significant changes in 

growth in the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has a right to crow about what‟s 

occurring in the Saskatchewan economy, and we are all proud 

of the expansion of the Saskatchewan economy. And we remind 

the government that with that comes their responsibility to 

ensure that all citizens will benefit from that growth. Certainly 

we‟ve been talking, Mr. Speaker, about Station 20 and the 

dollars that they need to meet the needs of the people of the 

inner city in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, there are dollars available 

as the member opposite is so proud to point out. They can 

address the needs of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the minister crows too loudly, he should 

acknowledge that while the oil and gas sector can move 

quickly, their investment decisions are not made lightly or 

without significant thought. Where do these investment 

decisions come from, Mr. Speaker? First of all the oil and gas 

sector has been very proud of the royalty structure in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and it said so over the last four 

years, since our government, Mr. Speaker, made significant 

changes to the oil royalty regime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also we remember the Centennial Summit that the 

then premier called, the centennial economic summit. What did 

the resource sector say at that summit, Mr. Speaker? They said 

deal with the corporate capital tax. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s difficult for the member to be 

responding when the noise is just escalating, and that‟s 

inappropriate. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. So we do 

remember the economic summit that the Saskatchewan Party 

members boycotted. But, Mr. Speaker, this government, our 

government was told very clearly by the resource investment 

sector, you need to deal with the corporate capital tax. And 

within a year, Mr. Speaker, we had dealt with the corporate 

capital tax to great praise, Mr. Speaker, from the resources 

sector — the investors in the growth in the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

And even outside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, decisions are 

being made affecting the investment by the oil and gas sector. 

We all recall just a few months ago, the Government of Alberta 

talking about a new royalty review, Mr. Speaker, and the oil 

and gas sector says, if you do that review, we‟re moving our 

money to Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, they looked at the 

situation in Saskatchewan, and they have begun to move money 

into this province, in addition to the decisions that were made 

here, decisions that were taken in the province of Alberta. 

 

And let‟s remember, Mr. Speaker, let‟s not forget that one of 

the very first things after the November 7 election that the new 

minister of Energy and Resources said was we need to refer to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan the whole issue of the royalty 

structure in Saskatchewan, the exact thing that was going on in 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker, that drove investment out. The minister 

said we need to have Enterprise Saskatchewan review those 

royalties. 

 

Well thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, they changed their mind. 

They flip-flopped on this issue, and they announced that they 

were not proceeding with a royalty review in Saskatchewan 

because, Mr. Speaker, that measure alone would have driven 

some investment outside of our province. So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has the same 

opportunity as the minister had to respond. I have the clock in 

front of me. I recognize the minister to wind up his comments. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I only have one more 

thought to put on record here. We just hope, we just hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister who has enthusiasm for the new land 

sales today can share the enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

for the contributions that we made in government to assist the 

oil and gas sector to make these very important decisions. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the government will ensure that they 

use the resources available to the Saskatchewan people for the 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SaskEnergy Extends Natural Gas Service 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise today to inform the House of an 

important and positive development in a project that is bringing 

new energy source and new economic growth and opportunities 

to northerners. Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is extending its natural 

gas service to La Ronge, Air Ronge, Weyakwin, Ramsey Bay, 

and the Lac La Ronge Indian band. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased today to announce that the steel 

pipeline construction contract has been awarded to Timberline 

Industries Inc., a Saskatchewan-based pipeline contractor from 

Pierceland. Timberline will be an important contributor to our 

government‟s goals of delivering significant Aboriginal and 

northern content to this project. Mr. Speaker, we believe that 

the construction of the pipeline will create a foundation of 

expertise amongst northerners for new and exciting 

opportunities in the energy industry in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the major steel pipeline work along Highway No. 

2 will begin in June and continue through October. SaskEnergy 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

crews will be working in the communities through the region, 

starting next month, preparing customers for natural gas 

service. Natural gas is scheduled to flow to the communities of 

Weyakwin and Ramsey Bay by this fall, with service to La 

Ronge, Air Ronge, and Lac La Ronge Indian Band beginning in 

2009. Customer facilities will be developed over the next two to 

three years. 

 

We are excited to move to the construction phase of this 

project, Mr. Speaker. Delivering the benefits of natural gas to 

this region has been over 10 years in the making, and we are 

getting it done, Mr. Speaker. Energy savings of 30 to 40 per 

cent will be available to customers — savings that will be 

delivered each year with safe, reliable, and environmentally 

friendly natural gas service. The long-term benefits to the 

community through service to homes, businesses, institutions, 

and community facilities will mean hundreds of thousands of 

dollars will stay in the communities to improve quality of life 

for all residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes in ensuring all of 

Saskatchewan is ready for growth, and that includes 

northerners. The economic and environmental benefits of a 

natural gas fuel source will further unlock the tremendous 

potential of northern Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 

minister for the well-in-advance copy of his ministerial 

statement, but I‟d like to thank the former government for the 

even much-more-in-advance copy of the ministerial statement 

as this is a re-announcement of what was announced about a 

year ago. 

 

I want to be clear on this, Mr. Speaker; this is good news. This 

is good news. The natural gas project continues to enjoy broad 

support. My colleague, the member for Athabasca, I know, 

worked very hard to make this natural gas service even more 

widely available. I hope I‟ve got, Mr. Speaker, I hope I‟ve got 

this committee name correct because as I understand it, the 

Anglin Lake-La Ronge natural gas committee was one that saw 

the benefit of this, the potential of this service and worked 

diligently and very hard over quite a period of time to make 

sure that it happened. 

 

So we thank this committee and literally everyone who‟s been 

involved in making the vision of this natural gas service option 

much more readily available to many, many people in the 

North. And I very much look forward to the continued 

expansion of SaskEnergy‟s natural gas service into the North. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Pan-Canadian Interactive Literacy Forum 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s my pleasure to advise on behalf of myself and my 

colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour, that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

participating in a first-time pan-Canadian literacy forum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can be proud that our 

province is playing a leadership role by hosting the Aboriginal 

literacy session in partnership with the Northwest Territories. 

This national interactive webcast literacy forum will be held on 

April 14 and 15. Here in Regina we are starting the celebrations 

early with a grand entry and opening ceremony on April 13. 

 

The theme of the forum is Literacy: More Than Words. Regina 

is one of five interactive host sites. Approximately 3,500 people 

at nine total sites connecting all 13 provinces and territories 

across Canada‟s six time zones will be linked together using 

interactive technology to discuss literacy across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very excited that Saskatchewan‟s site will 

feature three-time Juno Award-winning recording artist Susan 

Aglukark as keynote speaker. Keynote speakers from other 

locations include Adrienne Clarkson discussing community 

literacy, Fraser Mustard discussing early childhood literacy, and 

Frank McKenna discussing literacy for prosperity. 

 

This forum is the result of the Council of Ministers of 

Education, Canada‟s literacy action plan. Each of the provinces 

and territories has committed to working closely together to 

raise awareness about the importance of literacy and to increase 

literacy levels across our great country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this forum‟s unique structure will ensure that 

Aboriginal literacy becomes a national conversation. 

Saskatchewan‟s portion of the forum will focus on Aboriginal 

literacy initiatives with literacy success stories of First Nations, 

Métis, and Inuit cultures and communities. Traditional sessions 

will focus on the best practices among Aboriginal people and 

promising new initiatives by literacy service providers, 

businesses, educational institutions, health services, and 

government. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we have a young, dynamic, 

and growing First Nations and Métis population. The learning 

success of all of our young people is vital to securing the future 

of our province. It is through forums such as these, Mr. 

Speaker, that we continue to look at creative ways to eliminate 

the achievement gap between First Nations and Métis and 

non-Aboriginal learners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I‟d like to say that 

dialogue focused around the challenges and opportunities that 

exist within Aboriginal literacy is definitely welcomed. A 

forum of agencies, educational institutions, businesses, health 

services, governments across the board instituting or striving 

toward best practices is a wonderful event no doubt. Bringing 

stakeholders together for broad consultation is really good, and 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

it‟s something that this side strongly supports, and I guess we 

strongly support it across the board. And I would maybe 

mention to the side opposite that they look for this kind of 

consultation on other issues, broader issues and I would, I 

guess, encourage the Minister of Labour to think about that. 

 

There are, I guess, as well some challenges here. We‟ve got a 

good forum here, and there‟s going to be some 

recommendations. A big challenge is going to be, how are we 

going to implement those recommendations? When we look at a 

time here with over a billion dollar surplus and we‟ve seen a 

literacy budget that‟s been cut by over a fifth, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re talking about approximately $500,000 removed from a 

time where we‟re talking about connecting First Nations and 

Métis people with the opportunities they so deserve and 

engagement in our economy that they so deserve, happiness and 

life that they so deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess it also speaks further when we‟re talking 

about these issues that this forum goes far beyond literacy itself. 

It goes far beyond education itself. It connects to other 

shortcomings of their budget, and we‟re talking about 

affordable housing, training opportunities. And again I guess it 

shows how out of touch the other side truly is with the 

challenges facing literacy, the broad issues of our population 

particularly to First Nations and Métis individuals and urban 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I welcome a forum. It‟s a wonderful event bringing together 

consultation, and I hope we‟re able to invest and to act on those 

recommendations. I hope we‟re able to understand all the other 

broad pieces that connect in the success of literacy within our 

province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move Bill No. 26, An Act to amend The Midwifery 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 26, The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table answers to questions 549 to 

554. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions to 549 to 554 tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Station 20 West 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks, I‟ll be moving a motion that the government restore 

funding to the Station 20 project in Saskatoon, and it‟s 

interesting that this debate comes up after three ministers have 

spoken, one about increasing the vast amount of money that is 

now coming into the government. In fact I cannot think of a 

superlative word good enough to describe how much money is 

coming in, so restoring the funding to Station 20 really fits in 

with that as well. 

 

The other remark that was made by another minister was that no 

one should be left behind, and I think the 20,000 people that 

marched last Saturday think that there are people that are being 

left behind . . . 2,000, 2,000. Sorry. I was actually there. It was 

2,000-plus according to all the reports in the media. 

 

The third comment made by the minister that made me think 

about how pertinent it is to this motion is to talk about literacy 

and the piece of the puzzle in Station 20 that is dedicated to 

increasing literacy in our core neighbourhoods. So it‟s good 

timing for this motion to be coming before the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Station 20 West in Saskatoon is a project that began five years 

ago, more than five years ago in Saskatoon. And I do want to 

dispel the myth that this was on the eve of an election, and I 

will get into that in a little further in my comments. 

 

This project came about in response to not only the growing 

health needs of the residents of the core neighbourhoods, but 

the growing number of people who are living in core 

neighbourhoods. Health is determined . . . And this is one of my 

really key beliefs and one of my passions, is that health is 

determined not only by access to hospitals and doctors and 

nurses but by many factors commonly referred to as the social 

determinants of health. And those social determinants of health 

include housing and food, access to good food, education, 

safety, and supports within your families and your 

communities. Station 20 addresses all of those, all of those 

broad health determinants in one site which the Premier has 

dismissed as merely a mall. 

 

The planning for Station 20, as I said, had begun many, many 

years ago, and it was actually as a part of a vibrant community‟s 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

planning process which began in 2003, so certainly not in the 

eve of this election in 2007. This was a long-term, 

vision-creating process that had three partners, one of which 

was Quint. 

 

And I‟m going to explain what Quint is, because many of the 

people watching the debate and the questions in the House over 

the last few weeks are not all from Saskatoon and don‟t 

understand or don‟t get the significance perhaps of what Station 

20 means to Saskatoon and the core neighbourhoods and the 

people that live there. So in my remarks today I‟m hoping that I 

will give some insight into what the planning process was, what 

Station 20 is, who the partners are, and why it is so important to 

the community, and indeed why it is important to the health of 

our province. 

 

The partners in Station 20 are Quint, or the first partners were 

Quint and CHEP [child hunger and education program]. And as 

I said I‟m just going to explain about who they are in a moment. 

And they developed this long-term, vision-creating process in 

conjunction with or in partnership with the Community 

University Institute for Social Research at the University of 

Saskatchewan. So this wasn‟t‟ something that just grew around 

a coffee table. It was something that had a genesis in really 

sound planning and visioning. 

 

To further explain the partners as I promised, Quint is a Latin 

word for five. And they used the name because there‟s five core 

neighbourhoods in Saskatoon. And that was chosen for the 

non-profit development corporation. And their mission was to 

strengthen the economic and social well-being of Saskatoon‟s 

five core neighbourhoods. And it was founded in 1995. 

 

CHEP is the children‟s hunger and education program, Good 

Food Inc., which works with communities to reduce child 

hunger and to improve access to good food. It operates a variety 

of food security initiatives including children‟s nutrition 

programs, community gardens, good food boxes, and collective 

kitchens. So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see these are solid 

partners in dealing with issues that are endemic in our core 

neighbourhoods. 

 

The five neighbourhoods that I mentioned for Quint include 

Riversdale, Pleasant Hill, King George, Westmount, and 

Caswell Hill. And they have many things in common, these five 

neighbourhoods. They have caring people. They have character 

homes. They have mature trees. They have a diversity of 

residents of all ages and many cultures. And over the years as 

I‟ve said, the communities have seen a rising number of rental 

accommodations, absentee landlords, aging house stock, and 

many vacant houses. And many more people are moving into 

these core neighbourhoods because of stresses on their income 

and on their sustenance. They have to move into lower cost 

housing and into areas where it is not as easy to get access to 

food, transportation, any social supports, any education, and 

even any jobs. 

 

And it‟s interesting when members of the government 

mentioned that this was on the eve of an election, the Hansard 

from March 19, 2007, when the then member from Indian 

Head-Milestone questioned the Minister of Health about the $8 

million for Station 20, there was many questions and answers in 

Hansard recorded for all to read or look at, that certainly 

defines what the project was and the $8 million, where it was 

and why it was put there. And it was basically held in trust by 

the Regional Health Authority in Saskatoon which was also in 

the paper following the minister‟s unfortunate remarks about it 

being on the eve of the election. 

 

CHEP and Quint are the two lead organizations in the 

co-location partners, and they decided to call the project Station 

West because it blends the location with the history. It is on 

20th street, and it is of course in the west side of Saskatoon. 

And it‟s referred to as a community enterprise centre. And it 

has more than . . . It has the housing now. We‟ve all talked 

about the housing complex that is already up, that has been 

announced and is, I think, 55 units. Those are up on one side. 

 

The library is going in. So we talk about access to education, 

literacy programs; they‟re going to come in there. Read 

Saskatchewan wants to go in there. We also have many things 

that are talking about like a market, so there‟s a green space for 

people to gather. And people have that community spirit if they 

have a place to gather. 

 

Also one of the things that is really key to this is that this is 

definitely going to be access to food. And it started off, I think, 

in response to the fact that many people were starting to call the 

core neighbourhood in Saskatoon — those five neighbourhoods 

— a food desert. And the west side core neighbourhood‟s 

access to grocery retail establishments is not very good, and it 

has diminished greatly since the mid ‟80s. 

 

So right now, since then actually, six major grocery retailers 

have moved out of that area and closed on the west side, 

including three within the core neighbourhoods. So inner-city 

residents don‟t have access to a major grocery store within their 

neighbourhood. They‟re living in what has become known as a 

food desert, an area with limited access to healthy and 

affordable food. 

 

And the Quint Development people, they are talking about the 

synergy generated by co-operation among different 

organizations improves, improves the services and it also builds 

community. They‟re sharing spaces. It does have a flavour of a 

mall because it is a one-stop shopping. You have housing, 

affordable housing. You have library, a library access, so 

people can actually read books, can start reading to their 

children, can access literacy programs that can be developed 

and delivered through the library. We also have the food, the 

good food thing, and it started off as access to food but it has 

gone far beyond that because now there is a major health 

component coming into that. 

 

Station 20 West, it does have the sharing of programs and 

services and it does have a social enterprise model as a 

non-profit, the non-profit or associations that are partners, but it 

also has the College of Dentistry, the College of Medicine, and 

SWITCH, which is the student wellness initiative towards 

community health. This is something that we have never seen. 

The students in programs like medicine, nursing, pharmacy, 

dietary joined together and actually they organized themselves 

to deliver off-hours services through the Westside community 

clinic in Saskatoon and they also have partnered with their 

deans and in their colleges so the work that they do at SWITCH 

is part of their learning experience. 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

This was started in 2006, I believe, and is an integral part of the 

health services delivered on 20th Street in Saskatoon. The 

Westside community clinic, which is bursting at its seams in the 

building that they own on 20th Street, was going to be a 

co-locator as well. They would have more space. SWITCH 

would be able to offer more services and everybody was going 

to be, everybody was going to look forward to actually adding 

dentistry to the services that were going to be needed, that were 

going to be delivered. 

 

Getting back to the food issue, Mr. Speaker, many residents in 

the area don‟t own a car so when they talk about going for 

groceries and the bus is your only means of transportation or a 

cab . . . And if you have to take a cab, then you‟re using money 

that you could use for other things, including better food. But 

can you . . . I can only imagine — having raised two children 

and gone for groceries — how I would get those children in 

their strollers, on a bus, with my groceries. I don‟t think that 

that‟s really a realistic expectation of young mothers and young 

families. 

 

We also talked about the health disparity study that was done in 

the core neighbourhoods in the Saskatoon Health District. There 

was some alarming statistics about how the health disparity or 

how health is impacted by where you live and what you have 

access to. Many of the things that we saw were clearly, clearly 

impacted by where they live and what they eat and what their 

education is and what access to services they have. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Hospitalization for diabetes was three times higher in 

low-income neighbourhoods than the rest of the city, and nearly 

13 times higher than our eastern suburbs. Only 46 per cent of 

inner-city children are up to date on their immunizations, and 

this was another piece of the puzzle that was going to be 

strengthened in Station 20. Babies born in Saskatoon‟s 

lower-income neighbourhoods are five times more likely to die 

than an average city baby. 

 

These aren‟t things we can make light of, that we can dismiss 

by saying that this just about a grocery store or it‟s merely a 

mall. These are significant issues to people that live there. And 

the people that live there have developed over five years a plan 

to address their needs. The 2,000 people that were walking last 

Saturday were talking as they walked. I walked with them, and 

they were talking about the hope that this project has given to 

these neighbourhoods and to these people. And this hope . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just a little too much debate when one 

person‟s been recognized. I would ask you to give the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview the opportunity to present her 

remarks. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟re used to, in this 

House, having comments yelled back and forth and I try to 

ignore them because usually they‟re not that useful. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members realize they‟re not to 

comment on Speaker‟s orders. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I apologize. I do also want to talk about that 

there‟s four times as many people — I‟m going back into the 

disparities in the neighbourhoods — not only . . . There‟s 15 

times higher suicide rates. These are issues in these core 

neighbourhoods that can‟t wait for another study. This has been 

started in 2003, and has resulted in this project developed by the 

people that live there and the people that deliver services there, 

and this has got a major amount of support from around the city 

and even the province. 

 

This is something that can‟t wait. When you talk about babies 

dying, when you talk about suicides — these are the end of life. 

We don‟t get these back because we waited to develop another 

program that fit more with our political ideology or because 

we‟ve been so mean-spirited as to think we‟ll punish this 

neighbourhood for electing an NDP member. This is way past 

that, when people are dying and when people have no access to 

the services that you and I take for granted. This is way past 

that, and we should be able to move past that with revenues, as 

I‟ve heard, that are astounding and stunning and into the 

superlatives that we can‟t even think of. We‟ve got those 

revenues. Eight million dollars is what this project needs — $8 

million. Eight million dollars will buy a lot of good for this 

neighbourhood. It will save a lot of lives, and it‟ll change a lot 

of lives. 

 

The income disparity in these neighbourhoods is equally 

astounding. When the average household income in an east-side 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon is over 133,000, an average 

household income in Pleasant Hill, which is one of the five core 

neighbourhoods, is 22,000. That‟s a significant change in 

income. These people cannot wait. They can‟t wait for someone 

to decide how else to deliver a program so it fits better with 

their political ideology. 

 

These solutions are there already, developed by the community 

and ready to be delivered. The tenders were going to go out this 

month. This project has moved along significantly with all the 

partners and the pieces have come into place. The city is there. 

Many of the partners are there already, ready to get this project 

going with a tender. There‟s many, many single parents living 

in this area that need our help. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think after hearing three ministerial 

statements that talk about how much money we have, our 

commitment to literacy, and our commitment not to have 

anyone left behind, $8 million is not a lot of money to give this 

neighbourhood so they can too be included in our prosperity 

and growth. So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 

from Massey Place: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to restore 

funding to the Station 20 project in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member from Saskatoon Eastview: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to restore 

funding to the Station 20 project in Saskatoon. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to give notice that following my comments I will be 

moving an amendment, Mr. Speaker. And the content of the 

amendment that I will be moving is this: 

 

That all of the words after “That” be removed and the 

following be substituted: 

 

this government is committed to improving the social and 

health service delivered to persons in our inner cities and 

communities and to address the social problems that were 

not addressed under the previous government. 

 

This is the amendment that I will move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I have talked about social 

conscience previously in this House, and I‟ve talked about 

behaviour and what that means in relation to words that 

describe behaviour like having a social conscience. 

 

I know that I‟m a rookie. However I just, I can‟t believe the 

sanctimonious, better-than-thou attitude of the members 

opposite. Today the members opposite are using poverty as the 

catchword and that . . . You know, do they really care about 

poverty or are they using the poor as a means to their end? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spent 18 years working in and around the inner 

city of Saskatoon. I have seen the suicides. I‟ve seen the 

domestic violence deaths. I‟ve seen the overdoses. I‟ve seen the 

prostitution. And I didn‟t see, you know, for the last 16 years, a 

lot of solutions. And the member from Riversdale, you know, 

he had all the time and power to make positive change and 

failed to do so. And I‟m just wondering if he is or was — I 

guess he still is — incompetent or mean-spirited, you know. 

 

So let‟s, let‟s look at that disparity study, and let‟s talk about 

what was done by the former government after the study to 

address the disparities. And, you know, we‟ll talk about 

sexually transmitted diseases. People in the inner city or in the 

group that was studied are 300 per cent times higher to get 

chlamydia than the wealthier neighbourhoods. They are 700, 

the inner city is 700 per cent times higher for gonorrhea. 

 

So one would think that the former minister of Health would 

have made sure to do something — and the something would 

be, supply condoms in a harm reduction program to the people 

in the inner city. Egadz works very closely with the inner city 

and the people in the sex trade, and they give away condoms as 

a harm reduction program to reduce the incidence of sexually 

transmitted disease. 

 

Now the former government and the former Health minister 

failed to give monies and supply Egadz with condoms. Egadz 

had to go to Alberta, to the Muttart Foundation to get funding to 

give condoms away in the inner city. Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

just wondering if that former Health minister is incompetent or 

just mean-spirited. 

 

So you know, there are many examples of what the 

government, the former government, the members opposite 

failed to do in the inner city. In 2001 Saskatoon was excited and 

had all the parties involved in the issue of children not in 

school, which crosses into substance abuse, domestic violence, 

sexual exploitation. I read the statistics off in my response to 

the budget. 

 

Now in 2001 we needed a tracking system. We needed to know 

where these children were and how big of the problem really is 

it because we didn‟t have a central tracking system. The then 

minister of Education under the former premier, the minister of 

Education was I believe at the time the member from Nutana. 

Now in 2001 her ministry said, yes we will build you a tracking 

system; it‟ll be done in a year. It wasn‟t done in 2002, ‟03, ‟04, 

or ‟05, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m just wondering if that member, if 

that member from Nutana was incompetent or just 

mean-spirited, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Around that time also, Mr. Speaker, looking at studies in the 

inner city, it was a former MLA, Arlene Julé, that pushed the 

former government into looking at children in the sex trade, 

children that are exploited in the sex trade. And yes, Mr. 

Speaker, I have seen those children as young as nine selling 

their bodies in the inner city. The premier at the time was the 

member from Riversdale. It was occurring in his backyard, 

under his watch. He had the power to do something, Mr. 

Speaker, and he failed to. He chose not to. Now is that 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker, incompetent or just mean-spirited? 

 

Now the former MLA, Arlene Julé, and the Sask Party pushed 

the former government into striking a committee to look at the 

sexual exploitation of children issue. And that committee was 

struck and travelled throughout the province and made 49 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker — 49. Now since then . . . Peter 

Prebble co-chaired the committee with Arlene Julé, and they 

made 49 recommendations. Less than 50 per cent of those 

recommendations were made, Mr. Speaker, under the members 

opposite‟s watch. Again I ask, you know, is that incompetence 

or are they just mean-spirited? 

 

One of these recommendations was: 

 

The Committee recommends that the Attorney General 

create an integrated 5-member special police unit, 

reporting directly to the Attorney General to work with 

police departments to use the full weight of existing and 

proposed laws to stop the sexual exploitation of children. 

 

The Committee recommends the establishment of a joint 

RCMP-City Police . . . in Regina, Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert to investigate and lay charges against johns and 

pimps. The unit would report [directly] to the Attorney 

General, or his/her designate, on a quarterly basis. The 

unit should be set up similar to the precedent setting 

Integrated Drug Units in Saskatoon and Regina. The 

Province should provide targeted funding toward positions 

. . . [and to attack the johns and pimps]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that wasn‟t done, Mr. Speaker. And, you 

know, it‟s pretty clear how to do it. The recommendation‟s 

there. It‟s all laid out. But they chose, Mr. Speaker, not to do it. 

The former government, the people pointing their finger across 

the way at this government — has the audacity to do so — and 

they failed to act. So are they, are they incompetent, Mr. 

Speaker, or are they just mean-spirited? 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the amendment 

which I read out earlier, and that is that I move: 

 

That all of the words after “That” be removed and the 

following be substituted: 

 

this government is committed to improving the social and 

health services delivered to persons in our inner cities and 

communities and to address the social problems that were 

not addressed under the previous provincial government. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland has moved an amendment: 

 

That all the words after “That” be removed and the 

following be substituted: 

 

this government is committed to improving the social and 

health services delivered to persons in our inner cities and 

communities and to address the social problems that were 

not addressed under the previous provincial government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Debate will continue on 

the amendment and the main motion. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of 

Health for his concern. Mr. Speaker, the last speaker ended, or 

almost ended, on a discussion of a proposal that there be a 

special unit of police attacking a social problem, a criminal 

justice problem in large part, Mr. Speaker, and reporting 

directly to the Attorney General, and wanted to know where this 

was, and suggested that if such a thing was created, or not 

created, Mr. Speaker, not created, that would be proof of 

incompetence and mean-spiritedness. 

 

So I wonder where the government member can point to this 

program in her government‟s budget. I wonder when the 

Minister of Justice is going to announce, coming out of this 

budget — the first budget of the Saskatchewan Party 

government — I wonder when the Minister of Justice is going 

to announce his program that the person who sits almost 

immediately behind him just said would be an act of 

incompetence and mean-spiritedness not to bring about. 

 

I wonder when the member who just spoke is going to realize 

that she just attacked her own government for not implementing 

a program that now they have the power to implement and now 

they have the resources to implement and did not address in the 

budget that she voted for, Mr. Speaker. I wonder when all these 

things are going to happen. 

 

I expect, given the pace of realization, how long it takes things 

to dawn upon the members opposite, it might take a little while, 

Mr. Speaker. It might take a little while. It might take some 

time. But it was a very interesting ending to the member‟s 

comments. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about the genesis of 

Station 20. It was a few years ago when members of the 

community in Saskatoon concerned about the different health 

. . . [inaudible] . . and other disparities in the inner city of 

Saskatoon approached members of the Saskatoon caucus about 

this concept of bringing together decent housing, health care, 

and access to good nutritious food into one place in the inner 

city, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these were a group of individuals. They weren‟t policy 

makers within government. They weren‟t public employees. 

They weren‟t civil servants. They weren‟t politicians, and they 

didn‟t understand necessarily how government works. I think 

they had a better understanding, Mr. Speaker, how government 

works than many ministers of the Crown do today that sit in this 

Assembly and answer questions about how their government is 

working — think they had a better understanding than that. But 

they didn‟t have that sophisticated an understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, as government members of the day may very well 

have had. 

 

And they came to the Saskatoon caucus first, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, to talk about how this might be done. And in fairness 

to them, the project is a little unique. The project would be 

unique maybe in Canada, perhaps not in Europe where there are 

projects on which this is modelled, perhaps not in the United 

States where there are projects like this on which this project 

was modelled, but unique in Canada, bringing together not just 

formally considered health care services, Mr. Speaker, not just 

doctors, not just dentists, but other aspects of wellness around 

literacy, around good housing, around good food, Mr. Speaker, 

and so a little different than what government had been used to 

doing in the past, Mr. Speaker. And certainly not the charity 

model, which I do not criticize, Mr. Speaker, but the 

government members who‟d proposed that as an alternative, 

and it‟s not an alternative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don‟t have to make that choice, Mr. Speaker. We don‟t have 

to make that choice. We can have a community economic 

development model like Station 20 West, and we can have the 

other measures the government wants to brag about and boast 

about. And perhaps they should brag about them, and perhaps 

they should boast about them, and I would commend the 

government for doing those. But we never had to make that 

choice. 

 

And so when members of the community came to the 

Saskatoon caucus and said, we want to do this, I think one of 

the difficulties that I certainly had, Mr. Speaker — and it‟s sort 

of reflected I think in some of the comments that come from 

across the way from the government — some of the problems I 

had, Mr. Speaker, is that it would be a very, very different thing 

for a government to operate or even fund a grocery store, and 

that was a little difficult. 

 

There‟s no doubt, there is no doubt that given the people‟s 

circumstances who live in the area where Station 20 West 

would be built, people who have little access to reliable private 

transportation and who have now for years lived the furthest 

away from a grocery store that provides fresh fruits and fresh 

vegetables and good nutritious food, there‟s no doubt that 

there‟s no neighbourhood in Saskatoon that needs a grocery 

store more than this neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. And for it to 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

be held up as a criticism of the project, Mr. Speaker, is a little 

strange, Mr. Speaker. a little strange. But the win-win solution 

is, Mr. Speaker, that this is an economic development project, 

an economic development project, Mr. Speaker, which needs 

revenue because $8 million was capital, Mr. Speaker, and it 

wasn‟t all the capital. It‟s some of the capital. 

 

A project that needs revenue was being built, Mr. Speaker, was 

being built in a neighbourhood which needs a grocery store. 

And so an actual tenant would be a grocery store co-op, Mr. 

Speaker. And so that since the government would be financing 

the community economic development project, financing the 

area in which a community clinic could be housed, dental chairs 

could be housed, other health services could be housed and they 

would be looking to the services — the types of services that 

provide good food, whether it‟s a café or a grocery co-op as 

tenants — that there was really no dramatic, radical change for 

what the government was going to be asked to be funded here. I 

least I was convinced of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then after these community groups had this vision, Mr. 

Speaker, others joined in. And one of the groups that certainly 

joined in was the student wellness initiative toward community 

health, Mr. Speaker, which acts out of the Westside community 

clinic, which does not — I don‟t think anybody would believe 

that it does; nobody would say that it does — does not have 

room in its current space for the services it provides to people 

of the inner city including the students of SWITCH, who on 

their own initiative created this initiative and who help provide 

wellness and medical services to the people of the inner city of 

Saskatoon. And who are . . . were looking forward to, Mr. 

Speaker, were looking forward so eagerly towards the 

construction of Station 20 West. 

 

The others that joined in, Mr. Speaker, were leaders in the 

university community and specifically the deans of medicine 

and of dentistry, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell this Assembly, this 

group that the tipping point for Station 20 West was when a 

number of individuals involved, including the dean of dentistry, 

met with me when I was in cabinet, in government and then 

minister of Finance, and the dean of dentistry spoke in favour of 

this project — the Station 20 West project — as enabling him to 

put dentistry chairs where they were most needed, where 

dentistry services were least accessed, and that is in the inner 

city at Station 20 West — Station 20 West, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we had the group from the community . . . You know, 

Mr. Speaker, if the member from Swift Current, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, wants to join in the debate, I‟d be happy to listen 

to him when he‟s on his feet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had together, we had together, we had together the members 

of the community who wanted to bring these services, these 

necessary services in inner city. We had the idealism of the 

students, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve the idealism of the students and 

we had the commitment of leading academics in health care in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Because the university is not just teaching, it is not just 

research. It is community service. And those two deans of those 

two health colleges saw an opportunity, an opportunity working 

together with others in Station 20 West. And that‟s what tipped 

the balance and that‟s what caused the provincial government of 

the day — in a budget that pre-dates the election by a year, Mr. 

Speaker — to put aside $8 million. Not enough for the funding 

of the entire project, but to put aside $8 million for Station 20 

West. 

 

And what has happened, Mr. Speaker? We have a government 

that can‟t manage its current affairs, is incompetent to do so, 

has had to change the budget in respect to social services 

because the minister can‟t manage it. But can manage to reach 

back in a petty, vindictive way to money set aside in a previous 

budget — a small amount of money in comparison to what the 

budget was, Mr. Speaker — and grab that $8 million away. And 

people wonder what was the wolf in sheep‟s clothing campaign 

about, Mr. Speaker? It was about this. 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to speak today 

on this motion and this counter-motion. I‟d like to speak 

specifically on the NDP record which is really what prompted 

me to run as an MLA in the first place. And I‟d like to quote 

from a number of sources the report card on child poverty in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In Canada, the incidence of child poverty is 17.7 per cent. In 

Saskatchewan, it‟s 20 per cent. We have one in five children 

living in poverty in this province, and it is during the period of 

time that the NDP were in power. Fifty-seven per cent of 

Saskatchewan children who live in female, low parent families 

are poor. 

 

When we begin to take a look at the issue of poverty within our 

province, we must always be reminded that in the last 16 years 

it was under the NDP‟s policies and their lack of social 

conscience, their lack of social programs that influenced and the 

reality of that. You know, they made a promise at one time that 

somehow they were going to eliminate food banks, but the food 

bank use has gone up and they never funded it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, I got to tell you that under the NDP, 

their record in addictions treatment, which is particularly 

concerning to me, is they talked a lot about it but they 

accomplished very little. In August 2005 with much fanfare, the 

premier announced, the then premier announced Project Hope. I 

wasn‟t invited to that announcement but I was there and I 

listened to it. It was a managed, stage-managed photo op, with 

all of the government‟s bureaucrats running around with these 

lapel pins, Uniting to Heal, but they forgot one thing. They 

forgot to invite the grassroots organization that was kicking it 

all off, which was Families Against Meth — the families that 

had lost children in this province to crystal meth. 

 

One commentator at the time said that that was quite telling and 

what he went on to say was the challenge now is for Project 

Hope to live up to its grandiose title. It did not live up to it. 

Saskatchewan still has the highest rate of substance abuse than 

any other province. This information comes from no less than 

the authority, the Centre of Addictions and Mental Health. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say, as I know, having 

been the director of Teen Challenge Saskatchewan, that they did 

not in fact create one bed. With that three and a half million 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

dollars that they spent, they created not one bed. They created a 

research chair for $750,000 at the University of Saskatchewan 

to research what any 15-year-old could have gone on the 

website and researched and what every specialist in this country 

was talking about. Of course they were the workers, this was 

the government, the NDP government, who said there was no 

crystal meth epidemic. They said there was nothing. The 

minister of Education at that time said there was no crystal meth 

epidemic in this province while we had children dying. 

 

In fact I‟d like to quote a number of things. When the Health 

minister some years ago, who later became the premier under 

the NDP government . . . they closed Whitespruce, a 45-bed 

treatment facility for youth. Under that premier and that party, 

Saskatchewan ended up with the highest rate of alcohol and 

drug use in Canada. The premier then disbanded the 

Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission when he 

was the associate Health minister in 1993. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And only after the Saskatchewan Party continually raised the 

issue of increasing crystal meth abuse did the NDP reluctantly 

announce Project Hope. And of course that was done under a 

past member of the legislation whose daughter had got involved 

with crystal meth addiction, who decided to campaign against 

the mean-spirited and the blindsided views of the NDP 

government at the time that brought it to the forefront. 

 

The constant cuts and reductions in treatment facilities have 

adversely affected many lives in Saskatchewan. People who 

wanted to receive help couldn‟t receive it. Instead of taking a 

proactive approach to the growing addiction problem, the NDP 

were in denial. I had the Health minister at the time telling me 

in writing there was no crystal meth epidemic. We didn‟t need 

more addiction beds. I had the premier telling me the same 

thing as I was the director of Teen Challenge. When the 

Saskatchewan Party raised concerns about crystal meth 

addiction, the minister of Learning at the time said it‟s not 

specifically an issue with crystal meth. And that was stated in 

2004. And yet the centre of addictions says we have the highest 

rate. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I listen to the rhetoric on the other side 

by the NDP who say that they are the party who cares; they‟re 

the socialist party. Well if they were the socialist party, I don‟t 

know why we rank in the number one social problems across 

Canada in child poverty, in addictions, in child prostitution, in 

youth gang recruitment. This is under their watch. We‟ve only 

been government for five months. Under their watch, we rose to 

be number one in the nation. And in some categories like child 

incarceration rates, we‟re number one in North America. 

 

You know, they talked a lot about helping the poor and helping 

those with addictions. But the reality and the fact of the matter 

is that their record is the worst in Canada. People in 

Saskatchewan are tired of looking back, and that‟s why they 

elected a new government. We provided $16 million for 

addiction services. Not a Project Hope but real money. Not 

rhetoric or lapel pins but real money. An additional 100 

long-term addiction treatment beds will be funded by that 

money. They will be operated by community-based and First 

Nations organizations and — dare I say? — faith-based 

organizations where that prior government seemed to be so 

discriminatory against. We will establish an independent 

provincial addictions agency again for what? We will talk the 

talk and walk the walk as opposed to the NDP who are really 

good in talking the talk but only did that. We have 

organizations in the core at Saskatoon that have been neglected 

for funding under that previous government. 

 

The Girls Action Information Network under the Communities 

for Children who are the only organization and charity of 

non-profit organization working in Saskatoon for exploited 

children in prostitution, who are about ready to close their doors 

because they underfunded them . . . They wouldn‟t give them 

any funding, period. Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op group 

that is working with young men, giving them education, 

allowing them to learn a trade in the woodworking and furniture 

industry, self-supporting themselves, and the only funding that 

previous government gave them was a paltry $40,000. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got to tell you that the NDP in 

1991 made a promise to eliminate the need of food banks in 

Saskatchewan. But you know they‟ve got 16 years to complete 

the promise under their government, and they didn‟t do it. In 

fact there was a 95 per cent increase in the number of people 

using the food banks in Saskatchewan. By the hunger count 

2006, there was a 95 per cent increase. There was a number of 

children using food banks in Saskatchewan under the previous 

government rose by 84 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP failed to act on this problem and instead 

had more people relying on food bank when they were the 

government. The premier of that government said, “We in this 

government dream of a province where at the turn of the 21st 

century, like the soup kitchens of the 1930s, the food banks of 

the 1980s and 90s will be a thing of the past.” They blew it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment put out by my fellow 

MLA that it‟s time to end the rhetoric and the talk. It is time to 

stop playing politics with peoples‟ lives, with the highest 

suicide rate in the country, and to put our money where our 

mouth is which is why we‟re directing this massive amount of 

funding to go into the inner city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to join 

this debate, Mr. Speaker, on the idea to carry on with the good 

work that has begun around Station 20. I believe Station 20 is 

something that is an important discussion for us to have here in 

this legislature because it‟s something that is so important to the 

people of Saskatoon but not only the people of Saskatoon, the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to organize my comments around three things that I 

think we know about Station 20 West, and this is after the 

presentations that I‟ve heard from my caucus colleagues from 

Saskatoon Eastview and Saskatoon Meewasin as well the 

contact I‟ve had with constituents and people of Saskatoon out 

in the community. 

 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

The first idea is that we know Station 20 is the right thing to do. 

The second idea is that we know axing Station 20 was the 

wrong decision, and the third thing we know is that it‟s what 

Saskatoon and the province want, the people of Saskatoon and 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the member from Saskatoon Eastview remarked Station 20 

is indeed a unique approach, and it‟s an innovative approach. 

And the important thing to remember about Station 20 West is 

that the genesis of the project really did come from the 

community. And that‟s an important point to remember, that it 

was the people that are involved in the community, the people 

that are facing the challenges, the people that are working for 

improvement, the notion of how to do this came out of their 

work. 

 

We also know it‟s the right thing to do because we see 

examples of how organizing clusters of activity in one area, 

how that‟s able to bear a lot of fruit and have a lot of success. 

One example I like to highlight is for the research sector, Mr. 

Speaker. At the university we have Innovation Place. 

Innovation Place is one spot where people working for a 

common goal, while maintaining their own interests, are able to 

gain from each other. And there‟s a synergy that‟s created when 

services or activities are located in one area, not unlike the 

Station 20 West model. 

 

We also know that Station 20 West is the right thing to do 

because the work around Station 20 West is already underway. 

As members have identified this morning, the housing portion 

of the project is near completion as well as the plans for the 

library are underway. So there‟s already a good amount of 

activity, a good amount of investment occurring in this one 

spot, and it‟s only fitting that we carry on and maintain that 

momentum, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another reason we know it‟s the right thing to do is that the 

money was already set aside for this project, Mr. Speaker, and it 

wasn‟t set aside from this year‟s budget. It was actually from 

the previous budget, Mr. Speaker, last year‟s budget. The 

money had been sitting in trust. It was earmarked for this 

activity. People were planning. Things were underway. So 

that‟s another reason why we know it‟s the right thing to do. 

 

I‟d like to move on to my second idea that I‟d like to discuss, 

where we know that axing Station 20 West was the wrong 

decision. And we can tell, Mr. Speaker, that it‟s the wrong 

decision because the way in which the decision was 

communicated to the people involved in Station 20 West and to 

the wider public. Station 20 West, the organizing group, 

receiving a notice at the end of the week and then the news sort 

of trickled out through the community. And there was an event 

the following week where the community was able to come 

together and discuss what to do. 

 

But the interesting bit is how the different messaging by 

government, by ministers, and the Premier was sent out to the 

public. It reminded me of a story. In some of my summers I‟ve 

worked as a cabin leader at a camp in northern Saskatchewan. 

And it‟s always a good learning experience to hang out with 

youth. I don‟t have children of my own, so interacting with 

youth you learn a few things. 

 

And there was one incident one summer where a group of 

students, or a group of campers, were up to a bit of mischief, 

Mr. Speaker. There was a flooding that had gone on in the 

bathroom, and there was quite a bit of water all over the place. 

It was a huge mess to clean up. We got to the bottom of what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, by interviewing and talking to the 

individuals that were involved. 

 

So we took the three boys and talked to them in separate 

corners. The one boy said, oh well actually the toilet paper just 

fell off of the shelf, and it was just a mistake. We didn‟t know 

what happened. The next boy said, oh well I don‟t know what 

you‟re talking about. It‟s ridiculous. I don‟t know what you‟re 

talking about. I wasn‟t part of any of it. I have no idea what 

went on. The third boy said, oh I was bored. Don‟t know. I just 

was up to no good. I was bored. 

 

In the three different messages, none of them held any water, 

Mr. Speaker. It was in seeing the three messages that did not 

agree with one another, three messages that were not consistent 

with each other, with the stories, it was clear that the boys were 

just up to mischief. It was clear that there was a deeper motive 

behind what they were wanting to do, and that was just to cause 

some trouble in this incident. They‟re fine boys and they were 

good campers, but hopefully they learned from that experience. 

 

In the same way following the Station 20 announcement, we 

saw an ad hoc response, a response that was made on the fly. 

We had the Finance minister saying one thing. Oh well the 

fundraising hasn‟t occurred at the level it should, and we‟ve got 

a problem there. We had the Health minister saying another 

thing altogether, saying oh well it‟s actually about priorities and 

what we want to do. And it‟s about fire alarms, and it‟s not 

about building this project. And then we had yet another story, 

Mr. Speaker, from the Premier himself who said, well actually 

at the end of the day it‟s more of a mall issue, and we‟re not 

into malls — even though I believe that‟s a horrible case of 

misinformation and a misconception about the project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I‟ll move on to my last point, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve identified 

how Station 20 West is the right thing to do. We‟ve identified 

how we know that axing Station 20 West was the wrong 

decision. And now we‟ll discuss a bit about why the people of 

Saskatoon, the people of this province want Station 20 West. 

 

I had the great opportunity to be part of the march that occurred 

a few Saturdays ago — was that just last Saturday? — just last 

Saturday. And I myself haven‟t been part of a march with that 

much, that much momentum and energy and people around it. 

 

The interesting thing about that march, Mr. Speaker — I 

honestly could not see everyone because there were over 2,000 

people there — but the people that I saw from my time door 

knocking and from my involvement in the community, they 

represented a huge cross-section of the political spectrum as 

well as the social spectrum. There were people that I know 

voted Liberal there. There were people that I know voted Green 

there. There were people that I know voted NDP. And I saw 

people who I know voted Sask Party at that event. And I think 

that‟s an important point. 

 

I also saw a huge spectrum of the types of people involved. 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

There were health professionals. There were students from the 

U of S. There were residents of core neighbourhoods. There 

were residents of the suburbs. There were unions involved. 

There were business people involved. It was a broad 

cross-section. 

 

And we can see how much wide appeal there is for this just by 

some of the editorials we have seen in the The StarPhoenix. 

From April 3, a column that‟s read, “Let‟s get real.” And I 

quote: 

 

Calvert didn‟t need Station 20 West to win Riversdale, 

and Wilkinson isn‟t getting rich off this project. This is 

simply a good project whose genesis was in the inner-city 

Saskatoon community. 

 

An important point to remember, made by the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix. 

 

I‟ve also had, Mr. Speaker, very interesting conversations with 

people in the community. I was at one function in Saskatoon. It 

was a supper, and I met a young woman there who is a student 

at the U of S. And she‟s a student of one of the health 

professions that are taught at the U of S. I didn‟t bring up 

Station 20 West at the table because I didn‟t think it was 

appropriate. 

 

She brought it up to me. And she said, do you know what? In 

the last election, I‟m a resident or a constituent of Saskatoon 

Southeast, and I did not vote NDP. I voted for the Sask Party, 

but I am so outraged at this decision. I just know this is the right 

decision. It‟s the thing that should be occurring. And I‟m really 

dismayed and disappointed at this decision. And I encouraged 

her to go talk to the Premier at the event, and I think she did 

that, but I don‟t know the outcome of their conversation. 

 

Another incident that I‟d like to bring to your attention, Mr. 

Speaker, was a few nights ago I had the opportunity to attend 

the Whelan Lecture supper. The Whelan Lecture is an annual 

lecture that‟s provided at the U of S, and there was an end of 

event supper. At the same event, I had people coming up to me 

from the university community — people from students, staff, 

faculty — coming to me and expressing their outrage at this 

decision, Mr. Speaker. I do wish the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour was here for the discussion 

because I know he‟s had so much . . . I apologize for that 

remark. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I know this Minister from Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour would have some things to say about the role of the 

university in this project because I know he has spent a lot of 

time dealing with those people. And I know that he knows that 

their concerns about the project and how desperately they want 

to see this project go forward. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we know this project is the right 

thing to do because it came from the community and it is sound. 

We know that its basis for being axed was due to ideological 

reasons, and we know that the people of this province want the 

project, want Station 20 West to go ahead, Mr. Speaker. So I 

thank you for the time. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following two 

eloquent speeches from our side of the House — both were 

insightful, both were thoughtful — I‟m proud to speak to this 

amendment to the motion. Mr. Speaker, I do find it, in passing, 

strange that this motion was put forward by the opposition 

being that, you know, for 16 years where have they been on this 

issue? Now all of a sudden they‟re trying to take ownership of 

it, Mr. Speaker? I find that more than strange. 

 

Yes, I would find it a misguided attempt to connect with some 

voters. But, Mr. Speaker, an example of their inability to act on 

this issue when in power, the first one that came to mind was 

Oyate. It isn‟t that far in the past, but it‟s a poignant example. 

And what really struck me in that whole issue was that 

government at the time spent, I don‟t know if it was 16,000, 

30,000, to train their minister how to dodge questions about . . . 

Now if they would have just governed and done a decent job in 

the first place, maybe they could have put that amount of 

money, that amount of money into the people, into the program. 

They could have solved the problem instead of training an actor 

to avoid a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another one, Whitespruce. It was mentioned eloquently by my 

colleague over here and, you know, one of the first things they 

do when they get into government is start closing beds. They 

spent 16 years. They stagnate, and then they wonder why the 

problem, why the problem hasn‟t got any better. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if they don‟t know themselves, I can‟t believe they 

couldn‟t hire some experts that would have told them. They talk 

about math often, and I think this is somewhat of a math. You 

subtract that number of beds; you don‟t have them anymore, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former premier, the current Leader of the 

Opposition, he recently was quoted, he was quoted quoting the 

former premier of Alberta. Now that very popular leader, 

populist leader, he used to say, you know, find a parade and 

jump in front of it and lead the parade wherever it‟s going. And 

I find that that‟s what the opposition has done on this very 

issue. They said, hey there seems to be something going on 

here. So they run out. They jump in front of the parade. They 

don‟t have any ownership of it. In fact they‟ve caused most of 

the problems that they are championing. But I think if our left 

wing, radical former premier is taking quotes and advice from 

Alberta‟s former right wing leader, I find that more than passing 

strange as well. Yes I do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other angles that this government 

wasn‟t able to accomplish, and I think that they all tie together, 

Mr. Speaker — you know, their record on the economy and 

their record on the infrastructure, on everything. It wasn‟t that 

they were just poor at social issues and social programming, but 

they spread the wealth around when they were in government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our government is not, is not going to 

follow their lead. Our government in just four months have 

brought out a progressive Throne Speech. We put money 

behind that in our budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

bring to your attention, and through you to the members 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

opposite and the greater province of Saskatchewan, a few of 

those positive initiatives that this government, through our 

leader, through our Finance minister, are standing behind for 

the betterment of people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, $32 million, major upgrades to 

Saskatoon mental health, Oliver Lodge long-term care facility, 

and major renovations to St. Paul‟s. Mr. Speaker, these are 

bread and butter. Why did that government, when they were in 

power, not recognize the needs of these facilities and so many 

more? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, $500,000 to go to school lunch anti-hunger 

programs. Now they voted against it. Now what did they have 

against the young people who may be going hungry at 

lunchtime in school? I think there is study upon study that says 

that if a student isn‟t properly nourished, they won‟t learn. Now 

that opposition voted against that. Mr. Speaker, it‟s more than 

passing strange. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $3 million increase for initiatives with people with 

learning disabilities, difficulties and disadvantages. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that‟s putting our money where our mouth is. 

 

Eight million dollars of new money to combat gang activity. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you live in a community and you‟re not 

safe, I think if you want to access services, if you want to go out 

in your community and build a community, if you think that it‟s 

not safe, there‟s gang activity, it is going to put a serious 

dampening on anything going on that is positive in that 

community. Now we‟re putting $8 million directly into 

anti-gangs. And they voted against it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this budget we put $30 million into police, police officer 

retention. We‟re going to hire 30 more police officers this year 

and put them on the streets, Mr. Speaker. And they voted 

against it. In fact that government made a promise four years 

ago to put more police on the street, and they didn‟t keep it. 

They didn‟t put the police on the street that they had committed 

to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has taken great pride in 

keeping our promises, keeping our word. We‟ve made 60 

promises that we‟ve kept in this short time of government. And 

I‟m very proud to say $30 million for police that, that, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Housing initiatives. Across the province 856 social housing 

units, Mr. Speaker, will be available in 18 months. I would like 

to also bring forward the initiative by our minister . . . Mr. 

Pringle and Mr. Merriman, two former members of this House 

that sat on opposite sides, have got together for the betterment 

of our province. They are going to be directly addressing the 

issue of the cost of housing, and they are going to be addressing 

it in Lloydminster, my riding. I know the need there. I 

appreciate this initiative, and it is what needs to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, before my time expires, share a 

couple experiences I had door knocking to people in my 

community. When I door knocked before the election, you meet 

a lot of people with a lot of issues, but what really sunk into me, 

what really . . . what I thought about at night when I got home 

were those doors that I knocked on where families might not be, 

might not be experiencing life to the fullest nature. 

 

Now some of these families, I can think of a couple that had 

special needs children. And they had a group in Lloydminster, a 

well-organized group, and I thank them for kind of taking me in 

and educating me on services that were available and the holes 

in those services. And they told me that their group was actually 

getting smaller. There was less and less of them all the time. 

Because the Saskatchewan support was so poor, they were 

moving across the border to Alberta. They were willing to sell 

their houses, Mr. Speaker, and buy new houses in a different 

province because the services in Saskatchewan under the NDP 

government were that poor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when the solution to our disadvantaged peoples is to move 

away, that is disgraceful, and I think they need to answer for 

that, Mr. Speaker. This government, this government does not 

share that philosophy, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s an 

embarrassment that that government will have to live with, and 

now they have the gall to stand in front of a parade, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a men‟s shelter in Lloydminster. It just 

opened last month, and it‟s a great facility. It‟s servicing a need 

in our community. The Alberta government generously 

contributed. They saw the need. They asked the NDP 

government of the time, you know, will you help us out, we‟re 

organizing? You know what they heard, Mr. Speaker? The NDP 

government said no, we will not help you out. They didn‟t get a 

thin dime. Not one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟m proud to stand here. This government is doing the 

right thing, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: —Time has expired for the debate part. 

We‟re into the question and comment period. I recognize the 

member from Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

member from Northwest. I have an open letter here to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, in particular to the Premier, from 

the executive director of an inter-church agency. And he says, I 

quote: 

 

My understanding of the Saskatchewan Party is that it is a 

grassroots party which encourages community 

engagement and the promotion of self-sufficiency. [He 

goes on to say that] Supporting Station West fits with the 

Sask Party‟s core values. It would put tools in the hands of 

the poor to help them help themselves. The Saskatchewan 

Party also, [he goes on to say] I think, believes in fairness 

and integrity. A decision to cut funding which has been 

promised and committed on the basis of which so many 

organizations and businesses have expended time and 

resources appears to lack both fairness and integrity. 

 

I ask the member, what is his answer to this minister? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. But you know, quite frankly I really 

think the issue and the question ought to be what the NDP did 

in their record under the past, previous government. The 

premier of that past government during the last 16 years who 

ended it said, “We in this government dream of a province 

where at the turn of the 21st century, like the soup kitchens of 

the 1930s, the food banks of the 1980s and ‟90s will be a thing 

of the past.” 

 

The NDP failed to act on this problem and instead have more 

people relying on food banks while they were in government. 

Saskatchewan has the highest per capita food bank usage in 

Canada “. . . located in the Premier‟s riding. I haven‟t been able 

to get the Premier here for two-and-a-half years . . . I‟ll just say 

it the way it is,” Bob Pringle, executive director Saskatoon food 

bank and former NDP cabinet minister. 

 

I would like to ask that member why this record exists under 

their government? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

is to the member from Saskatoon Eastview. I had the 

opportunity before, but again yesterday, to drive through down 

20th and through the area that we‟re talking about. I have a 

pretty good idea, a very good idea where Station 20 was going 

to be. I was at the community clinic and I‟ve been before. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I really found interesting, I really found 

very interesting is one building that stuck out more than any 

other, was the building that that government put in. They had $8 

million just before the election to put up for Station 20. I ask 

how many dollars did they have to put up for a brand new 

liquor store right in the middle of Riversdale? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we‟ve 

pretty much dispelled the myth that this was a pre-election thing 

since it started in ‟03 and the money was there in the ‟07-08 

budget. So that‟s clearly not the case in this funding. 

 

What is in Riversdale that is a jewel of Riversdale, that came in 

under this government, is the White Buffalo Youth Lodge right 

across from the Westside Clinic, which the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone must have also driven by. This White Buffalo 

Youth Lodge is something that is clearly a benefit to the 

community. It does have primary health care services through 

the district. It has the tribal council involved. It offers life skill 

classes. It addresses the needs of education, getting more kids to 

come into that facility so that they will maybe put back into the 

school system. This is something that is a jewel of the 

Riversdale area and came in under this government. If he drives 

down 20th Street, if he‟s only looking for Liquor Board stores, 

that‟s a comment on his capacity, not ours. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my remarks I 

identified how the university community is truly on board with 

the notion and the concept of Station 20 West and are big 

supporters of it. We know the College of Medicine, the College 

of Dentistry, as well as SWITCH, the student wellness initiative 

toward community health, all were hoping and planning to be 

part of Station 20 West, SWITCH encompassing many different 

faculties and programs. 

 

My question to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: what 

discussions has she had with individuals from the university 

community, whether that be students, staff, or faculty, and 

concerning the cut of this funding, and what has their response 

to her been? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member opposite for the very interesting question. I don‟t think 

he‟s aware of the facts. SWITCH has been around for some 

time now, and they work with the community clinic. They exist 

in and of themselves right now. 

 

I think a much better question, a much better question, Mr. 

Speaker, is what has that government done in the inner city 

when the health disparities report came out in 2005, Mr. 

Speaker? How could they have failed, failed miserably in 

addressing the health disparities study in 2005-2006? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the questions today 

and the discussion today is very interesting. It‟s around Station 

20 and all of us recognize there are needs there. A number of 

years ago I had the opportunity to be on a committee that was 

dealing with the exploitation of children in the sex trade. And I 

think that‟s something that was mentioned here today through 

Project Hope and I know we have some information on that. 

 

But then I think about one of the main recommendations there 

and that was the wraparound program within our committee‟s 

recommendations. And that was shown very well. It was 

working very well in a centre called Whitespruce youth 

addiction centre. That was outside of Yorkton. That was the 

centre that the NDP government closed down. It was a centre 

that had wraparound opportunities to help children who had 

addictions and have their family involved. 

 

So I want to know why this opposition would bring up an issue 

when we know very well we had a shining example of success 

and they closed it down. To the member from Eastview, please 

answer. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview. 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that‟s a really 

nice way to deflect the focus off of Station 20. That is in 

Yorkton. And I understand that the member would like to not 

talk about Station 20 because this is in Saskatoon. But the 

questions today and the motion today is to restore the funding to 

Station 20, which is a needed — needed — facility within the 

communities in the core neighbourhood of Saskatoon. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of Batoche. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is also for the member from Saskatoon Eastview. She 

talked about Station 20 taking the funding. Well where were 

you if you‟re building a liquor store? Where were your 

priorities when you built a liquor store instead of doing your 

project? Your whole project could have been done, so why was 

that liquor store built at that time? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I guess the members in the Sask Party only are 

interested in liquor stores. There‟s many things that have been 

done in the Riversdale area, including the W.P. Bate School, the 

White Buffalo Youth Lodge, the SWITCH program. Many of 

the things that are done there are directed to the health and 

wellness needs of the inner-city neighbourhoods and the core 

neighbourhoods. Those things have been addressed and this 

culmination of Station 20, the planning began in 2003. So these 

things have been building. The community has been building its 

response. This is the community‟s answer to the things that they 

perceive as wrong in their areas and this is their solution, and I 

don‟t think the Sask Party will be welcome in those 

communities imposing their solution. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

previous debates on Station 20, the Premier is recorded in 

Hansard of saying that his government will focus on providing 

investments in food banks. My question is for the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland: can you explain to me why your 

government would rather invest in food banks rather than invest 

in people, giving people the tools to equip themselves to take a 

meaningful place in our economy so they don‟t have to depend 

on food banks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you again, members opposite, for a very interesting question. It 

seems, Mr. Speaker, that the questions are very poorly 

researched in the sense that I don‟t think the members opposite 

know anything about the inner city. They have no idea. And the 

food banks, we‟re working with the food banks and increasing 

funding with the food banks because they‟re doing life skills 

programs, Mr. Speaker. They‟re doing education programs on 

life skills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite, I just don‟t understand . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has drawn to 

conclusion. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Motion No. 2 — Infrastructure and Sustained Growth 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to speak to . . . first to move the motion. I‟ll move it 

right now, second by the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

The motion reads: 

 

That the government be commended for recognizing the 

immediate and future need to invest in the infrastructure 

of the province, neglected under the previous 

administration, and to ensure Saskatchewan sustains its 

growth. 

 

I so move. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to speak to the 

motion . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member eloquently stood on his feet, moved a motion, handed 

the motion forward, Mr. Speaker. The proper process would be 

to read the motion, and then at that point, Mr. Speaker, another 

member should be on his feet. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — On the point of order, the member 

hadn‟t given up the floor. He just hadn‟t sent the paper by Page 

yet, so the member from Biggar can continue on. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like to 

speak to the motion that I will move later on. 

 

The motion clearly, clearly speaks to two fundamental points. 

One is the past, and one is the future. The future, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that in our budget that we recently introduced, over 

$1 billion ready-for-growth initiatives will sustain economic 

momentum by upgrading hospitals and health facilities, schools, 

roads, and highways. And the time to invest is now. The new 

government elected last fall, so far we‟ve kept 60 of our 

promises to the people of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this budget is committed to benefiting everyone in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, contrast that with the record of the former 

NDP government over the last 16 years. And when I‟m finished 

describing and explaining what‟s happened in the last 16 years, 

everyone will understand, if they don‟t already know, why we 

have a huge infrastructure deficit in this province. Look at the 

NDP record on highways and infrastructure. 

 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

First the NDP government had collected $1 billion, or actually 

more than $1 billion in gas tax than it had invested in roads over 

the last decades. The former premier admitted they had no 

long-term highway spending plan. The funding to cities were 

cut in half by the NDP in the 1990s. Revenue sharing is just $2 

million more now than in 1990s, and that was much more than 

the rate of inflation. And as everyone knows, Saskatchewan 

highways voted the worst in the country — specially Highway 

55 — by the CAA [Canadian Automobile Association]. And 

also the NDP increased fees for long-haul trucks due to 

increased damage on highways, but none of it was reinvested in 

highway repair and maintenance. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP converted highways to 

gravel rather than fixing them. Many of the highways were 

rated as poor or worse by their own Highways department. And 

in 2003 the government estimated nearly 11 000 kilometres or 

41 per cent of the highways network was not in good repair. 

 

The NDP, in their 16 years, closed section shops. They 

increased the distance crews had to travel to clear highways, 

risking both workers and the public. The then minister of 

Highways, Mr. Eldon Lautermilch, said the road system isn‟t 

sustainable as recently as in 2006. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP passed a resolution in 2002 not 

to increase the speed limit on divided highways and then 

minister of the day Wartman rejected the idea and the next year 

they flip-flopped and raised the limit. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the Canada-Saskatchewan 

infrastructure program there was over 1,300 applications in 

three years but less than 300 were approved. And, Mr. Speaker, 

even the local media had started calling the highways an 

embarrassment. Mr. Speaker, the infrastructure of this province 

was truly left in really a disgraceful, not only a dangerous and 

embarrassing but a disgraceful shape after 16 years of NDP 

rule. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our new budget that we brought down began the 

process of addressing that. On November 7 the Saskatchewan 

people made a choice. They chose a Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now Saskatchewan has been always blessed with natural 

resources. Our resource-rich yet diversified economy is red-hot 

as we know and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re certainly as a 

government going to take the initiative to take advantage of the 

resources of this province and the abilities of the people and the 

optimism of our citizens to grow this economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget was a budget ready for 

growth — the ready-for-growth initiative — and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we as a province must be ready for growth. As we 

know, we‟re in competition with jurisdictions all around the 

world, not only the next door neighbours in Alberta but all 

around the world. 

 

And as we know, we learned in our first days in office that our 

public infrastructure was worse than expected and the revenues 

are considerably higher. It‟s interesting to know that the NDP 

were hiding a lot of revenue in their estimates. 

 

Simply put, Saskatchewan is ready for growth; our 

infrastructure system is not. Many of our schools, our hospitals, 

and health facilities are in need of repair or to be rebuilt 

entirely. Our roads and highways are crumbling under the 

weight of heavy traffic with heavier loads, and our government 

must make significant investments in the future. And as we 

outlined in our budget, the time for that investment is now. 

 

Our Finance minister brought down a budget, ready-for-growth 

initiative, the largest capital investment in Saskatchewan 

history. Our government is investing $1 billion in infrastructure 

across Saskatchewan. One billion dollars to build and repair 

hospitals, our highways, and our schools ensures Saskatchewan 

is ready for growth. 

 

Nearly $200 million will pay for the key repairs and upgrades to 

our hospitals and health facilities and will help to purchase new 

medical and safety equipment. Over $160 million will focus on 

important upgrades and repairs for schools in rural and urban 

communities and make improvements to our universities and 

training centres. 

 

Over $400 million will help strengthen our roads and highways, 

for they are important to carry the loads that‟s necessary. The 

ready-for-growth initiative also includes capital spending plans 

for municipalities, parks, and other priority areas. It is necessary 

to make this investment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government believes that investment 

is critical to the future direction of this province, and we are 

going to do something about it. As we know, if a government is 

really truly serious about expanding, about growing, 

infrastructure is a fundamental part that must be not only 

maintained but rebuilt after 16 years of decline by the NDP. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is going to do this 

all within a balanced budget. We can‟t afford to ignore 

infrastructure flaws hoping things will get better on their own, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And once again our government believes the time is now. We 

are ready for growth. And as I spoke earlier, our government 

has already kept 60 of our promises, which is, I believe, is just, 

just absolutely amazing considering the former government on 

the other side, they would make many promises and promises 

and break them again and again and again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I‟d like to just speak to some of the infrastructure 

announcements that we‟ve made since the last election. And 

I‟m sure everyone is aware of the MRIF [Municipal Rural 

Infrastructure Fund] funding — and that‟s the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund 

which involves joint funding between the federal and provincial 

and municipal governments — have benefited the communities 

across this province. 

 

I had the great pleasure to attend a number of announcements 

and also a number of communities in my constituency have 

benefited from this program, like Langham. They extended an 

area to serve FirstSask Community Hall, $68,000; Radisson, a 

pool reconstruction for just over $110,000; Wilkie, another 

community in my constituency, a community centre, 

washrooms accessibility, water meters for households to 

promote efficiencies, over $193,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Nipawin Evergreen Centre, energy efficiencies, $250,000, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Melfort, Spruce Haven Park, washroom 

facilities, over $35,000. Tisdale, RECplex Aquatic Centre, 

ceramic tile replacement, solar heating, over $214,000. In my 

home town of Biggar I got a funding from MRIF for a solar 

heating in the local pool, which was greatly appreciated, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The list goes on and on of projects that we are 

funding now in the effort to get caught up to all the lack of 

funding and the infrastructure deficit that‟s taken place across 

this province over the last 16. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only community halls and those types 

of projects, but the infrastructure deficit really showed up with 

the, really, the infrastructure deficit in the hospitals and health 

care facilities around the province. We are working to give 

children the best start in life. The government will increase the 

funding for the expansion plans at the maternal children 

hospital, Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

In health care, contrast what the Saskatchewan Party 

government is doing to what the NDP did over the last 16 years. 

Under the NDP government, the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health 

Region hit crisis mode and was asked to discharge patients to 

free up beds. One of many, many examples under the NDP. 

 

NDP plans for universal drug coverage was called 

unsustainable by their own former Finance minister, Janice 

MacKinnon, which suddenly the members on the other side 

don‟t seem to get along with. But she always told the truth and 

always told it the way it was. And unfortunately they never took 

her advice after the former government came into power. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the then minister of Health always denied 

there was ever a real shortage of nursing in the province. He 

always refused to set targets to retain and attract new nurses. 

And under our Saskatchewan Party government, we have a 

commitment to bring in 800 new nurses over four years, and 

we‟ve already fulfilled most of that commitment by bringing in 

300 new nurses by this year. And I think that‟s outstanding 

because we all know that health care professionals are the root 

of, the fundamental part of the health care system. Nurses is 

really a big part of that and for some reason the former 

government never did recognize that as a problem and never did 

anything to address the shortage of health care professionals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the NDP many hospitals were 

forced to temporary shutdown, even close permanently and that 

is a big problem with our health care system. How many 

communities never knew from day to day, from week to week if 

the hospital or the emergency aspect of the hospital was going 

to be open after 5, or was it going to be open on weekends? And 

again that really created uncertainty and pessimism in many 

communities in the province. 

 

We talk about nurses and attracting nurses and retaining nurses. 

Under the NDP they slashed hundreds of nurse training seats. 

It‟s incredible that the NDP would do such a thing when all 

studies, everyone . . . You don‟t have to ask anybody living in 

the province that there was a problem in health care and we 

needed more nurses — and they were slashing training seats. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we speak of infrastructure, 

most people think of highways and that‟s the big aspect of it. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, our highway system is 

crumbling, and it wasn‟t not only due to increased traffic in the 

province, but neglect by the NDP government. There were 

years that the NDP government did no highway building at all 

in this province. And it finally caught up to us. There‟s truly a 

crisis in our highways system and a little later I‟ll go into what 

the Saskatchewan Party government is going to do about the 

highways situation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we learned in our first days of office that 

the public infrastructure is worse off than we thought, and the 

revenues were stronger than expected. And through the MRIF 

program and other programs which I‟ll mention, we are 

beginning to address this. 

 

In our budget we are committed to highways and getting our 

infrastructure ready for growth in this province. And its 

fundamental theme of our budget is to get ready for the future 

growth of this province and there‟s just no way around it. You 

have to have the infrastructure in place to take advantage of the 

growth that is happening now and in future days and weeks and 

years ahead. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is committed to looking 

further, developing further economic growth. Further economic 

growth in Saskatchewan demands an improvement in our 

transportation system and all the connectors to that system. I 

mean not only the highways, finishing the twinning, upgrading 

highways, but improving the highways and the road network in 

the North, in reserves, or up to reserves. But also obviously it‟s 

very important that we address the infrastructure deficit in 

cities. And we look at bridges and overpasses and all those 

things that bring the whole highway structure together. 

 

In our budget there is $408 million for roads and highways 

across this province. And it‟s a huge part of the largest capital 

investment in the history of this province. A $513 million 

highways infrastructure budget is a 15 per cent increase from 

2007-2008; $513 million is equivalent to 140 per cent of 

on-road fuel tax revenues. There is $5 million in this budget to 

assist rural municipalities affected by truck haul traffic and 

heavy oil production. 

 

And it‟s so fundamental that we keep the infrastructure up in 

the, really the resource-rich parts of the province. As our 

Premier has said many times, there‟s no oil pumpjacks on 

Albert Street or on Idylwyld Drive. They‟re out in the 

resource-rich areas and the rural areas. And that‟s where we 

have to keep our infrastructure up, upgraded, adequate for the 

industry to produce the wealth which in turn produces revenue 

for the Government of Saskatchewan, where the Government of 

Saskatchewan can pass that on into more upgrading, improving 

infrastructure, into health care, into social services, building 

hospitals, schools, and to the benefit of everyone in the 

province. 

 

Two million dollars is earmarked to maintain and repair, 

resurface provincial highways — the largest preservation 

budget in Saskatchewan history. This budget fulfills our 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

promise to use $140 million over two years from the NewGrade 

Upgrader sale for roads and highways. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again compare that, contrast what the 

Saskatchewan Party government is doing now to what the NDP 

government did in the past. Well the question was, what was the 

NDP plan for highways and infrastructure? Well good question. 

Even the then premier didn‟t know. He‟s quoted as saying, 

“How we have been doing things in the past has been, in many 

cases, ad hoc without a long-term plan . . .”  

 

And the now Leader of the Official Opposition, then premier, 

stated the obvious. No one had to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that they didn‟t have a plan. They were surprised 

to be re-elected in 2003 and didn‟t have a plan and didn‟t know 

where to go. But one thing that they didn‟t do, did not plan for 

growth, did not plan for the future of this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party, we have outlined 

our plan for the future now in our first year, in our first budget, 

to improve the infrastructure of this province — not late, to 

make announcements three, three and a half years into the 

mandate and try to win the next election based on promises 

which could have been met earlier. And the NDP government in 

the past did that consistently, made promises, then broke them 

after the election. And it just shows in the infrastructure of this 

province that things started getting rundown. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government in our first budget 

will end the embarrassment that the Saskatchewan roads have 

become in many areas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the KOA Campground — a multinational 

corporation — they actually have in their offices, places to 

avoid in North America, and Saskatchewan is on their list of 

places to avoid. Well I bet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, soon 

Saskatchewan will be off that list and people will be 

encouraged to travel to Saskatchewan, to our many beautiful 

parks and resources in the North, and fishing and hunting and 

our beautiful cities. Because now we will be on the list of places 

that you can actually travel across without wrecking your 

vehicle. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s, you know, 

Saskatchewan became a joke under the NDP, being actually on 

a list of places to avoid. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now we have an optimism in this 

province. Well now the media is talking optimistically about the 

future, businesses are talking optimistically about the future, 

and the people are talking optimistically about the future of this 

province. This is a place to come to to make a living and to live 

and raise children in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

don‟t have to any more worry about our children leaving to 

other parts of the world to find a job and only coming back to 

Saskatchewan to visit their parents and grandparents. Now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they can come and live here. 

 

And in the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people that were my age 

that graduated from high school went to Alberta or went 

elsewhere around the world. In many cases their parents and 

grandparents followed them to Calgary and to Edmonton to 

live, and not only lost the innovation but we lost the tax base 

that comes with that type of migration out of the province. 

 

Now things are reversed. People are coming back to 

Saskatchewan. People I‟ve known that left the province for 20 

and 30 years now are coming back to Saskatchewan. And once 

they see their friends coming back, more are saying, well is 

there opportunity in the province? Yes, they‟re going to come 

back to join their friends and again they‟re coming back to be 

closer to their families or they‟re going to bring their parents 

and grandparents back to Saskatchewan. 

 

And at the end of the day we see it in the price of housing in 

this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s skyrocketing. People 

have well-paid jobs in this province and they‟re buying and 

building homes and condos not only in Saskatoon and Regina, 

but in communities in my constituency — Biggar, Landis, 

Vanscoy, Langham, small communities — and not only in the 

communities but out on the, on the acreages out in the rural 

areas. 

 

There‟s a place actually called Springwater which may only 

have six or eight people living there two years ago. There‟s 

many abandoned buildings and lots and now all those lots have 

been purchased and people are actually building houses and 

moving into places like Springwater, and it‟s incredible. 

 

With that growth of course comes the demand for sewer and 

water. And we look at these small communities — and not only 

the Springwaters of my constituency but the Vanscoys of the 

constituency — that cannot, without the investment in the 

lagoons and the water treatments and water system, they do not 

have the capacity to take in more, more development and open 

up more lots. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s not going to happen overnight. 

It‟s going to be a lot of strains on the system, on the finances, to 

put in enough adequate funding to upgrade our lagoons and 

sewer systems in the smaller communities in this province. 

That‟s a challenge but we are prepared to deal with it over a 

number of years because we need to invest in the small 

communities so that more homes can be built and more people 

can live in the province to take up the jobs, the new jobs, that 

are out there. 

 

As I was saying, municipal funding provides many 

opportunities for municipalities to improve the infrastructure as 

I outlined. Infrastructure improvements are necessary to ensure 

that municipalities in Saskatchewan are able to support 

economic growth. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And it‟s amazing how the economy has changed now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There‟s many people fly into mines in the 

North. They were flying into Fort McMurray and many still are. 

But they don‟t have to live in a large city or even close to where 

their jobs are. They can live in small communities and travel. 

Many people are in the trucking industry. Again they are buying 

up these lots and acreages around the province so that they can 

enjoy the rural aspects of the province and still be able to go to 

work in the areas that they have employment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people have a strong sense 

of community and our government shares that belief. As I had 

mentioned, investment in municipalities ensure that 

communities of all sizes continue to prosper with the growing 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

economy. And our government wants to ensure everyone in 

Saskatchewan benefits from the current economic growth. 

 

And that‟s very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that everyone 

shares in the growth of the province — young and old, people 

in the North, people on First Nations. And we‟re working 

together with everyone in our society to share in the growth of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget provided $300 million over 

four years for five-year, interest-free loans which makes funds 

available for municipalities to take on more infrastructure 

programs. The new Building Canada Fund shows teamwork 

between the federal and provincial government for the benefit 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

There‟s a fundamental point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the past 

the NDP government fought with the federal government. They 

fought over everything. They made a point out of insulting and 

fighting with the federal government of all stripes, quite 

frankly. And at the end of the day we see that that wasn‟t a 

good policy to do that. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government is prepared to work with 

the present federal government and any future federal 

government that is in power because we believe through 

co-operation and dialogue we can benefit Saskatchewan better 

than having a confrontational attitude and only fighting for 

political reasons with the federal counterpart. 

 

I know it‟s sometimes convenient for provinces to pick a fight 

with the federal government. But at the end of the day it‟s not a 

very worthwhile project, while co-operating and working and 

having a dialogue right across all aspects of our shared 

responsibility with the federal government is the best way to 

proceed into the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government provided an initial 25.7 

million for the municipal rural infrastructure program, MRIF, to 

help fund rural infrastructure projects in Saskatchewan. 

 

Also in our budget — this is very important — our government 

committed to a 7 per cent increase in municipal revenue sharing 

that will provide municipalities with sustainability. 

Municipalities will be able to budget their spending because 

they know that they will receive from the provincial 

government. In contrast the NDP funded on an ad hoc basis. 

 

Another important point: there‟s never enough money to go 

around, and even with all the abundance that we have with this 

budget and in this province there‟s still shortfalls because 

there‟s such a backlog. As I said the infrastructure deficit in 

communities . . . I know in my constituency they are going to, 

this money is available to them. It‟s still not enough. They are 

going to have to raise some of their taxes to do these projects. 

 

But these communities also know that in the future there‟s 

going to be sustainable, predictable funding to the local 

communities. And they can count on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Under the NDP they never knew from year to year whether they 

were going to have any increases in funding. And this is very 

clear. We‟re all working together, from the federal government 

to the Saskatchewan Party government and the municipalities, 

working together to address this infrastructure deficit. 

 

As I said, urban and rural people will equally benefit from 

increased infrastructure funding to municipalities. As we know, 

the NDP neglected rural Saskatchewan because that wasn‟t their 

voter base. And it‟s very unfortunate that the former 

government, who sits in opposition now, did that. It created a 

lot of cynicism in the political process and system. And one of 

the fundamental things that our Premier and our government 

has always said, that we‟re going to govern this province as a 

whole. We‟re going to do the best thing for the province as a 

whole. We hope everybody will benefit from the improvements 

in growth in the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former NDP government took a 

confrontational role as I said with the federal government, and it 

was a big problem because so many projects are jointly funded. 

And you know from every level of government, every level of 

government is looking for help from another level of 

government or from the private sector, and it‟s only natural and 

it‟s right to try to address the funding needs by getting money 

from another level to try to reduce or keep the tax rate down. 

 

And that was the terrible thing, that what happened under the 

NDP government is that the fighting with the federal 

government really affected these joint ventures and it hurt the 

province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is so much material that we can talk 

about. I haven‟t even touched on the highways yet — the 

individual projects that we are developing and we are growing 

this province by committing dollars to individual highways. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I talked about the MRIF program, but under 

the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative, we have 

provided $300 million over four years, as I had mentioned, for 

interest-free loans of five years. And again that‟s to address the 

shortages of lots in the province. And through our health 

announcements approve the first leg of construction of an 

all-weather road to Wollaston Lake — 35 kilometres. And these 

projects go on and on. 

 

I think one of the things . . . To hear the comment from media, 

it‟s not the media that‟s cynical but other people. They may be 

cynical about whether the Saskatchewan Party can deliver and 

certainly . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to read a few headlines from 

the important stakeholders in the province. “SARM Pleased 

with Provincial Investment in Infrastructure.” It goes on to say: 

 

“Infrastructure is key to the future growth and 

development of this province . . . we are glad to see this 

government is committed to following through on its 

election promises and make a provincial investment in 

infrastructure.” 

 

Headline: “Chamber Supports „Strategic‟ Investment to 

Promote Future Growth.” 

 

This budget provides for . . . [a million dollar] investment 

in capital which will help ensure Saskatchewan has the 

infrastructure ready to support an increased . . . [motion] 

and enhanced economic activity. 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2008 

. . . “The new capital investments in post-secondary 

education, roads, municipalities and health care as 

outlined in this budget will help the province realize 

sustainable strategic growth, not only in the short term, 

but in the future as well,” . . . [said chamber president 

Steve] McLellan. 

 

Another headline: “CFIB Says Provincial Budget Paves the 

Way to Prosperity.” 

 

“Saskatchewan business owners will be nodding their 

heads when they see their priorities addressed in the 

provincial budget. Measures introduced today will 

maintain and [re]build upon Saskatchewan‟s positive 

economic momentum,”. . . 

 

Said CFIB‟s [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] 

vice-president, Marilyn Braun-Pollon. 

 

Another headline from the Saskatchewan Trucking Association. 

Their president endorses Highways budget. Highways budget 

on the right road. 

 

The Saskatchewan Trucking Association today endorsed 

the Department of Highways and Infrastructure proposed 

budget as a progressive initiative for attacking a 

weakening infrastructure. This is an exciting time for our 

truck transport. “We‟re seeing a government that wants to 

lead change,” said STA President Denis Prud‟homme. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the accolades just keep pouring in, and we 

only need to look at those types of comments to know that we, 

as a government, we are on the right track. 

 

I‟d like to quote from Paul Martin, business commentator: 

 

Last fall when the province‟s two major political parties 

duked it out in the election, the key theme that emerged 

was centred on the way the parties would deal with the 

buoyant economy. 

 

The NDP said it was time to harvest economy. In effect it 

was big enough and that we should take the extra money 

generated by the economic activity to underwrite an 

expensive drug plan. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party on the other hand argued a 

different vision saying that the growth pattern had just 

begun, and it was time to invest in building a bigger 

economy not halt its progress. Well the new government 

got its first chance to put our money where its mouth was 

in yesterday‟s budget. 

 

With the title, Ready for Growth, the Saskatchewan Party 

directed its attention to infrastructure, the foundation for 

economic growth as we build a new platform to continue 

building upon. And the government‟s promise in the last 

election that it will deliver a growth agenda took a giant 

step forward. 

 

By Mr. Paul Martin. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just find some more information 

that I‟d like to put on record about how well our government is 

doing. In our promises that we have kept, 60 promises that 

we‟ve always kept include $400 million for roads and highways 

across the province, $191 million to fix hospitals, health 

facilities, purchase medical equipment, to continue construction 

of new provincial laboratory, 164 million for new K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] school projects and post-secondary 

capital, 139 million for municipal infrastructure, 102 million in 

community facilities; 137 million through the building 

communities program; 98 million for other initiatives. 

 

$27 million for forest fire fleet renewal and fire towers; 6 

million for parks; 65 million for various government-owned 

investments such as completing construction of the Regina 

provincial corrections centre; replacing FleetNet with an 

up-to-date emergency communications system; maintaining 

other government buildings and replacing equipment. That‟s 

just the promises that we made in the government, that we‟ve 

kept on $1 billion ready for growth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the projects just goes on and on that we 

have committed to. Just as an example, $100 million increase 

for school capital will allow major and much needed 

maintenance upgrades to proceed across the system including 

new school projects in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, 

Oxbow, Porcupine Plain, Duck Lake, La Ronge, Maple Creek, 

Balcarres, Humboldt, and upgrades and progress at Norquay, 

Naicam, Yorkton, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Gravelbourg. 

 

17.6 million in base school capital will fund maintenance and 

renovation projects across the province, will enable the ministry 

to work with school divisions on enhanced capital planning 

initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on. One quick point 

before I move the motion. In our budget we have introduced a 

Bill, The Growth and Financial Security Act, and that really 

speaks to the future of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

surpluses will be divided half between debt reduction and future 

investment in infrastructure. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to read the 

motion. The motion reads, second by colleague from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook: 

 

That the government be commended for recognizing 

immediate and future need to invest in the infrastructure 

of the province, neglected under the previous 

administration, and to ensure Saskatchewan sustains its 

growth. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved 

a motion: 

 

That the government be commended for recognizing 

immediate and future need to invest in the infrastructure 

of the province neglected under the previous 

administration and ensure Saskatchewan sustains its 

growth. 



April 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

I recognize the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased in the few seconds that I have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — . . . now 1 o‟clock, that this House 

now stands adjourned. Pursuant to the order of the Assembly, 

this House now stands adjourned until Monday morning at 10 

a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 787 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2008 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 788 

 Annual Meeting of Provincial Fire Chiefs Association 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 788 

 Junior Achievement Awards 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 788 

 Outdoor Hockey League Celebrates 15 Years 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 788 

 Peacock Collegiate Students Win Junior Achievement Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 789 

 Protesting Homophobia and Intolerance 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 789 

 Amendment to Extended Hours Motion 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 789 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 

 Liquor Store Closure 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 791 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 792 

 The Government’s Performance 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 792 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 793 

 Budget Provisions 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 794 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Record Sales for Oil and Gas Exploration Rights 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 795 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 796 

 SaskEnergy Extends Natural Gas Service 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 796 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

 Pan-Canadian Interactive Literacy Forum 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 797 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Station 20 West 

  Junor .................................................................................................................................................................................. 798, 807 

  Schriemer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 801, 808 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 802 

  LeClerc .............................................................................................................................................................................. 803, 808 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 804 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 806 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 808 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 808 



 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Infrastructure and Sustained Growth 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 809 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................... 809 

  Deputy Speaker (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................. 809 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


