




















































Hansard: October 22, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 45A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1323 

 October 22, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 

The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 

of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 

Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of Doyle 

Vermette, as a member for the constituency of Cumberland. I 

hereby table the return of the writ. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 

you, Doyle Vermette, member for the constituency of 

Cumberland, who has taken the oath and signed the roll and 

now claims his right to take a seat. 

 

The Speaker: — Mr. Vermette, as you take your rightful place 

in this Legislative Assembly, I’m sure that your time here will 

be one that serves as a record of honour to yourself and your 

constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 

hon. member take his seat. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I am advised that his Honour is here for 

prorogation. 

 

PROROGATION 

 

[At 10:03 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. His Honour was 

then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the First 

Session of the Twenty-Sixth Legislature. 

 

In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 

done and the progress made. 

 

The past year has been an extremely eventful one. 

 

This session’s work included passage of The Growth and 

Financial Security Act, which includes specific measures to 

ensure balanced budgets and the appropriate use of surplus 

revenues. 

 

In just a year, members of this Assembly can proudly point to 

the fact that Saskatchewan’s debt has already been reduced by 

one-third, with debt reduction remaining a high priority. 

 

In this session, you passed a budget, which included the 

unprecedented “Ready for Growth” initiative, a $1 billion 

investment in our future. 

 

Legislation was passed that saw the creation of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

This new agency will collaborate with First Nations, the private 

sector, labour, post-secondary educational institutions and 

municipalities to sustain economic momentum in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The passage of Bills Nos. 5 and 6 have brought Saskatchewan’s 

labour legislation into line with other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

The commitment to keep royalty rates unchanged continues to 

bring record-breaking activity to crown lease auctions. 

 

With one sale remaining, year-to-date revenue from land sales 

now stands in excess of $1 billion - the first time in history the 

billion-dollar mark has been exceeded. 

 

This Assembly approved the full and immediate funding of 

AgriStability and AgriInvest, programs aimed at improving 

income support for our agricultural sector. 

 

The commitment to establish a Graduate Retention Program has 

been fulfilled, making post-secondary graduates eligible for 

rebates of up to $20,000 over seven years, provided they stay in 

our province. Saskatchewan now has the most aggressive youth 

retention plan in Canada. 

 

Revenue sharing for municipalities was increased in the budget, 

then again in April, in response to growing provincial revenues. 

Revenue sharing in 2008/09 will now total $140.5 million, an 

increase of 15 per cent. 

 

Progress was made on addressing the shortage of registered 

nurses in Saskatchewan. New nurses from the Philippines are, 

as I speak, beginning work in our province. More are coming. 

 

In addition, a partnership agreement was signed with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. It commits all parties to finding 

ways to bring 800 new nurses to Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

In 2008/09, $100 million in new funding was provided to 

address urgent health facility maintenance and needed repairs 

across our health care system. Work has begun on a ten-year 

health sector human resources plan, a ten-year capital plan and 

a senior’s health care strategy. 

 

This year also saw the largest ever single year funding increase 

for the agencies across Saskatchewan that provide crucial 

services to people in need. The $18.3 million investment in 

Community Based Organizations will help them recruit new 

workers and retain existing ones through salary increases and 

improved benefits. 

 

In May, an important commitment was fulfilled when the 

first-ever Round Table on the Duty to Consult took place in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The round table included representatives from First Nations, 

Métis, business and all levels of government. 

 

Other initiatives seen in the past year include: 

 

 $16.3 million for revitalization of St. Mary’s 
Community School and the Pleasant Hill 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon; 

 $2 million for 38 pre-kindergarten programs for 3000 
vulnerable children; 

 $500,000 for school lunch and anti-hunger programs 
in community schools; 

 $400,000 to help Saskatchewan pork producers 
provide 320,000 kilograms of pork to our food banks; 

 A 15 percent increase in payments to people who 
provide support for children in foster care; 

 The largest increase in Saskatchewan’s history to the 
Employment Supplement, benefiting 5,800 low 

income—mostly single parent families; 

 $5.1 million for 88 additional addictions treatment 
beds; 

 A 3 million increase in programming for students with 
learning disabilities; 

 $10.7 million more for cancer care; and 

 $1.1 million more for transition houses and sexual 
assault centres. 

 

We, in Saskatchewan, have been truly blessed. Our province 

now has the resources needed to make these important 

investments in our future. 

 

However, we must remain aware of the fact that we are global 

trading partners. We are not isolated from events taking place 

around the globe. 

 

As world financial markets experience uncertainty, it is 

important for members of this Assembly to plan a wise and 

careful course for the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

This course must be characterized by fiscal prudence, a desire 

to make the investments that will allow for continued prosperity 

in our province and the need to assure that everyone has an 

opportunity to benefit from that prosperity. 

 

Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 

diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 

activities of this session, and wish you the full blessings of 

Providence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of His Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until later today, the 22nd day of October 2008 at 2 

p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:11.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1323 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 

PROROGATION ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1323 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




