




















































Hansard: April 16, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 27A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 16, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 981 

 April 16, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

just a great honour today to introduce a very, very special guest 

to members of this Assembly and through the members of this 

Assembly to our province. Seated in your gallery today, and 

joined by Ian Hanna who works at Executive Council, is the 

Hon. Peter Lougheed, former premier of Alberta and great 

Canadian. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, by way of I guess informal leave of 

the House, just provide a bit of a longer introduction to Mr. 

Lougheed, our special guest here today. 

 

I think everybody understands that Mr. Lougheed as premier 

attracted national attention and acclaim for his province and for 

the citizens of Alberta, as a leader in that province throughout 

the ’70s and ’80s as Alberta sought to secure its future for the 

very long term through resource policy but also through very 

successful efforts to encourage the business community in 

Alberta to diversify the economy of the province of Alberta. He 

understood that it is the duty of government to ensure that the 

resources which belong to the people of the province are 

developed to the benefit of current and future generations. 

 

He understood the importance of supporting innovation and 

research into improving the health and welfare of the citizens of 

Alberta. And he demonstrated a prescient concern for current 

generations many, many, many years later — since his 

retirement from politics — when in 1976 he developed the 

Heritage Savings Trust Fund. That’s something we had a 

chance to talk about very, very briefly this morning. We’ll have 

a chance to meet later and talk some more about that I’m sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are in Canadian politics, there are 

politicians, and then there are statesmen. And today we’re very, 

very proud to welcome a statesman to our capital and to our 

Legislative Assembly. And moreover we’re very grateful for 

the opportunity we’re going to have to get some counsel from 

Mr. Lougheed. 

 

I’ve already been able to ask him in some previous meetings 

some questions about how do you sustain growth in the long 

term? What can government do to help with that? How do we 

ensure that the growth that we have, the development of our 

resources are environmentally sustainable, are orderly? And it’s 

a term that we talked about again this morning. And how do we 

ensure we kind of keep the momentum going as long as we can 

under this circumstance of amazing growth that we see in the 

province? 

 

And so we can learn from both the successes in Alberta and the 

challenges. And we can learn from the counsel of the people 

like Mr. Lougheed who will meet with Enterprise Saskatchewan 

board members as well later today to talk about these very 

issues. And so for taking time out of his schedule . . . And I 

want to say that he is still very busy because he’s here, arrived 

this morning, and will leave later this day to accommodate a 

continuing very, very busy schedule. And we’re very grateful to 

have him in the capital today and the Legislative Assembly. 

Would all members please help welcome the Hon. Peter 

Lougheed. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition, I also want to join with the Premier in welcoming 

former Premier Lougheed to our Assembly this morning and 

again to the province. I may say, and I know the Premier will 

agree, that in each conversation that I was able to have with Mr. 

Lougheed during my time as premier in this province, each time 

we met I found those to be very productive, very productive 

conversations. And there are many of us in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who remember when Mr. Lougheed served as premier 

of Alberta, how we stood — our two provinces together — in 

defensing the interests of the resources of Western Canada 

against then a challenging Liberal government. And if I may 

say, Mr. Speaker, there are many of us today who are very 

appreciative of the work that Peter Lougheed is doing in terms 

of wise counsel on oil sands development in the West, and so 

with the Premier I want to extend greetings on behalf of the 

official opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature 

two individuals who are not strangers to many of us here, and to 

the province and the city of Regina: Albert Rapley and Matt 

Rapley, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the pleasure of attending a prayer breakfast this morning, 

and Matt sang a very beautiful song, “Joyful, Joyful.” And in 

speaking with the people around our table, they certainly 

expressed how they were appreciative for that song and really 

how it was a good way to start the day on a beautiful spring 

morning. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me 

in welcoming these guests to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join 

in the member opposite in welcoming Matt Rapley and his 

father, Albert. We have all worked very hard to put 

Saskatchewan on the map in a good light, and Matt did a very 

excellent job in regards to his showing on Canadian Idol. 

Everybody there knows where Saskatchewan is and the fine 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

talent that we have in Saskatchewan. So again I would like to 

ask the members to welcome Matt and his father to the House 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to rise also to welcome Mr. Peter 

Lougheed to the Assembly today. Now Mr. Lougheed and I, we 

may not share the same political persuasion, but we do have a 

bit of a connection in another area in that my cousin, Linda 

Butler, worked for Mr. Lougheed for a number of years, first in 

his law firm in Calgary and then followed him to the legislature 

in Alberta. So while we don’t always talk about politics within 

the family, Mr. Lougheed, we quite often keep that separate, but 

we do keep up with each other and are aware of the pursuits that 

we follow during our lives. 

 

So I know my cousin has always spoken very highly of Mr. 

Lougheed, and I just want to express that when those kind of 

sentiments come from a long-time employee and someone who 

has a great loyalty and respect for the people that they work 

with, it really does bear a great deal of weight. So on behalf of 

all of us, please welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 

gallery I’d like to introduce to you, and through you and all the 

members of the Assembly, Murray and Alida Lincoln. They’re 

visiting their home province from Ontario. Apparently they 

come here in April because it’s the only month that we don’t 

have mosquitoes. 

 

Alida was born and raised in Regina. Murray was born near 

Ceylon and raised in Regina. Together they have ministered 

through the Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada in numerous 

locations throughout North America, including Africa and 

China. The Lincolns returned to their home province during the 

1990s and worked in both Yorkton and Regina. During this 

time Murray was very active in the arts community through 

woodworking, carving, drawing, and tatting — the art of 

lacemaking. 

 

Their work has always revolved around social justice issues and 

broken people, Mr. Speaker. Reverend Lincoln and Alida 

currently reside in Peterborough, Ontario and have been 

instrumental in COSA, a 12-step recovering program for men 

and women whose lives have been affected by another person’s 

compulsive sexual behaviour, and the Peterborough community 

chaplaincy. The community chaplaincy program is about the 

reintegration of a person from a correctional institute and has 

one main objective — no more victims. 

 

And apparently, Mr. Speaker, they have a connection to our 

Premier. They are very good friends of Pastor Bob Reesor that 

— Reesor? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Reesor — that 

married our Premier and his wife, Tami. 

So I’d like all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to introduce a guest 

that’s seated in your gallery. And if he could give a wave, I 

think he’s still up there. There he is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Seated in your gallery is Jay Mowchenko. Jay is the pastor of 

the Free Methodist Church in Weyburn, the church that I attend, 

my wife Amanda and I attend. He was able to join us this 

morning for the prayer breakfast, and I know he certainly 

enjoyed that. And he’s here to watch some of the proceedings 

before he attends to other appointments today. 

 

Over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, Pastor Jay has 

become a good friend, a sometimes running companion, and a 

trusted counsellor and an adviser to myself, which I appreciate 

greatly. And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

him to his legislature today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I’d just like to take one moment. We want to 

welcome our guests, but we also remind our guests — they may 

not be aware of this — but they’re not to participate in debate. 

But you’re certainly welcome to observe the proceedings on the 

floor of the Assembly. Thank you so much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents dealing with health care in our community and in 

the Five Hills Health Region. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too rise 

to present petitions today. This one concerns the support of 

Station 20 and how important it is to the folks of the inner city 

of Saskatoon. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the your 

Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition today as well, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present several 

pages of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on behalf 

of citizens of the province who are — of Saskatchewan — 

concerned with the withdrawal of the proposed essential 

services legislation and withdrawal of proposed amendments to 

The Trade Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw The 

Public Service Essential Services Act, Bill 5, and The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, Bill 6, and hold broad 

public consultations about labour relations in the province. 

 

I present these petitions on behalf of residents of Margo, Foam 

Lake, Theodore, Jedburgh, Springside, Sheho, Yorkton, 

Saskatoon and Delisle and Watson and Quill Lake. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Cancer 

Awareness Month. In 1965, 50 per cent of the population in 

Canada smoked. By 2005 the smoking rate dropped to 19 per 

cent. While this is a vast improvement over the ’60s, 18 per 

cent of teens 15 to 19 years are still smoking, as are 26 per cent 

of those from 20 to 24 years. And 21 per cent of youth from 

grade 5 to 9 are experimenting with tobacco. 

 

These numbers are frightening when added to the effects of 

passive smoking that have resulted in cancer, heart disease, and 

respiratory illness. The cost to our health system is enormous. 

 

The Cancer Society is educating government and business on 

the value of smoke-free workplaces that promote a healthy 

choice for current and future workers. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The society has pointed out that success rates increase when an 

employee’s attempt to quit is employer-supported. Companies 

are encouraged to include all workers in efforts to promote a 

healthy workplace. By choosing and enforcing a smoke-free 

environment and providing resources to those who want to quit, 

companies can realize economic spinoffs and improve morale 

through less downtime from smoke-related illnesses. 

 

Workers have become the most valuable asset in our new 

economy. Wise governments and employers will take measures 

to protect and maintain their employees’ well-being. 

Smoke-free workplaces make perfect sense. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Prayer Breakfast 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 

opportunity, along with the Premier and many of my 

colleagues, of attending the annual Saskatchewan Prayer 

Breakfast which is organized by the Lieutenant Governor and 

the Chief Justice. 

 

This year’s event at the Conexus Arts Centre also featured an 

inspirational message from a man who is well known to sports 

fans in Saskatchewan, Richie Hall. He spoke about being part 

of the team rather than on a team and the importance of giving 

back and thanks for all the blessings that we have received. 

 

I believe that the Mayor of Hudson Bay in her breakfast prayer 

encapsulated Richie’s message. It reads: 

 

Almighty God, Creator of the Universe, you have given us 

this good land as our heritage — this land of abundance 

with rich soil . . . [clean] waters and rich minerals, for 

which we are so thankful. May we prove ourselves with 

honest industry, truthful education and an honourable way 

of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as last year’s guest speaker at this breakfast, I 

know how much time and effort goes into the event. I would 

like all the members of the Assembly to join me in thanking all 

of those who worked so hard to ensure that this year’s prayer 

breakfast was a success and to also thank Mr. Richie Hall for 

his inspirational message about being part of Christ’s team in 

giving back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

St. John Ambulance 125th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this year marks the 125th anniversary of St. John 

Ambulance, and they now have a new location to serve the area 

in Moose Jaw, and it serves Moose Jaw and Regina. 

 

Tammy Hincks, a former customer service representative for 

the organization’s Regina office, took over the position of 

location manager in February of this year. Tammy’s first order 

of business is to bring St. John Ambulance back into our Moose 

Jaw community. 

 

The organization is most recognized for its delivery of first aid 

and CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] training, but is 

certainly not limited to those programs. They maintain a huge 

volunteer aspect and provide training in a wide variety of areas. 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Tammy wants Moose Jaw to be known as their number one 

training location. 

 

Tammy will be splitting her time between Moose Jaw and 

Regina and will be promoting the work of St. John Ambulance 

at major events in our community such as Sidewalk Days and 

the Moose Jaw Hometown Fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

recognizing the good work of the St. John Ambulance, 

congratulate them on their 125th anniversary, and welcome 

them back to our community in Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Humboldt Broncos Win League Championship 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Kindersley and myself were sitting on the edge of our seats 

yesterday in anticipation of the big game last night. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today to rise and 

acknowledge the accomplishments of the Humboldt Broncos 

who last night captured the Credential Cup as champions of the 

SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League]. Though they 

trailed in the series three games to one, the Broncos fought back 

and won game 7 — 8 to 2 over the Kindersley Klippers. 

 

This is the second year in a row that the Broncos have won the 

league championship, and it is their seventh overall. Jordan 

Schindel of the Broncos was named the Credential Cup most 

valuable player, but we all recognize the hard work that 

members from both teams put in throughout the series and the 

whole year. The Broncos will now move on to the Anavet Cup 

on Friday against Portage la Prairie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all recognize the importance hockey has to our 

communities in terms of community spirit. I understand that 

there were at least 1,800 fans in attendance last night, and, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure you that the community of Humboldt is 

swelled with pride this morning and very, very proud of their 

young men’s accomplishments. 

 

I ask all of the members to please join me in congratulating the 

Humboldt Broncos on their season thus far and extend their 

support to the Broncos in their pursuit of the Anavet Cup. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Parkridge Centre Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Parkridge Centre is a 

long-term care facility situated in my Saskatoon Fairview 

constituency. Since the opening in 1987, Parkridge Centre has 

been considered one of the finest examples of barrier-free living 

for the physically challenged. The centre was designed with an 

emphasis placed on quality of life for residents and their 

families. 

Mr. Speaker, through the month of May, Parkridge Centre will 

be hosting its annual Pennies for Parkridge campaign. Last year 

11-year-old Brenden Affleck, grandson to a previous resident of 

Parkridge Centre, personally raised $1,200 for the campaign 

and has become something of an ambassador, doing media and 

speaking engagements. He not only involves the community in 

the campaign, but he is a role model for other children around 

the importance of family in community. 

 

Brenden was successful in engaging students from different 

schools to participate as they raised $3,000 for last year’s 

campaign. This year Brenden has a personal goal of collecting 1 

million pennies, while Parkridge Centre would like to double 

that amount and collect 2 million pennies. All money raised will 

go towards the redevelopment of their atrium. Parkridge Centre 

needs a space that both young and elderly can enjoy as some 

residents may call Parkridge home for their entire lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Brenden 

Affleck and the Parkridge Centre for their enthusiasm and 

support to help and improve the quality of life for the residents 

who call Parkridge Centre home. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Curling Champions 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the right 

to feel proud even more of our athletes. Our Saskatchewan 

men’s curling team won the Canadian senior men’s curling 

championship in Prince Albert. The championship game was a 

close match and one that kept the Saskatchewan fans on their 

seats until the final rock had slid into place with a perfect draw. 

 

The team was skipped by Eugene Hritzuk, and the third was 

played by Kevin Kalthoff. Second was Verne Anderson from 

my very own Wadena, and the lead was Dave Folk. This 

extraordinary team has now earned Saskatchewan a ticket to the 

2009 worlds in New Zealand. 

 

As well Saskatchewan’s representative at the Canadian senior 

women’s curling championships was Delores Syrota, including 

third Sylvia Broad, second Gloria Leach, and lead Bev 

Krasowski. They ended up in fourth place, just short of a berth 

in the playoffs. And they also are from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Another Saskatchewan curling team is heading to the 55-plus 

Canadian games in New Brunswick in August. This mixed rink 

hails from Wadena with Don Adams, Florence Carbno, Earl 

Haugerud, and Vie Haugerud. They came home with a gold 

medal from the 55-plus mixed category at the curling 

playdowns in Watrous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating these three teams for working hard and giving 

their best for curling. May they continue their tremendous 

teamwork as they represent Saskatchewan at the next level. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Thank You, Sister Maria 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

people’s northern representative in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Canada, I am proud to stand today to pay tribute 

to Sister Margaret McMahon, affectionately known as Sister 

Maria, who has dedicated part of her life and service to the 

people of the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sister Maria has spent the last 12 years serving 

parishioners and God throughout my region. Sadly, this service 

has come to an end as Sister Maria is now preparing to travel 

back home to England. While our parting is sad, the memories 

and more importantly the work that Sister Maria has done will 

last a lifetime, and I want to say to her thank you and thank you 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say that people who dedicate themselves to 

serve God and humanity want to know that this service has 

made a positive difference. As Sister Maria leaves our land, I 

want her to take with her our love, our gratitude, our 

appreciation and, above all else, our commitment to continue to 

building her faith, our faith. Mr. Speaker, I wish Sister Maria a 

safe journey and a good life. I hope she keeps a small place in 

her heart for our people and our communities. 

 

At this time I also want to pay tribute to all the sisters, the 

clergy, the lay service, and the parishioners that build on a 

foundation of faith and hope for all humanity. It is the greatest 

work that any single human can do, and many of us need to say 

thank you. And many more of us need to continue that work. 

 

Sister Maria, we know you have more work to do, but know 

this — your work in our region was well done. God bless you 

for that work and may he keep you safe on your journey home 

and on. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, despite knowing for weeks that municipalities were 

struggling under this government’s inadequate funding, 

yesterday the Premier suggested, out of the blue, help may be 

on the way. And while the message may mean good news for 

taxpayers, it certainly was a surprise to many, including the 

minister responsible who, just the day before, was following his 

own stellar advice — sit back and wait and see what happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if he’s in the loop or not, but to the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs: will the minister commit to 

getting money to the municipalities in time to avoid a huge tax 

increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for her 

question. And I want to recognize a bit of the preamble to her 

question where she talked about a surprise. 

 

What a welcome surprise it was for the province of 

Saskatchewan, for all the people in the province, last Thursday 

when the Ministry of Energy and Resources announced land 

sales, oil and gas land sales, at over a quarter billion dollars in 

just two months — this on the heels of a land sale of $197 

million for the two-month period after that. That was a surprise. 

Our ministry officials had generously forecast $100 million in 

land sales. Two and a half times that came in. 

 

So our government, Mr. Speaker, I’m . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask all members to come to 

order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I hear some doubt over there that this 

was a surprise that we’d have a quarter billion dollars in land 

sales in a two-month period, from the current House Leader. I’d 

say that it surprised everyone. It’s a welcome surprise. 

 

And what the current government believes, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when changes like this happen, we ought to be able to react 

very quickly to partner with those who are on the front line to 

ensure that we have the infrastructure in place to keep the 

growth going to continue to put Saskatchewan in a leadership 

position in the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the surprise wasn’t that our 

economy’s growing. We all know that’s happening. The 

surprise was that it took the Premier five months to realize that 

his commitment to municipalities was inadequate and that his 

budget commitment of a 7 per cent increase for municipal 

funding was inadequate. Mr. Speaker, that was the surprise, that 

it took him so long to realize it. And they know that at the end 

of the day it took the voice of taxpayers, municipalities, and this 

opposition to finally goad them into some action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible 

finally admit — or the Premier if he’s doing the answering for 

the minister now — will he finally admit that his budget 

commitments were inadequate and that it’s about time he made 

some movement on this file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about some things 

that are not a surprise at all. It’s no surprise that Saskatchewan 

— with all of our resources and with our most important 

resource, our people — it’s no surprise that we are leading the 

country. It’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that a government that 

campaigned on keeping that momentum going would then 

introduce in its first budget an historic billion dollar 

ready-for-growth initiative. It’s no surprise that in the course of 

delivering that budget that that new government would keep its 

promises to municipalities for a 7 per cent increase in revenue 

sharing. 

 

The surprise occurs with the sheer magnitude of the momentum 

of the economy, in no small way aided by the efforts of the new 

government on the royalty structure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And so, and so what a good government 

would do and what we never saw from the previous 

administration, but what a good government would do is react 

to a quarter billion dollars in two months in land sales. We’re 

going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no surprise in the 

economy. There’s no surprise in this government sitting on a 

huge, fat pile of cash. The surprise was that it took that Premier 

so long to realize that his inadequate commitments were hurting 

municipalities, and he just . . . the minister sat back and said, 

wait and see, wait and see. That’s all you do. So with a billion 

and a half dollars in cash sitting in surplus, these commitments 

were inadequate, first and foremost. 

 

And I’m not a clairvoyant, Mr. Speaker, but I suspect that there 

won’t need to be much negotiations with municipalities. This 

government just needs to decide to put the money on the table. 

Mr. Speaker, he has the support of this opposition, and will he 

commit today to at least doubling the current commitment in 

the budget for municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite flatters herself and her party. The Premier has made a 

very clear, compelling statement about this government’s 

interest in remaining flexible, in remaining interested and able 

to adopt to changing circumstances and taking full advantage of 

opportunities as they arise, in stark contrast to the performance 

of the previous government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m wanting to know is, when will members 

of the opposition have the courage and integrity to get up in this 

House and freely admit that they broke the back of the 

revenue-sharing program by clawing back $300 million from 

municipalities, crippling their ability to manage their finances 

without continual property tax increases? 

 

I would like to know when they will have the courage to get up 

and admit that they had 16 years to negotiate a new 

revenue-sharing deal and didn’t get the job done, Mr. Speaker. 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know when they’ll 

admit that they had 16 years to do this, to find a solution, and 

it’s going to take more than 16 weeks to create one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to go 

back to the early ’90s. He likes to think he’s in charge, but his 

advice to me was, sit back and wait and see what the 

municipalities are going to do. Don’t get in a panic. Sit back 

and wait. 

 

Then the Premier jumps up in the middle of question period and 

says, oh well maybe, you know, we’ve got lots of dollars. He 

finally realized. That’s a surprise. It took him five months to 

figure out how much money the coffers of Saskatchewan 

actually has in it. They’re overflowing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to compare himself to 

this former government, this former government gave the 

municipalities $30 million extra last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Maybe that should be the benchmark they 

should be looking at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thirty 

million dollars indeed after taking $300 million — you give a 

dime; you take back a dollar. I don’t think that’s respectful to 

municipalities. And it didn’t just take one or two years in the 

early ’90s to do it. It was a campaign of destruction and 

disrespect that lasted for an entire decade. They broke it, Mr. 

Speaker. We intend to fix it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when he said they’re fixing 

it, that’s one thing. But how long are they going to take? And, 

Mr. Speaker, if they’re going to sit on a pile of money when the 

municipalities are . . . 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call members to order. 

Member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, clear and simple, will the 

minister commit a dollar value to the increase for 

municipalities, so they can work it into their current system of 

budgeting which is well in progress? Can he commit today to 

the dollar value offered for the municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, hopefully the hon. 

member on the opposite side of the House will realize that it 

will take some time to repair the damage of 16 years of abuse 

and neglect. Sixteen years, Mr. Speaker, is a long, long time. 

We have to repair and rebuild a shattered relationship, one that 

is actually based on respect, collegiality, and a 

government-to-government partnership with our municipal 

partners. That is already well under way. I’ve already visited all 

13 of our major municipalities, a number of the towns, the 

villages, and even some of the northern, even some . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with 

respect to this extraordinary opportunity to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member will complete his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

respect to the extraordinary opportunity that’s been presented to 

us by this unprecedented sale, $265 million in revenue, we have 

already contacted our municipal partners in SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] to get some 

discussions going as early as next week to get this process 

under way immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the minister 

revealed that SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] would 

not be issuing rebates to drivers this year — this in spite of the 

fact of the extreme financial position that saw a net surplus. The 

company will not be passing any money along to drivers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is for the minister. Did SGI make the decision not 

to issue rebates to drivers this year based on its own financial 

projections, or has the minister been imposing his views on one 

of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I thank the member for his question. SGI did make a 

profit this year, $35 million down from 52 million the year 

before because of some summer storms that we incurred in 

Saskatchewan; $22 million dividend to the Crown Investments 

Corporation to help in the future years to establish programs 

like the ready-for-growth $1 billion fund that this government 

put forward. The Auto Fund is in a situation where we have 

$141 million in the fund. Industry standards indicate that we 

should be at about the $130 million mark. So we have a little bit 

of a surplus there. 

 

The decision was made not to, not to extend a rebate right now. 

It was made in accordance with industry standards. It was a 

sound, sound financial thing to do, and it’s in keeping with our 

commitment to run the corporations in that manner. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, SGI’s out-of-province 

investments have been extremely successful in recent years. 

Last year alone they accounted for $9 million in profits. 

Investing outside of Saskatchewan has been so successful in 

fact the SGI president has said that the corporation plans to 

expand these operations to 26 per cent of revenues by 2010 

from the current level of 18.5. But, Mr. Speaker, apparently this 

plan does not sit well with the minister. 

 

My question to the minister: is it the minister’s intentions to 

impose his views on SGI as they relate to investments outside 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear for 

the member opposite that yes, we will impose our views on the 

Crown corporations. That is, that is to provide the service at the 

lowest possible cost. That was the commitment that we made, 

that what we made. If that’s an imposition, you know, if that’s 

an imposition I’d agree that that’s what we’re doing. We are 

providing the service at the lowest possible cost to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. But what we did on November 7 is we 

promised that, and what we announced when we tabled the 

annual report is that we’re keeping that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Based on that answer, Mr. Speaker, obviously 

the minister didn’t read the editorial in The Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix. Mr. Speaker, SGI is an incredibly successful 

Crown corporation that contributes much to Saskatchewan, but 

for some reason the minister and the Sask Party seem to think 

that they know better than those who operate SGI on behalf of 

the province. 

 

My question to the minister: will the minister force the Crowns 

to operate in ways based on his own views, or will he allow 

them to do what they do best in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear for the 

member opposite and all members in the House. SGI made a 

profit based on business in Saskatchewan and outside the 

province. $26.4 million of the $35 million profit were made in 

Saskatchewan. Our commitment to Saskatchewan people are to 

provide that service at the lowest cost and to make, make 

Saskatchewan and any expansion necessary in Saskatchewan a 

priority. That was the promise of this government on November 

7. That continues to be the promise today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Dental Sealant Program 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister 

of Finance took notice of questions from the critic from Health, 

and I’d be glad to answer those questions today. 

 

The question was around the dental sealant program which is a 

pilot program that was started under that opposition when they 

were in government. In the short time that it operated, it was 

only available in two health authorities at a cost of $300,000 . . . 

is what those health authorities spent on this dental sealant 

program. That serviced 225 children. That’s a cost of over 

$1,000 a child under that dental sealant program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at what that would have cost through 

the dental services already provided in our province, for 225 

children to receive the same service through a dental office, it 

would have been $24,000 compared to the $300,000 in a pilot 

project that government spent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was a good decision, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

committed to human resources, capital investment in this 

province, and that’s what we’ll be doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned that a 

delegation from the Pacific Northwest Economic Region, 

known as PNWER, was in the province, is in the province 

meeting with government officials and members of the cabinet 

and the caucus of the government. According to PNWER’s 

website, Mr. Speaker, one of the goals of PNWER is to expand 

the BC [British Columbia]-Alberta Trade, Investment and 

Labour Mobility Agreement known as TILMA. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many remember that this party now in 

government, when in opposition, called upon our then 

government to sign TILMA. With urgency, they called upon 

government to sign TILMA. Somewhere as the election 

loomed, they had a conversion experience. They heard the voice 

of Saskatchewan people. They saw an election coming and 

changed their position and said we will not sign TILMA. 

 

So my question today is to the Premier. In the discussions with 

PNWER that are happening, is TILMA on the table? Is it part of 

the discussion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member opposite for the question. I will say that the 

position with respect to the new government and TILMA has 

not changed since the election campaign. 

 

We highlighted concerns last summer after some hearings in the 

province that were conducted by the appropriate committee of 

this House. We had some concerns with respect to the lack of 

clarity in TILMA on the treatment of subsidiaries of Crowns. 

Certainly Crown corporations are fully contemplated in 

TILMA, but the question around subsidiaries just remains 

unclear, as does our desire to pursue new-growth tax incentives 

and to have municipalities pursuing new-growth tax incentives. 

We also couldn’t get a definitive answer as to whether that 

would be allowed in TILMA. 

 

However our government is going to continue to work very 

hard with our western partners, with groups like PNWER, with 

The Energy Council, through economic co-operation initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker. We believe that it is Saskatchewan’s time to lead 

in these efforts. We believe there is greater strength for the 

West if we work together as has been the example in the past. 

And we will find those ways to work together, Mr. Speaker, in 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this is very 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

interesting. The Premier stands in the House today and says that 

they have not changed their position on TILMA. 

 

Well just last night, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature we had a 

very interesting circumstance. The member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford was chairing a meeting involving members 

representing PNWER and various groups and individuals from 

Saskatchewan. The member from Cut-Knife-Turtleford was 

asked whether a Saskatchewan Party government will review 

TILMA. The answer was yes. 

 

Meanwhile the member of Melfort, the Minister of Finance, 

was in committee in this same legislature, and when he was 

asked will the Sask Party government review TILMA, the 

answer was no. Now, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: which is it? 

Is the Sask Party now reviewing TILMA, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the concerns of the new 

government could ever be . . . and this is something I stated 

publicly during the election campaign and since. If the concerns 

we have, the way TILMA exists today, cannot be addressed, 

i.e., with respect to municipalities — and this is part of the 

review that the member for Cut Knife would be talking about 

— it’s simply the notion of ongoing discussions between 

provinces. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, the concerns of our province cannot be met 

with respect to the autonomy of municipal governments, if our 

concerns with respect to treatment of subsidiary Crown 

corporations cannot be met, then TILMA is simply not on. 

 

But should we, as a province, be advancing the improvement of 

labour mobility in our jurisdictions? Yes. Should we be 

improving trade opportunities? Yes. Mr. Speaker, should 

Saskatchewan step up and lead in the new West? Yes. Should 

we be joining groups like PNWER to advance the Asia-Pacific 

Gateway and trade opportunities for our residents? The answer 

is yes. 

 

Should we be involved in The Energy Council and advancing 

North American energy security, not just sitting at the back of 

the room, stealing the muffins as the previous government used 

to do? The answer is yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, well I thank the halleluiah chorus 

for the applause. Mr. Speaker, what this government needs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition 

has a right to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, should this government get its 

act together? The answer is yes. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote for you reports that are coming 

from the province of Alberta. This week we read in media 

reports in Alberta from Jim Macdonald with Canadian Press, 

and I’ll just quote Mr. Macdonald, quote: 

 

Alberta is already talking with Saskatchewan’s newly 

elected right-wing government which, unlike the previous 

NDP administration [note these words, Mr. Speaker], is 

keen to become part of a western trade deal with Alberta 

and B.C. 

 

It is being reported in Alberta that this government is now keen, 

quote, “. . . keen to become part of a western trade deal with 

Alberta and B.C.” It seems to some of us that the Premier’s 

trips to Alberta now are engaging in more than just fundraising 

for his political party. 

 

I want to ask the Premier what discussions has he had with the 

Government of Alberta that would convince that government 

and the people of Alberta that he is now keen on signing 

TILMA. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell that member 

opposite and all of my colleagues in this Assembly exactly what 

the message has been from this province with respect to 

TILMA. I will say that we have said to the newly elected 

Premier Stelmach and also to Premier Campbell that we do like 

the principle and the concepts of western economic 

co-operation, that our new government wants to advance in 

areas where we can reduce any barriers to trade that exists, 

where we can see labour mobility increase between our two 

provinces. 

 

But what I have said very clearly to those two Premiers and 

what our officials have been saying to their officials is that we 

have concerns the way TILMA existed. We expressed them 

before the election with respect to the autonomy of 

municipalities, with respect to subsidiary Crowns. Those 

concerns have not been addressed to this date. 

 

We understand that TILMA’s take it or leave it, and under those 

circumstances we will not take it. We will, however, pursue 

other opportunities to improve Saskatchewan’s position with 

the new West. And for once, we would hope that the members 

opposite would join with us and have an outward, bolder vision 

for what Saskatchewan can do within the West and within the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, and my question is this. My 

question is this. The Premier maintains he’s not changed his 

position. How is it then that the Government of Alberta seems 

to have a different view? How is it that it’s being reported 

publicly by Canadian Press in Alberta that his government, that 

this government is now keen — keen, note the word — on 

signing in to TILMA? 

 

The Premier’s right; it’s a take it or leave it. There’s no 

negotiation. It’s a take it or leave it. In Alberta we seem to be 

hearing one story, a different story that we’re hearing in this 

legislature. 

 

So my question again to the Premier is, how is it that the 

Government of Alberta and the press in Alberta now believe 

that this government is keen on signing TILMA? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is really and truly an honour 

and a privilege to be able to answer questions on behalf of the 

new Government of Saskatchewan. I, however, cannot answer 

questions on behalf of Canadian Press or Mr. Macdonald in 

Edmonton. I simply can’t do that. I would encourage the 

member opposite if you had some questions of him, you ought 

to ask questions of Mr. Macdonald. I’ve told him exactly the 

position of the government. 

 

But here’s an interesting point, Mr. Speaker. We’ve lost a little 

bit of ground in Saskatchewan over the decades under the 

previous government because there was this sort of inward 

vision, inward-looking vision the government would have. 

 

The member opposite would say, after we attained 

have-province status, he said, oh we’ll always be in and out of 

equalization payments. That’s what he said. We knew that they 

wouldn’t join up with Energy Council except to go to the 

meetings as an observer for free. They wouldn’t be engaged in 

PNWER. They wouldn’t talk to BC and Alberta about 

opportunities to co-operate on health care delivery on the 

purchasing of pharmaceuticals. 

 

We have a different vision, Mr. Speaker, in this new 

government. That vision is outward looking. That vision sees 

Saskatchewan leading in the new West and in Canada. And 

we’ll pursue those aims and objectives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a 

government that clearly says one thing before an election and 

does something completely different after the election. That’s 

what we have here. 

 

We are debating in this legislature something they call the 

growth and stability fund, which is simply the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund which they said they would never have. 

We’re debating in this legislature a Bill to take away the rights 

of working people in regard to essential services. Before the 

election, they said they’d never do it. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, before the election they didn’t 

tell us that they were going to cancel the funding for Station 20. 

They didn’t tell us they were going to cancel the funding for the 

dental sealant program. What they told us before the election is 

no, never on TILMA. 

 

What do we find after the election? We’re having discussions 

with PNWER. We got a backbencher over there saying, yes 

we’re reviewing TILMA. We’ve got the press in Alberta 

reporting from the Alberta government that this government is 

now keen on signing TILMA. 

 

What we’ve got here, Mr. Speaker, is a government that goes 

and gets its money to run its political party in downtown . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member has his right to place the 

question in an allotted period of time. And the Speaker is 

keeping his eye on the clock, as the minister does have the 

opportunity to respond. The member can place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve got here is a 

government that says one thing before an election and one thing 

after an election. We’ve got a government that goes to get its 

political money in downtown Calgary. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Who is calling the shots here? Is 

it downtown Calgary, or is it your commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, downtown Calgary is talking 

a lot about Saskatchewan today to be sure. They’re talking 

about the new government in Saskatchewan. And more than 

that, we see millions of dollars and people coming to the 

province of Saskatchewan because of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because of the confidence they have in the 

new government. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The 

context of the hon. member’s question is interesting to me 

because he wants to try to press the point that the government is 

doing something different than when it campaigned. 

 

I want to tell you that in the first five months this government 

has kept 60 of its election promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Sixty of its election promises. We will soon 

actually exceed the promises that we’ve made to the municipal 

sector, Mr. Speaker. And there is more to come. 

 

The theme of this government has been promises kept and 

being ready for growth in the province of Saskatchewan. The 

theme has been a vision that is worthy of the great potential of 

the province, something that we didn’t see coming from those 

members. And I’ll just tell the members opposite they can 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

expect more promises kept, Mr. Speaker, and a vision worthy of 

the future of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I just want to bring to the attention of 

members, while it certainly is appropriate for . . . Order. Order. 

While it is appropriate and certainly appreciated when notice is 

taken of questions and the minister to respond, that I believe in 

the future rather than breaking the train of thought where the 

questions may be coming from, the responses will be taken at 

the end of question period. So I pass that on, and that is the way 

it will be. So I want to . . . At this time we will move on to 

ministerial statements. Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 34, An Act 

respecting a Graduate Retention Program and repealing The 

Graduate Tax Exemption Act be introduced and read for the 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has moved first reading of Bill No. 34, 

The Graduate Retention Program Act be now read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 35, The Income Tax Amendment Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 35, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Order. Order. Order. I ask the members to come to order so that 

we can hear the Bills as they’re called and the ministers can 

respond. 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now move 

that Bill No. 38, The Corporate Capital Tax Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 38, The Corporate Capital Tax Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table 

the report from the Provincial Auditor of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan on the financial statements of the 

Crown agencies for the years ending in the 2007 calendar year. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

government I wish to table answers to questions 578 to 587. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 578 to 587 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 33, An Act 

respecting an Active Families Benefit, 2008 will encourage 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

healthy, active families through culture, sport, and recreational 

activities. 

 

The purpose of the new active families benefit Act is to help 

families with the cost of their children’s participation in 

cultural, recreational, and sport activities. This government 

believes that sport, especially organized sport, helps children 

and youth realize their potential and grow into engaged, healthy 

citizens. Sport develops their confidence and, very importantly, 

it establishes positive lifelong habits. 

 

As adults, sport helps us build stronger relationships with our 

children and gives us a framework for teaching them valuable 

lessons about teamwork and leadership. Sport enhances the 

quality of life in our communities, as well making them a more 

attractive place to live, to work, to play, and to do business. 

 

We will be providing $150 per year per child refundable tax 

benefit. Parents and legal guardians of children aged 6 to 14 

years registered in cultural, recreational, or sport programs can 

claim an active families benefit of up to $150 per child. 

Families will need to retain receipts and complete an 

application form as part of their Saskatchewan income tax 

return and submit it to the Canada Revenue Agency with their 

annual return. Families will not be required to submit their 

receipts with their tax return but will be expected to retain their 

receipts for future reference if they need to verify their claims. 

It is anticipated that up to 120,000 Saskatchewan children and 

youth will benefit from the active families benefit. 

 

The Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport will be 

consulting with major stakeholder organizations such as Sask 

Sport, SaskCulture, the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 

Association, and In Motion to help define eligible cultural, 

recreational, and sport activities and to engage these agencies in 

helping to promote the active families benefit to families who 

will gain by its assistance. It is expected the program guidelines 

defining eligible activities will be completed by the fall of 2008. 

The active families benefit will take effect beginning January 1 

in the 2009 tax year. Mr. Speaker, this is one more promise 

kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 33, The Active 

Families Benefit Act, 2008. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 33, The Active 

Families Benefit Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to stand and enter into debate on this particular 

piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, we are all in favour of 

encouraging young people and our citizens to participate in 

physical activity and organized sports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We with keen interest look at this Bill, and ask a number of 

questions of ourself. Why the arbitrary $150 figure? How does 

it impact families that may or may not have the ability to ever 

file income tax, Mr. Speaker? Those are of the lowest income in 

our society, Mr. Speaker. Many of those families don’t in fact 

file income tax, so how do they access benefit from this 

particular provision, or can they? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation where we’ll 

have a number of very important questions that need to be 

answered in committee. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that we move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 33, The Active Families 

Benefit Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Second reading. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of An Act to amend The Highways and Transportation 

Act, 1997. These amendments are largely of a housekeeping 

nature. 

 

The first amendment is to The Highways and Transportation 

Act. The intent of this amendment is to complete the transfer of 

authority to set speed limits to the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure from the Highway Traffic Board. What this will 

do is put into legislation what has been practised through 

delegation for a number of years. This transfer of authority will 

also be reflected in a consequential amendment to The Traffic 

Safety Act. 

 

Other amendments to The Highways and Transportation Act 

will be to clarify provincial jurisdiction for the appointment of 

weigh scale inspectors. It will remove references to duties that 

the federal government does not perform in Saskatchewan or 

other provinces. The Highways and Transportation Act will also 

be amended to transfer the power to issue hours of service 

permits to the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure from the 

Highway Traffic Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has moved second 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

reading of Bill No. 17, The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to join into this debate on Bill 17. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a long-time tradition in this House that 

on second readings the minister will make his remarks. Usually 

advance copies of those remarks will be sent to the critic, so the 

critic has the opportunity to review those remarks before the 

presentation of the Bill. 

 

Unfortunately that was not done in this case. But I’m sure it’s 

just an oversight by the minister or his staff, and I’m sure it’s 

not something that’ll happen again. So I’m looking forward to 

— at some point in time in the future — to take part in the 

second readings of another Bill, and I’ll be able to thank the 

minister then for his advance copy of his remarks. 

 

As we glanced through this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we see some 

things that could possibly be alarming. We see the minister has 

indicated that he believes that this is a housekeeping Bill, and 

that basically what it does, it puts into legislation what is 

already being carried out in practice. That of course, Mr. 

Speaker, doesn’t necessarily mean because it’s being carried out 

in practice that it’s right. 

 

What we look at here is . . . we see the shifting of power. We’re 

shifting power from the Highway Traffic Board in particular, 

which is a board made up of representations from people from 

all across this province, from all walks of life who bring 

different viewpoints to the table and to the issues before them. 

And as a result of that, we have a good cross-section of people 

who make decisions on behalf of Saskatchewan people when it 

comes to such things as the Highway Traffic Board, highway 

traffic Act. 

 

And now we’re seeing this power that’s been dispersed by a 

public board now being put in the hands of the minister. And I 

think that’s something that we have to look at closely. We’ll 

have to see if it’s in the best interests of Saskatchewan people, 

try to ascertain the ramifications of this for Saskatchewan 

people and for stakeholders. 

 

I mean, for example, we have the ability now . . . If this 

legislation was passed, the minister would have the ability to fix 

speed limits on provincial highways or portions thereof. But I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, how this would work if perhaps a 

community that perhaps has strong representation to the Sask 

Party was to make representation to the minister? Would that 

interfere with the minister’s decision process and perhaps give a 

special preference to that community in that decision making — 

the decision as to the maximum speed of traffic through that 

particular community? 

 

Those are just, you know, some of the things. We see the 

shifting of authority for weigh scales that has always been 

invested in the federal government now being shifted over to 

the minister’s office to make those decisions. So it a little 

concerning when you look at the fact that the minister is now 

enjoying a greater range of powers in his office rather than 

having that decision-making process dispersed amongst a broad 

range of membership of the board, of the Highway Traffic 

Board. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, that we will have plenty of time in 

committee to ask the questions of the minister, those particular 

questions of the minister on this particular Bill so that we can 

be comfortable, so we can be comfortable that at the end of the 

day the legislation will be in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be moved to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. The question before the Assembly 

is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 17, The Highways and 

Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move the second reading of The 

Midwifery Amendment Act. 

 

Before I get into my remarks on this Act, I do want to comment 

on the previous . . . the member opposite talking about getting 

second reading speeches in advance. In all the years that I’ve 

been in this House, that has never happened. The odd 

ministerial statements will be passed on beforehand, but it is 

that work of the opposition to read the Bill which has already 

been for first reading and make their comments on that basis, 

not on the second reading speech which has never, that has not 

been the tradition of this House. 

 

Just a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the government proclaimed 

additional sections of The Midwifery Act that make midwives a 

provincially recognized and self-regulated profession. It was a 

joyous day for the province’s midwives and a proud moment 

for our government. At that time we indicated our intentions to 

amend The Midwifery Act to entrench provisions allowing 

midwives to provide postpartum care to mothers and babies. 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, we are following through on that commitment. 

 

Presently midwives can provide postpartum care under a bylaw 

passed by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan and approved by the government. This was 

intended as an interim measure until the legislation could be 

amended. That bylaw expires at the end of this year. 

 

The midwife amendment Act clarifies the role of the midwife in 

providing care to a mother and her newborn through the 

prenatal period and delivery and the postpartum phase of a 

normal, low-risk pregnancy. The amendment also clearly 

defines the regulatory role of the Saskatchewan College of 

Midwives and the requirements of the licensure for the 

midwives wishing to work in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government consulted widely in developing 

this legislation. The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the 

Midwives Association of Saskatchewan, the College of 

Pharmacists, and regional health authorities are all supportive of 

these amendments. I want to thank all of these parties for their 

work and support. 

 

With a sound regulatory structure in place, midwives will be 

able to make a significant contribution to improving 

Saskatchewan’s publicly funded, publicly administered health 

care system. 

 

Midwives are expected to on the job in Regina and Saskatoon 

later this year, working as employees of the regional health 

authorities. Services will be expanded throughout the province 

as more midwives are licensed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the International Day of the Midwife is held each 

year on May 5. This year’s event will be a special day for 

Saskatchewan midwives, their clients, and this government. 

Midwives are now in the position to make a full contribution to 

the province’s health care system by providing safe and flexible 

care centred on the needs of the mother and her family — truly 

something to be celebrated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Midwifery 

Amendment Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 26, The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 

begin my remarks, leave to introduce a guest? 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery is my 

cousin Lynn McGregor from Winnipeg. She’s here doing 

business in Regina. I’d like to welcome her to our Assembly. 

It’s the first time I think she’s been here, and I think it’s going 

to be an interesting day to watch the proceedings. So welcome, 

Lynn, to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, The Midwifery Act is something 

I’ve been involved in since probably ’97. I was on the 

implementation working group of the committee as the past 

president of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. The initial 

discussions around the midwifery profession and bringing it 

into Saskatchewan began under Louise Simard, the previous 

minister of Health, and has moved through many years of 

discussion about how you bring a new profession into the 

province, whether you need that profession, how it’s regulated, 

how people are educated. 

 

Many of the things that happened over the years I was party to 

and was pleased when the then minister of Health, the member 

from Nutana, brought the Act, The Midwifery Act, into this 

legislature in 1999. 

 

Since then there has been a lot of work done on regulating. 

There was a lot of discussion on whether we needed our own 

college or not. Many of those things had to be discussed with 

the various organizations that the minister mentioned — the 

SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association], the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, the pharmaceutical 

community — all of those things. This was not an easy process. 

And having been part of it, wearing several different hats, I am 

very pleased today to see that this amendment has now added 

the postpartum care, which I think was just omitted. I don’t 

think there was any intention to omit postpartum care because 

that is an integral part of what a midwife does. 

 

I am an obstetrical nurse, so I am well aware of the value that 

midwives will bring into the birthing experience of women. I’ve 

just had two recent experiences as a grandmother, so I can see 

how valuable it would be to have had a midwife in these 

experiences — the follow-up, the one-on-one care, all the things 

that I think the women have now, the option to choose. 

 

And I’m very happy to see that the way the midwives will fit 

into the system is going to be through the health districts, and 

we don’t have another fee-for-service or stand-alone profession. 

I think this is a really good way to put midwives into the health 

system. And I think women will access those services quite 

readily and they’ll welcome it. 

 

So I do like, I do welcome this amendment, and I look forward 

to speaking to it in committee. So I will now move that it does 

move on to committee. 

 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. The question before the Assembly 

is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 26, The Midwifery 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

direct that The Midwifery Amendment Act be directed to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise today to move the second reading of The 

Social Workers Amendment, 2008. 

 

The Social Workers Act establishes the Saskatchewan 

Association of Social Workers, an organization which currently 

has about 1,200 members in the province. When it was 

proclaimed in 1995, the Act gave the Saskatchewan Association 

of Social Workers or SASW [Saskatchewan Association of 

Social Workers] as it is commonly referred to, ownership of the 

title social worker. 

 

In Saskatchewan an individual can only use the title social 

worker if he or she is registered with the SASW. While the 

SASW establishes credentials for social workers and establishes 

standards for their professional conduct, it also provides a 

forum for a variety of other activities. These include such things 

as conducting specialized research, taking action on issues 

related to social welfare, and publishing and distributing 

information to both social workers and the public. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Increased public representation on SASW council. The SASW 

council is made up of no fewer than six members, one of whom 

is a member of the public with no professional connection to the 

field of social work. Along with being a member of the council, 

the public representative is a member of the discipline 

committee. The public representative brings a valuable external 

perspective to the work of the SASW. He or she presents a 

consumer viewpoint on issues of public concern, ensures the 

profession follows the Act and its bylaws, and promotes 

standards of practice and professional ethics. 

 

Our government agrees with the SASW that this external 

viewpoint, advice, and perspective is important to making 

certain the SASW keeps sight of the wider public view, a view 

outside the field of social work. Mr. Speaker, we will amend 

section 8(2)(b) of The Social Workers Act to increase public 

representation on the SASW council from one member to two. 

We will repeal section 9 subsection 4(1) and replace it with a 

new section which will permit the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to appoint two persons who reside in Saskatchewan as 

members of the council. 

 

Our government and the SASW wholeheartedly welcome the 

additional input, advice, and perspective that an additional 

member represents. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we will 

amend section 9(2) to increase the term of office of the public 

representatives from two years to three. This will enhance the 

role of the public representatives because their familiarity with 

and better understanding of the work of the SASW and their 

knowledge of social work issues will result in a greater 

contribution and influence over time. We believe, as does the 

SASW council, that these changes will strongly support its 

responsibility to protect the public. 

 

Mutual recognition agreements. Mr. Speaker, the SASW 

participated in a national project that concluded in the spring of 

last year to develop a mutual recognition agreement for 

registered social workers across Canada. The agreement 

addresses registration requirements for social workers and 

recognizes equivalent educational qualifications, credentials, 

and work experience acceptable to and implemented in other 

Canadian jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, this means that, subject to 

the SASW bylaws, a social worker registered with a social work 

association in another province would be eligible for 

registration with the SASW. Mutual recognition would 

facilitate the movement of social workers between jurisdictions 

and allow for social workers to respond to short-term 

emergencies in other jurisdictions. 

 

While mutual recognition agreements are not legal documents 

and governments are not signatories to them, by taking part 

Saskatchewan will enhance its ability to enable labour 

movement into the province. Mr. Speaker, we will therefore 

repeal section 18 and 21 of The Social Workers Act and replace 

them with new sections which will facilitate the issuance of an 

annual licence to registered social workers from other 

jurisdictions as well as the issuance of restricted and temporary 

licence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social workers are employed not only in the 

Ministry of Social Services all across this great province, but 

also in schools, hospitals, nursing homes, community-based 

organizations, medical offices, and with the police forces as 

well. The work they do enhances the lives of the Saskatchewan 

people each day. 

 

My ministry enjoys a very positive working relationship with 

the Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, a relationship 

that we intend to continue to build upon. My staff have worked 

closely with the SASW to bring forth the amendments to The 

Social Workers Act which I have just described. Mr. Speaker, 

therefore I move second reading of The Social Workers 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 19, The Social Workers Amendment 

Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure indeed to speak to Bill No. 19, An Act to amend The 

Social Workers Act. And it is important to keep these kinds of 

Acts current. I understand it was first proclaimed in 1995. 

Membership at that time was about 500; now it’s 1,200. And so 

it is important to reflect back on what we can do to make sure 

it’s appropriately serving the membership and the public here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The minister went through the amendments individually, and I 

won’t spend a lot of time right now reflecting on each, but it is 

an important one. And while straightforward, some of these 

ones about increasing some of the public representatives, that’s 

very important. And I understand the parts about the MRA was 

one that the association was really involved in, the mutual 

recognition agreement. And it’s something that they were 

looking for as the minister talked about a national project, very 

important that we get that work going as quickly as we can. 

 

I would say that this is an important piece that we should move 

forward. There are some concerns. I have talked to some of the 

stakeholders, including the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers about this. Obviously they’ve been watching this, been 

very involved, and so they’re very supportive of that. So we 

would like to see that moved forward. I do have some 

questions, and one would be about the number of public 

representatives is increasing, but what is the process of 

appointing those people? 

 

I know that social workers play a huge role right across this 

province, but I can tell you from my own experience in 

Saskatoon Centre, if there’s one person you hear a lot of talk 

about is social workers and the good work they do. So who will 

be appointed to this to serve the needs or represent the public at 

large? So those are the kind of questions that we would be 

asking in committee, and we would be asking more questions in 

committee to seek clarity on this. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that this Bill No. 19 

move forward to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. The question before the Assembly 

is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 19, The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be directed to the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to move second reading of The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act, Bill 28. The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act facilitates the reassignment of 

responsibility for the administration of The Vital Statistics Act, 

1995 and the name change Act, 1995, from the Ministry of 

Health to the Minister of Crown Corporations through the 

Information Services Corporation, ISC. 

 

The proposed Bill will facilitate the transfer of vital statistics 

employees to ISC, permit the transfer to and vesting of ISC of 

the assets, liabilities, contracts, and causes of action respecting 

the operation of the vital statistics branch of the Ministry of 

Health. It will provide for the opportunity of a registrar of vital 

statistics by the Lieutenant Governor in Council on the 

recommendation of the Minister of Crown Corporations and the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

It will authorize the continued sharing of information in the 

vital statistics registry with the Ministry of Health for health 

research and programming purposes. It will authorize the 

continued sharing of registration information by the Ministry of 

Health with the registrar of vital statistics for purposes 

connected to the administration of the vital statistics registry. 

 

It will authorize ISC to retain all revenues derived from the vital 

statistics registry and the delivery of products and services 

under The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act; The 

Vital Statistics Act, 1995; and the name change Act, 1995. It 

will ensure the continued confidentiality of information in the 

vital statistics registry. 

 

The Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, wanted to improve 

records management, security, and disaster recovery of the vital 

statistics registry. ISC’s core business is registry services. And 

since vital statistics is a registry, it’s a natural fit, Mr. Speaker, 

within the ISC responsibility. 

 

After reviewing these needs with ISC, the Ministry of Health 

and ISC agreed it would be beneficial for employees, 

customers, taxpayers, and the people of Saskatchewan that we 

proceed with the transfer of vital statistics to the ISC. The 

transfer of vital statistics registry will provide vital statistic 

employees with a greater professional growth opportunity 

within Information Services Corporation. 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

The Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health, and ISC have 

agreed that the Minister of Crown Corporations and the 

Minister of Justice will share responsibility for public policy 

relating to vital statistics information and legislative 

governance, Mr. Speaker. This unique, ongoing governance 

relationship involving Justice and ISC will be comparable to the 

very successful current governance regime and relationship 

between ISC and Justice with respect to their joint 

responsibility for the existing land titles registry and land 

surveys directory and the roles of the statutory officials for 

those registries, namely the registrar of titles and the controller 

of surveys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker I am pleased to move today second reading of The 

Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act. I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

moved Bill No. 28, The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer 

Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

moments, remarks in response to the minister’s second reading 

speech on this Bill. The opposition doesn’t have any difficulty 

with the principle being expressed here. As I think the minister 

would concede, this is a process started by the previous 

government. 

 

And it makes a good deal of sense in principle to move this type 

of registration — the storage and retrieval of this kind of 

information — to ISC so that it can be stored and used properly 

by ISC, a corporation set up for just this type of purpose, for 

this kind of vital information to be kept, to be kept properly and 

to be accessible when appropriate and not to be accessible when 

not appropriate. That’s where the skills are. That’s where that 

expertise has been built up, Mr. Speaker. So depending on what 

type of topic you’re talking about, either God is in the details or 

the devil’s in the details, but one or the other is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s not a matter of the principles of what the government’s 

proposing in this legislation. It’s the matter of the details about 

the transition and to make sure that again there are no 

unforeseen consequences resulting from the transition from 

Health, which doesn’t necessarily have to be their repository to 

Vital Statistics to ISC. Those questions and detail are best dealt 

with in committee. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

that this Bill move to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 28, The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant 

la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation 

des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to introduce amendments contained in Bill 

No. 27, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 

2008. 

 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act provides the statutory 

basis upon which the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority regulates gaming, the distribution and sale of alcohol 

in the province. This Bill will increase flexibility and 

opportunity for businesses involved in the liquor industry, 

strengthen the socially responsible sale and service of beverage 

alcohol, and implement some housekeeping items aimed at 

reducing red tape and ensuring consistencies with current 

practices and processes. 

 

I will begin with the amendments to the Act that will increase 

flexibility and opportunity for businesses involved in the liquor 

industry. Our government is focused on meeting the needs of 

the province that continues to grow. We recognize that as 

Saskatchewan economy shifts and increases in size, so too must 

our liquor regulations. It doesn’t mean the regulations need to 

increase in size, but that our economy is increasing in size. 

 

One of these changes will allow businesses the opportunity to 

offer you-brew and you-vin services in Saskatchewan. Such 

you-brew and you-vin businesses will be able to offer supplies, 

space, equipment and expertise at their store for customers who 

want to make their own beer and wine for personal 

consumption at home. 

 

[11:30] 

 

You-brew and you-vin services are also going to benefit home 

wine and beer hobbyists. People who have contemplated 

making their own home batch of wine or beer but just don’t 

have the space required in their home will be able to come to a 

permitted business where they can rent the space and 

equipment. Similarly other hobbyists who have tried to make 

their own wine or beer with limited success will be able to 

come to a permitted establishment and work with a 

knowledgeable professional who has the experience to help 

them make a quality product. 

 

Since announcing this in mid-March, SLGA has received 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

numerous inquiries from individuals interested in setting up 

you-brew, you-vin operations. We’re hearing from people 

throughout Saskatchewan and also from people who live in 

other provinces. SLGA will be consulting with these existing 

wine and beer kit businesses and interested individuals to 

develop regulations related to these you-brew and you-vin 

operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 27 will also strengthen the socially 

responsible sale and service of beverage alcohol in 

Saskatchewan. One of these changes involves the recorking of 

wine for patrons dining in liquor-permitted restaurants. This 

change will give patrons the option to take home their 

unfinished wine rather than feeling compelled to finish the 

bottle before leaving the restaurant simply because they have 

already paid for it. 

 

Another amendment related to social responsibility pertains to 

fines charged to liquor-permitted establishments that serve 

minors or over serve patrons. Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 

note that the majority of the province’s 1,700-plus liquor 

permittees follow the rules on a regular basis. I think that’s a 

very important distinction to point out. 

 

The increased fines will only affect those liquor-permitted 

establishments that do not follow the rules associated with their 

liquor permits. Many fines will be increasing, particularly those 

related to issues of public safety such as serving alcohol to 

minors, over serving, and overcrowding. 

 

The amount of the fine increase will depend on the infraction or 

offence. For example the current maximum fine for any person 

who gives or sells alcohol to minors is $2,500, but when this 

Bill is passed, it will increase fourfold to $10,000. Fines will 

also increase for the consumption of alcohol in a vehicle and the 

failure of a minor to leave a permitted premise after failing or 

refusing to supply proof of age. 

 

Furthermore once the new penalty structure is in place, SLGA 

sanctions will involve more direct penalties and fewer warning 

letters for those liquor-permitted establishments that do not 

follow the terms and conditions associated with their permits. 

 

I have also asked the officials at SLGA to find a quicker way of 

informing permittees when an infraction occurs involving 

establishment patrons. Currently the permittees are unaware of 

the infraction until their licences come up for renewal, giving 

them no chance to address the problem in a timely fashion. This 

has to change. 

 

Finally, these amendments will toughen our laws on the use of 

false identification by minors to gain access to or remain in a 

permitted premise, doubling the fines for such infractions to 

$2,000. Mr. Speaker, those are the main amendments contained 

in this Bill. 

 

We will also be taking this opportunity to implement a number 

of smaller housekeeping items aimed at reducing red tape for 

those businesses involved in the liquor business, making the 

Act consistent with current practices. For example, rather than 

requiring permittees and manufacturers to have all of their 

advertising approved by SLGA in advance, SLGA will provide 

a set of standards that require that people will be required to 

follow when planning their advertising. No longer will Big 

Brother run the manufacturers’ and permittees’ advertising 

campaigns. 

 

We will also remove the provision that requires SLGA to 

publish notice of an application for a liquor permit in a 

municipality with no permitted premises or store where a 

previous operation has closed within 60 days of the new 

applicant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are among the host of housekeeping changes 

included in this legislation aimed at reducing red tape and 

updating Saskatchewan’s antiquated liquor regulations, but they 

are not the only ones. A few other examples include SLGA will 

no longer have to approve the type of glass or containers 

permittees use. Remember the old draft glass with the white 

ring around the rim? That will no longer be SLGA’s job. 

Churches and clergy will no longer require permits for the use 

of wine for sacramental purposes. 

 

We will eliminate outdated and unenforced regulations still on 

the books, such as the prohibition on the use of credit cards or 

debit cards as a means of paying for beverage alcohol. Imagine 

that, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity to use credit cards to pay for 

beverage alcohol in Saskatchewan. Not that it hasn’t been 

happening for the last 16 years, but it will now be legal. 

 

All of these amendments are consistent with the government’s 

desire to modernize regulations and minimize the red tape for 

business in all sectors of the province’s economy. I am certain 

that these changes will be welcomed by those with an interest in 

more socially responsible use of alcohol, as well as those 

currently in the hospitality industry, and those contemplating 

opening new businesses in this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 27, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services that Bill No. 27, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to get up and talk about the 

amendments to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, Mr. 

Speaker, of 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is significant changes in this piece of 

legislation, some of which are simply housekeeping that are 

putting in effect rules, changing the rules, to what has been the 

practice for a number of years. But there are also some 

significant changes that could affect various stakeholders within 

both the industry and the general public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For those reasons and to take the time, adequate time, to consult 

those individuals and the public, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

that we adjourn this debate at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant 

la Loi sur l’administration des successions 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Administration of Estates 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Administration of Estates Act is Saskatchewan’s principal 

legislation regarding the rights and liabilities of executors and 

administrators of an estate. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill 

is to update and clarify current provisions in The 

Administration of Estates Act. The Devolution of Real Property 

Act was adopted in Saskatchewan in 1928 and has been largely 

retained in its original form. The proposed legislation will 

repeal The Devolution of Real Property Act and retain relevant 

provisions within The Administration of Estates Act. 

 

The proposed legislation will also repeal The Crown 

Administration of Estates Act and amend The Administration of 

Estates Act to authorize the Public Guardian and Trustee to 

apply for letters of administration on behalf of the Crown. The 

Public Guardian and Trustee, as official administrator for the 

province, may apply for letters of administration in broad 

circumstances, which effectively overlaps with the powers 

given under The Crown Administration of Estates Act. The 

amendments will clarify the role of the Official Administrator 

in the administration of estates on behalf of the Crown. Mr. 

Speaker, in addition this Bill updates the Official Administrator 

provisions. These amendments will provide clarity for users and 

update the Act to reflect the current role of the Public Guardian 

and Trustee as the only Official Administrator in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also update provisions dealing with 

small estates to increase the value of small estates which will be 

prescribed in regulations. In order to administer a small estate, 

people should not be required to undertake the same procedures 

where the expense of preparing letters or other court documents 

would exceed the value of the estate. The current limit of 

$5,000 for what would we regard as small estates no longer 

reflects an appropriate value for small estates in our province 

and very much needs to be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to continue Saskatchewan’s 

commitment towards legislative reform, to provide current and 

accessible legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second reading of The 

Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 20, The Administration of Estates 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This legislation is 

legislation that we on this side of the House know the purpose 

of and we’re in favour of it. And what I would say is that this 

type of legislation comes from many years of work in the 

Department of Justice working with the community and with 

the judges across the province to make sure that the rules as it 

relates to administration of estates actually accomplish the goals 

that have been set out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite a number of years ago when I was first 

appointed attorney general in 1995, this whole area of review 

became a priority. And over the last 12 years, going on 13 years 

now, the Ministry of Justice has brought forward amendments 

and new Bills and new Acts in a whole number of areas, which 

have simplified the processes for the people of Saskatchewan. 

And this particular legislation I think is legislation that fixes 

some identified problems after other new legislation was 

brought forward. And I know that all of us will be appreciative 

of this even though this probably doesn’t have a huge, wide 

application much of the time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we send this to the 

committee where there may be a few questions that we could 

ask that will clarify some of the issues. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 20, The Administration of 

Estates Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

20, The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008 be 

moved to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 21, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008. 

I am pleased to outline today for all members the background 

and changes to the Act that are included in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly about what led to the 

proposed changes to the Act. As members may know, in August 

2007 a new collective agreement between boards of education, 

the government, and the teachers of Saskatchewan was ratified. 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Amendment Act is a negotiable item under the provincial 

collective bargaining agreement. The collective bargaining 

agreement is for a three-year term from September 1, 2007 to 

August 31, 2010. 

 

Changes are required in the Act to update provisions agreed to 

in the collective agreement and housekeeping amendments 

agreed to by all parties. The proposed amendments will allow 

teachers to purchase and count up to one year of compassionate 

leave as pensionable service. Teachers will also be able to 

purchase maternity, adoption leave, and parenting leave taken 

prior to February 3, 1998, to the maximum allowed under the 

Income Tax Act. 

 

As noted, Mr. Speaker, there are also a number of other 

amendments that are not part of the collective agreement but 

have been agreed to by all parties. Teachers may receive a lump 

sum pension rather than a monthly allowance. This amount will 

change as provisions in The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 change. 

Also while a teacher is receiving disability benefits, their time 

will count towards their future retirement allowance. Members 

should know that over the lifetime of the plan the cost will be 

approximately $5.5 million from plan members and $5.5 

million from the General Revenue Fund. Mr. Speaker, I am 

happy to note that approximately 500 teachers will be eligible 

for this extended coverage. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Consultations regarding the proposed amendments took place 

between the parties at the collective bargaining table. As such 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association are fully supportive of the 

amendments. 

 

I am pleased to move therefore, that Bill No. 21, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the brief 

opportunity to speak to Bill No. 21, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

And as the minister pointed out, it was a result as I understand 

from the collective bargaining process of last year. We 

definitely value the collective bargaining process between 

government and associations. We’re pleased that the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association and the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] support this amendment. 

 

It includes some housekeeping, but it also includes some 

extensions of security for teachers having the ability to purchase 

the one year of pension for a year of compassionate leave. We 

will have some other comments on this Bill, but at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be referred to a committee. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation 

and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time. Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I’ll move second reading of 

Bill No. 22 to amend The Irrigation Act, 1996. The Irrigation 

Act was implemented to provide uniform legislation for all 

irrigators in the province. The Act provides and simplifies the 

administration of irrigation in the province by clarifying the 

respective roles of the irrigation district boards, the minister in 

charge of the Act, and Saskatchewan Agriculture, to whom the 

administration of the Act is assigned. 

 

An amendment to the clause 3(1)(b) of the Act is required to 

clarify that the Minister of Agriculture has the authority to enter 

into agreements respecting the operation and maintenance of 

irrigation, water control, and water supply works for the 

purposes other than irrigation. This clarification would allow 

water conveyed through Saskatchewan Agriculture-owned 

facilities to be used for purposes other than agriculture 

irrigation. 

 

On January 24, 2007, Treasury Board finalized the transfer of 

irrigation assets from Sask Water Corporation to Saskatchewan 

Agriculture. These assets include the Macrorie, Lucky Lake, 

Riverhurst, and South Saskatchewan River irrigation projects. 

The transfer is effective April 1, 2006. As a result of this 

transfer, all provincial irrigation projects are now administered 

by Sask Agriculture. 

 

Some of these projects transport water for purposes other than 

irrigation. These purposes include domestic, municipal, 

recreational, industrial, and wildlife uses. For example, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture supplies water, under 

contract, to Sask Water Corporation who in turn delivers water 

through the Saskatoon southwest water supply system to five 

reservoirs. These reservoirs provide water for Blackstrap Lake 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

in the provincial park, individual irrigators, golf courses, potash 

mines, towns, villages, and Ducks Unlimited. 

 

The current Act does not make clear whether the Minister of 

Agriculture has the full authority to enter into these agreements. 

As such the Ministry of Justice has recommended that changes 

be made to The Irrigation Act to clarify this authority. Mr. 

Speaker, an amendment to The Irrigation Act is required to 

clarify that the Minister of Agriculture has the authority to enter 

into agreements for purposes other than irrigation. 

 

Therefore I move that an amendment to The Irrigation Act be 

read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved that 

Bill No. 22. The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to get up to speak on this Bill. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

largely seems to be housekeeping, moving forward, making 

some amendments within the legislation that clarifies the 

authority to continue the practice which has largely been in 

place for some time, Mr. Speaker. We may have a number of 

questions when this Bill goes to committee, so at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, I move this Bill be moved to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 22, The Irrigation Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my brief 

remarks, I’ll be moving second reading of The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

I have a great appreciation for the ongoing need to protect 

important wildlife habitat. Much of the best remaining wildlife 

habitat in Saskatchewan is on Crown land. These natural areas 

are very important for maintaining existing wildlife 

populations. The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act currently 

protects 1.4 million hectares of natural uplands and wetlands in 

the province’s agricultural areas. 

 

This land remains available for some agricultural use and oil 

and gas activities. This reflects the philosophy of The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, which is to conserve wildlife habitat 

while allowing traditional and compatible uses to continue. As a 

matter of fact, much of the land under The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act is leased to cattle producers who use it for 

grazing or haying. Agricultural producers who lease land 

included in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act have proven to 

be good stewards. As a result, wildlife is benefiting. 

 

The habitat protected by this Act provides food, water, and 

shelter to more than 400 species of wildlife. Sometimes 

maintaining a balance between environmental stewardship 

objectives and other objectives means we have to remove some 

land from the protection of the Act. This is the case today as we 

recommend removing 560 hectares of land from the Act. 

 

This will allow proposed sale and development opportunities to 

proceed and will address three situations where privately held 

lands had been inadvertently designated. At the same time, as 

an additional step, this amendment also proposes to add another 

288 hectares of suitable Crown land under the protection Act to 

compensate for these withdrawals. Additional land with a 

similar ecological value will be added to the Acts in future 

amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 25, the habitat protection amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have 

before us a Bill that is very important to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The protection of our natural habitat 

is important to all citizens of the province. Mr. Speaker, this 

particular Bill will move a number of acres out, Mr. Speaker, 

and replace it with a similar amount either now or in future 

Bills, and that’s been practice for some time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this particular Bill is going to facilitate the commercial 

development of pieces of land in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

which will affect many stakeholders in those particular areas. 

So as a result of our needing some additional time to consult 

with stakeholders, talk to individuals about the impact of these 

developments in their specific areas of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d move that we now adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of the 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 

2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 29, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008. As part of our government’s 

goal to improve quality of life and provide an added measure of 

security for Saskatchewan people, we are expanding the 

consultation and assessment process before significant changes 

are made to school facilities. We feel it is important to make 

sure the process boards of education follow to close rural 

schools is consistent across the province and that affected 

communities are fully engaged. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the following amendments to the school 

closure and grade reduction process apply to schools within 

school districts. The way The Education Act, 1995 was written 

was that only in those instances where a school was in a school 

district was a specific legislated process required. Because of 

this, decisions regarding urban schools are not included in the 

new process as they are located outside of school districts. 

 

The amendments proposed to the school closure and grade 

reduction process are lengthen the legislative consultation and 

review process, more fully engage the community in the review 

process, and provide for formalized public communication as 

the school review progresses. 

 

The amendments also recognize the significant contributions 

made by our strong, locally controlled education system. With 

these amendments, decisions on education delivery and school 

facilities remains with locally elected boards of education. The 

amended consultation and review process will now start at the 

beginning of October — about four and one-half months sooner 

than under the current process. 

 

This amended process adds an important dimension to the 

review process — the school review committee. The 

composition of this committee respects the important role of the 

new school community councils. The committees will include 

the appointment of some school community council members 

as well as local government and community representatives and 

First Nations representatives. This committee serves as an 

important link between the school division and the broader 

community throughout the review process. It provides a real 

opportunity for the community to share information with the 

school division, to receive information from the school division, 

and to support the community in its understanding of process as 

the school review progresses. 

 

These amendments balance the need to expand consultation, 

communication, and assessment with the need to ensure the 

continued strength of the education system through autonomous 

locally elected boards of education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how important schools are to rural 

communities when there are opportunities for economic growth 

on the horizon. Before significant improvements are made to 

school facilities, it is essential to make sure that the potential for 

future economic growth is considered before changes are made 

to a school. That is why these amendments also provide for this 

consideration through provision for the designation of a school 

of opportunity. 

 

Communities will have the chance to work with their local 

governments to put forward a proposal to have a school which 

is under review for closure designated as a school of 

opportunity. A school of opportunity can remain open for up to 

two years, giving the community time to encourage and support 

the activities necessary to increase the population of preschool 

and school-aged children. We are continuing to dialogue with 

our stakeholders as these criteria are developed, and we expect 

to have changes drafted by early summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, additional amendments to the Act include an 

update to the provisions on the identification of students with 

special needs. The amendments are intended to update language 

by referring to educational assistants rather than teacher aides 

and by referring to pupils with intensive needs rather than 

pupils with disabilities. The amendments are also intended to 

move away from a medical model by identifying various 

categories of needs and the criteria for such categories in 

guidelines rather than legislation, regulations, or policy. 

 

[12:00] 

 

This will provide greater flexibility for those who are involved 

with identifying pupils with intensive needs. The proposed 

amendments will also better reflect recent court and human 

rights decisions related to the efforts of school divisions to 

reasonably accommodate pupils in the regular classroom 

setting. School boards retain the ability to fulfill their 

responsibilities for providing educational services to those 

identified as having intensive needs. This includes allowing 

school boards to enter into agreements with other school 

boards, persons, or agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our final amendment includes a new requirement 

for the Educational Relations Board to provide copies of its 

decisions and an annual report to the Ministry of Education. 

Our government has laid out an exciting agenda for our 

province, and the education sector system plays a significant 

role in our commonsense plan for Saskatchewan. Education 

continues to be a priority for our government. As members 

know, this year we dedicated a total of $1.185 billion which 

includes teachers’ pensions and benefits, and this money will be 

used to support pre-K to 12 education, the Provincial Library, 

and early learning and child care in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a $241.8 million or 25.6 per cent increase 

over last year’s Education budget. Saskatchewan’s economy 

and our population are growing and bring with this growth an 

optimism for the future. Mr. Speaker, the changes we are 

making with this Act are part of meeting the commitment our 

government made to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 29, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 29, The Education Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 



April 16, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

question? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to get up and talk about The Education 

Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, there are few things that 

are as important to the residents of Saskatchewan and in 

particular students and parents than the education of their 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last number of months, we’ve had 

significant discussion about the education of our children, 

particularly in rural communities, but then more recently in 

some of our urban communities as well and the impacts of 

changes as we move forward in the education sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were very, very high expectations of people 

for massive improvements in the education system with the 

change in government, Mr. Speaker. There were people out 

there that believed that all rural schools would remain open and 

there would be significant changes, Mr. Speaker, that would 

enable them to continue operating schools that previously — 

under the previous government and under the regulations and 

Act that were in place — would have not have likely stayed 

open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those particular individuals voted wanting to keep 

those schools open, Mr. Speaker. They believed they would 

stay open with the change in government. They believed there 

would be significant new money to keep schools open in rural 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a significant number of stakeholders who 

have indicated a desire to talk to us about these particular 

changes in this legislation. It is a Bill that will require some 

fairly large consultations with individuals and organizations in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. For those reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is the Assembly prepared to and 

agreed with the motion to adjourn? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to once 

again rise in the House today to move second reading of The 

Statutes and Regulations Revision Act. Mr. Speaker, the 

purpose of this Bill is to authorise the revision of the statutes 

and regulations of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

last official revision and consolidation of statutes was 

completed in 1978, which coincidentally was the year I 

graduated from law school. So this particular consolidation has 

spanned my entire legal career. 

 

It was undertaken before the development of electronic versions 

of legislation and before the adoption of contemporary drafting 

standards. Since 1978 there have been numerous amending Acts 

and many new Acts that have been added to the statute 

volumes. A revision of the statutes is necessary to ensure that 

all references have been properly updated and that unnecessary 

provisions are removed. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, because the current statutes have been 

drafted over several decades by different drafters, a revision 

would assist in bringing consistency and wording among 

statutes. Common provisions and statutes such as auditing or 

tabling provisions have slight variations in wording that can 

create significant obstacles for anyone who wishes to search 

statutes electronically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today provides for the 

establishment of a revision committee to prepare revisions of 

any or all Acts or regulations of Saskatchewan. It provides the 

committee with revision powers that are aimed at updating 

Saskatchewan legislation, for example consolidating 

amendments, changing numbering, adding or changing 

headings, and adopting gender neutral language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, undertaking a revision at this time will provide an 

opportunity for Saskatchewan to correct and modernize its 

statute and regulations database to provide ongoing official 

consolidations in an electronic format, to adopt drafting 

standards for legislation that will be followed in the future, and 

to enhance the overall image of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to move second reading of 

An Act respecting Revisions of Statutes and Regulations. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 30, The Statutes and Regulations Revision 

Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular Bill 

does facilitate work that does need to be done in the province. 

There are some questions that we have as it relates to the actual 

wording of the Bill, but those issues can be dealt with within the 

committee. So I move that we send this to the committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 30, The Statutes and Regulations 

Revisions Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the Bill be sent to the Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice. 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2008 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 8 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I previously 

spoke about this Bill, I raised a number of the questions around 

the policies as it relates to the whole issue of revolving funds. 

There are now some specific questions that we would have in 

committee, and I move that we send this to the committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 8, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. I would urge that this Bill 

be moved to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 10 — The 

Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of 

Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I previously 

had the opportunity to speak to this Bill at some length, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a piece of legislation that brings in line our 

pension provisions in the province of Saskatchewan with federal 

income tax provisions, Mr. Speaker. It’s a Bill that is very 

important that we proceed with. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 

would move that this Bill be referred to committee. 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 10, The Miscellaneous Pensions 

Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the good work of the standing policy committees, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:11.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 981 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 981 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 982 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 982 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 982 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

 Prayer Breakfast 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

 St. John Ambulance 125th Anniversary 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 983 

 Humboldt Broncos Win League Championship 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 984 

 Parkridge Centre Fundraiser 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 984 

 Curling Champions 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 984 

 Thank You, Sister Maria 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 985 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 986 

 Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 987 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 987 

 Dental Sealant Program 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 988 

 Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 988 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 988 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

 Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

 Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 991 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 991 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 992 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 992 

 Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 992 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 



 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 993 

 Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 993 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 994 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 995 

 Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 995 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 996 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 996 

 Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 996 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 997 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 997 

 Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 997 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 998 

 Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration des successions 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 999 

 Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 999 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1000 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1000 

 Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1000 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1001 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

 Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1003 

 Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1003 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1003 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1003 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1004 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1004 

 Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1004 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1004 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


