




















































Hansard: March 19, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 15A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 19, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 371 

 March 19, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

all members of the government, we want to offer a very general 

welcome to the many guests who have joined us today in the 

Assembly for what is about to transpire here in a few minutes 

and also, I’m sure, those who are also here to watch question 

period. Through you, Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition in 

welcoming all of those who are joining us in the gallery today 

to observe the budget, those who are joining us in other parts of 

this building. We welcome you here, and we know that together 

we form the great province of Saskatchewan. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I will join with the Premier and the Leader of 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to welcome our guests, but 

also just to take a moment to remind our guests of protocol in 

the Assembly. It is appropriate for guests not to participate in 

any of the debate. As well, if guests would also remain in their 

places until we have adjourned the Assembly, if that’s at all 

possible. Just a little heads-up. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride that I stand and present a 

petition that would work to provide improved health care 

service and delivery in the area of Moose Jaw. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I file these petitions on behalf of citizens of 

Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present 

several pages of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on 

behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning 

the withdrawal of the proposed essential service legislation and 

the withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in this province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon, Yorkton, 

and Prince Albert. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Contributions of Community Association 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is my indeed honour to 

highlight the efforts and to thank the Regina Rosemont Mount 

Royal Community Association for their contributions within 

our community. Rosemont Mount Royal is a large community 

association serving approximately 3,800 households. It has a 

strong record of accountability, a proud history of volunteerism. 

The association has been responsible for coordinating 

community communications, sport, fitness, arts, craft, 

programs, seniors’ groups, family socials, financial support to 

our schools, the purchasing of equipment and supplies, the 

outdoor rinks, and input into Regina civic affairs that directly 

involve our community. 

 

It has been my privilege to witness this commitment, and I 

thank outgoing Chair, Elaine Dittmann, the 15-member 

executive, members, volunteers, participants past and present 

for their enriching contributions to our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite, the members of this 

Assembly to join with me in extending thanks to the Rosemont 

Mount Royal Community Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Focus on Women Trade Show 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I had the 

honour of volunteering my time at the 22nd annual Focus on 

Women trade show at the Prince Albert Exhibition Centre, 

where I was invited to take tickets and greet guests. It was my 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

pleasure to contribute to the success of such an important event. 

Women from all over our great province exhibited and attended 

this event. 

 

This year there were over 66 booths at the trade show. I would 

like to recognize the directors, Joan Bibby and Linda Grimard, 

show administrators Katie Wilson and Tina Logodin, and 

committee member Rosie Cartier for all their exceptional work 

in organizing the event. It was through their hard work that the 

weekend ran smoothly and helped enhance the lives of women. 

This year there were over 66 booths at the trade show. Without 

their hard work and dedication of all the organizers, there’s no 

way that such an event could be pulled off. 

 

Along with International Women’s Day and Rural Women’s 

Month, this trade show serves as a reminder of all the valuable 

contributions that women make to our society. I hope that all 

members will join me in congratulating the organizers of the 

Focus on Women trade show on a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Seven-Year-Old Raises Money for Alzheimer’s 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is a community of 

people who reach out to help one another. One fine example of 

this selflessness and caring is a young Prince Albertan named 

Corbyn Morgan. Corbyn is seven years old, Mr. Speaker, and 

he raised over $4,000 for the fifth annual Alzheimer Society 

Forget-Me-Not Walk held earlier this year. This is an enormous 

total when compared to the $104,000 raised to date in the 

province in the entire history of the campaign. Mr. Speaker, the 

container of coins that he carried ended up being far too heavy 

for him to even carry. 

 

As an aside, Mr. Speaker, Corbyn’s contribution was also the 

highest amount raised by an individual. 

 

Corbyn was very close to his grandfather, Gwyn Morgan, who 

is 72 years old and was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in 

September ’07. Corbyn was told about the walk through his 

school and the grade 1 student went to work. He sent emails, 

visited neighbours asking for pledges, worked countless hours, 

engaged the help of his family and of his community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I ask all members to join with me in 

acknowledging the great contribution made by Corbyn Morgan 

and congratulating him in his tremendously successful 

campaign. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Dalmeny Students Support Schools in Afghanistan 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise 

today to recognize students from my constituency. I would like 

to share with this Assembly the generosity of the grade 11 and 

12 students from Dalmeny High School and area residents and 

how they’ve helped some of the most vulnerable citizens of 

Afghanistan. 

 

Sandra Schatz is a teacher at Dalmeny High School. Her 

sister-in-law Paulette is working for the United Nations in 

Kabul, Afghanistan. She told Sandra of an all-girls school in 

Afghanistan that was in need of help. These schools aim to 

educate girls, some of whom have never had the opportunity to 

attend school until the Taliban was overthrown. When Sandra 

heard this, she decided to get her students involved. Their 

interest turned into something amazing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people do not realize this, but it is bitterly 

cold in many parts of Afghanistan. The students there are in 

desperate need of basic clothing and supplies. The grade 11 and 

12 students at Dalmeny were on a mission. In just three weeks, 

these students raised over $8,000 for winter clothes, school 

supplies, and wood for heating. So much was raised that they 

were able to help two schools. To top it off, the items were 

bought locally in Afghanistan to help to boost the local 

economy. 

 

It is through efforts like this that the Afghan people will be able 

to finally rebuild their nation. Canada’s federal Minister for 

International Development heard of their achievement and 

personally wrote them a letter to congratulate the students. 

 

And today, on behalf of a very proud province, I would like to 

publicly congratulate grade 11 and 12 students of Dalmeny 

High School for their selflessness, generosity, and hard work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Saskatoon Citizen Receives Global Citizens Award 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The Saskatchewan Council for International 

Cooperation was formed in 1974 by international development 

agencies active in Saskatchewan. It now encompasses the local 

committees of 35 churches, educational organizations, and 

agencies. The SCIC [Saskatchewan Council for International 

Cooperation] is committed to the recognition of the dignity of 

all persons and their right to self-determination, protection of 

our fragile environment, and the promotion of global 

understanding, co-operation, peace, and justice. 

 

Since 1991 the SCIC has annually given out Global Citizens 

Awards. Priscilla Settee is a 2008 recipient of the Global 

Citizens Award. Dr. Settee is an associate professor of native 

studies at the University of Saskatchewan. She works in the 

community of Saskatoon in a number of capacities including on 

the parents’ council of Oskayak High School and as an adviser 

with the Iswewak group which focuses on disappeared and 

missing women. 

 

Dr. Settee has initiated a number of projects linking the 

academy and the community, including a Canadian 

International Development Agency project with the University 

of San Marcos in Peru. She is a founding member of the 

Canadian Indigenous Languages and Literacy Development 

Institute, established in 1999. The Global Citizens Award 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

recognizes Priscilla Settee’s work at home and abroad. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Student Awarded Carnegie 

Foundation Scholarship 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to bring to 

the attention of the Assembly the accomplishments of an 

outstanding young man in my constituency. Bahar Bahrani, a 

senior at Evan Hardy Collegiate, has been chosen as a Herbert 

H. Carnegie Future Aces Citizenship Award and Scholarship 

recipient. 

 

Ninety-three schools from across Canada submitted 

applications to the Carnegie Foundation. Bahar is one of 20 

finalists who will receive a $1,000 scholarship to help with 

post-secondary tuition and expenses. He will be honoured at a 

reception in Toronto on April 11. 

 

The Herbert Carnegie Foundation is a non-profit registered 

charitable organization whose mission it is to inspire and assist 

youth and adults to become the best they can be as a 

responsible, respectful, peaceful, and confident citizens of 

Canada. 

 

Future Aces of the foundation offers 30 scholarships to students 

from across Canada who exhibit exemplary citizenship qualities 

and who are in need of financial assistance to further their 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating Bahar Bahrani, an exceptional young man who 

has been singled out for his initiative and dedication in serving 

his school and community. The province is proud. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Status of the Artist Bill 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 

disappointed when the status of the artist Bill was stalled from 

passing in 2007. I want to use Guy Vanderhaeghe as an 

illustration of my point. Mr. Vanderhaeghe grew up, studied, 

and now works in the province, actually in Saskatoon Eastview, 

while gaining world fame as a writer. His novel The 

Englishman’s Boy was filmed in Saskatchewan, starring movie 

greats like Bob Hoskins and Nicholas Campbell. 

 

Mr. Vanderhaeghe demonstrates a certain kind of Canadian 

nationalism with his own particular Saskatchewan flavour, 

recognizing our otherness in the world without branding other 

nations negatively. He has brought our province to life with the 

written word and has taken it to the world. 

 

He believes his success has taken place in part because 

Saskatchewan people are recognizing and buying the work of 

local artists, and including them in school curricula and library 

acquisition lists. We like what local artists are saying about us. 

They know who we are and what sets us apart from others in 

the world. And apparently the world likes what he has to say 

about us as well. 

 

Mr. Vanderhaeghe has said, and I quote, “that we have a 

tradition of being progressive, both socially and politically,” 

and have “a strong spirit of egalitarianism.” He illustrated how 

truly he is Saskatchewan-made by stating that, although he 

takes the art of writing very seriously, he doesn’t, quote, “see 

how that separates him from a carpenter or a mechanic, who 

also wants to do the best that they can.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, greats like Farley Mowat, Joni Mitchell, Maria 

Campbell, and many others have taken Saskatchewan to the 

world. They deserve the best we can give them in return. We 

need to protect them as well as we protect other workers. This is 

what the status of the artist Bill was intended to do. 

 

Our failure to pass this Bill lets down our current artists as well 

as our future artists. We need to revisit and pass the status of the 

artist Bill. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Increased Fees 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government is about 

to announce their first budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — And we expect it will be a surplus budget, 

thanks largely to 16 years of hard work by the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. The provincial treasury is bursting at the 

seams, having inherited $1.5 billion and a booming economy 

from the previous government. 

 

But what does the new government do? They pick our pockets 

with a variety of increased fees only days before the budget. 

These fee increases will average between 30 and 60 per cent. 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the fee increases will cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers about $650,000 annually. This is 

nothing but a slap in the face to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

To the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

whose ministry proposed the majority of fee increases, 

considering the fact that the government is sitting on $1 billion 

surplus, how can the government justify taking $650,000 out of 

the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers on an annual basis for 

these increased fees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I thank the 

member opposite for that question because when I became the 

minister in November, my officials had informed me that some 

of those fees hadn’t been looked at since 1988, Mr. Speaker, 

especially the ones involving amusement rides. Some other 

ones, Mr. Speaker, actually created a backlog. 

 

So for the public safety concern we have for the safety and 

security of our citizens, we couldn’t even get enough people 

hired to do the inspections because Alberta had a boom, Mr. 

Speaker, and the inspectors that we require went there to do the 

job, Mr. Speaker. So now for us to have them come back, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to understand that they could ask more 

money, an increase in wages. 

 

So after consulting with the industry, my ministry officials had 

told me that these particular fees had not increased, and they 

were expecting it, Mr. Speaker. So from now on, the fee 

increase was talked about within the ministry for this budget, as 

a cost recovery, Mr. Speaker — to cover the costs of the new 

inspectors. That’s all it is, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the previous government, there is no doubt 

that Saskatchewan is booming. Everywhere you look you can 

see new construction. The enormous growth in construction and 

development has placed Saskatchewan tradespeople in high 

demand. Saskatchewan needs even more tradespeople. 

 

A quick look at the list of fees that are increasing shows that the 

bulk of increased fees will affect tradespeople and the 

businesses they work for, Mr. Speaker. There are going to be 

increases to power engineers’ certificate and examination fees. 

There are going to be increases to pressure welders’ licence and 

testing fees and increases to pressure vessel and boiler 

installation fees, to name just a few. 

 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety and Policing: 

why in a time when tradespeople are in such great demand 

would the government choose to punish them with an increase 

to so many of the fees that directly affect them and the 

businesses that they do their services for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the 

question I should pose to the member opposite: why would they 

raise a wiener roast tax and charge those and use our tourism 

facilities like they proposed last year, Mr. Speaker? Why would 

those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, not increase a surcharge 

to victims on the actual tickets that are issued by my police 

forces, Mr. Speaker? Those monies go to people who need it the 

most. 

 

But I’ll take the time to answer this question because you know 

what, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the fees are increasing is 

simply because we have to meet the demand of the inspectors’ 

salaries, Mr. Speaker. The tradespeople understand that they’re 

going to have to pay more if they go to Alberta, Manitoba, BC 

[British Columbia]. We are still under those fees, Mr. Speaker. 

So we’re doing a due diligence on that file to make sure our 

tradespeople still have a good fee structure in this province. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, since the Sask Party has taken over 

government, we have seen political staff, political appointees, 

and party faithful hired by the new government receive huge 

wage increases over those employed in these very same 

positions by the previous government. The increases given to 

less than one dozen of those individuals would have offset these 

fee increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government expects tradespeople 

and businesses to pay more through increased fees such as 

pressure vessel and boiler survey and registration fees, and 

pressure vessel and boiler installation and licence fees. Mr. 

Speaker, they pay their friends more and expect businesses and 

tradespeople to pay the bill. 

 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety and Policing: 

will you cancel these fee increases and support the people and 

businesses of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Public Safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, no I will not. And I’ll tell 

you why, Mr. Speaker. Because the people who have the safety 

and security of the citizens of this province paramount are those 

same people who own those buildings, own those pressure 

vessels, own the amusement rides, Mr. Speaker, and they are 

prepared to pay that difference for the safety of our citizens. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Housing Crisis 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, a lack of affordable housing and quality housing is at a 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

boiling point in Saskatchewan today. We know of young people 

couch surfing up in La Loche because they can’t find a place to 

stay. We know students are holding demonstrations to draw 

attention to the lack of affordable housing. We know that 

seniors are worried about whether or not they can afford their 

rent. And this morning, we heard media reports of families 

having to stay in the emergency room at St. Paul’s Hospital in 

Saskatoon last week. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: does she believe, does she 

truly believe there’s an affordable housing crisis here in 

Saskatchewan today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much for that 

question. And the quick answer quite frankly is, yes I do believe 

there is an affordable housing crisis in the province today, as 

well as an available housing crisis. 

 

And that is why I have asked two very credible gentlemen to 

take a look at this issue. The government previous had done 

some programs. We’ve been monitoring those programs, and I 

might add, Mr. Speaker, they put them in place on the eve of 

the election. And we’ve been . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

Minister of Social Services to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’d 

like to say that they took a look at it on the eve of an election. 

That was after the students were saying that there was a crisis 

when they went to get housing in the fall, and that was after we 

heard from different vulnerable citizens within the province. 

They finally took a look at it and put programs in place on the 

eve of the election. 

 

In less than six months, our government’s going to look at 

strengthening those programs as well as addressing the industry 

and what they can do to help this crisis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course HomeFirst was 

announced in 2004, and we were right on the ball. And of 

course we were listening to people last summer. 

 

But I want to say this. Yesterday the minister announced a new 

task force to study the issue and one of the members appointed 

to this task force is a former MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], Ted Merriman. Well last summer Mr. Merriman 

called the housing market an emergency situation. At the time 

he said to government, quote, “You just can’t wait. You’re not 

the one living on the streets.” Well the housing situation has 

indeed worsened since those comments were made but the 

government now seems all too willing to just sit and wait for a 

report. But like Mr. Merriman said, they’re not the ones sitting 

on the streets, living on the streets. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: why is she waiting to act on 

what is clearly a pressing need for Saskatchewan families, 

seniors, and students? How can she look at her former colleague 

in the eye and tell him this is action, when clearly all it is, is 

waiting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite surprising to 

me that that member would even stand on his feet today and 

come up with such a silly question. People have been waiting 

for 16 years for a government that never, ever conceived that 

this province could grow. They never planned for growth. They 

never did anything about the housing situation till the eve of an 

election. Then they finally put some programs into place. 

 

And they can’t take a compliment. I have said, Mr. Speaker, 

those programs were good. We need to strengthen them. We 

also need to see what the industry and what municipal 

governments need to partner with us to not only address 

affordability but availability, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what 

these two gentlemen are going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in February of 

last year our premier put an additional $100 million into 

affordable housing and community revitalization, the single 

largest expansion for the HomeFirst program. In this past 

summer, our government heard the voices of those who said 

more needed to be done. Countless groups were consulted and 

provided input into the solutions they felt would improve the 

housing crisis. 

 

Why is the minister insisting on reinventing the wheel? Is the 

photo op really worth the continued suffering of Saskatchewan 

people? My question is to the Minister of Social Services: will 

the minister stop playing politics with people’s lives and get to 

work on the affordable housing starting today, especially with 

today’s budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before I recognize the minister, 

I just want to remind members to address their comments 

through the Chair. Minister of Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I know there’s fewer members on the opposite side of the 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

House, and maybe they need to get a few more researchers 

because the fact is yes, they did say, they announced money for 

housing. They said it was there. They never spent it. They never 

spent it. It was a hollow announcement.  

 

So we currently have 856 units that are in construction right 

now and will be ready, which represents 71.5 million of those 

dollars. There also is an expression of interest that is going out 

fairly shortly which is a total of 18.4 million for First Nations 

housing off reserve and Métis housing. We have 84 

submissions of additional groups that want to partner with Sask 

Housing Corporation in different projects. That is all happening 

as we speak. It did not happen when that member was 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we finally got a straight answer 

from the Minister of Labour who bowed to political pressure 

and promised to hold a public competition through the Public 

Service Commission for the new Vice-Chair of the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

Now one way to get a straight answer from the minister is to 

ask a very simple question. Two weeks ago the government 

fired the Chair and the Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations 

Board and bypassed any open and public competition in the 

appointment of their new Chair, Ken Love, who has very close 

links to the Sask Party, and they promptly gave Mr. Love a 

$60,000 per year raise. 

 

My question: if an open and competitive process is good 

enough for the new Chair, why not the Chair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve discussed in this 

House, when we speak about the new Chair of the LRB [Labour 

Relations Board] we speak about an individual who’s capable, 

competent, respected throughout the legal community and the 

broader community in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have every confidence that he will set a new course for the 

LRB, making new efficiencies and running it professionally on 

behalf of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the public knows, J. Seibel, 

the former Chair of the Labour Relations Board was a private 

practice lawyer working with Gauley and Company in 

Saskatoon. He acted, before his appointment as Vice-Chair, as a 

lawyer for employers and employees who had issues with their 

union. 

 

He went through a competitive public process through the 

Public Service Commission to become the Vice-Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board, and then he moved up to the Labour 

Relations Board position of Chair. 

 

To the minister, can he name a single thing, any action, any 

decision, any discussion, any problem, anything at all that the 

former Chair of the Labour Relations Board did wrong, and 

why was this Chair, J. Seibel, a well-known Labour Relations 

Board lawyer who has represented employers, why did you fire 

him? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 

experiencing a time of renewal. Obviously what we see . . . 

people returning back to the province, coming to the province 

for the first time, 13,300 new full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. You 

can get a sense of renewal in the air, Mr. Speaker, and renewal 

is what our government is about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have said is that across various agency, boards, and 

commission, there will be a sense of renewal, Mr. Speaker. And 

this decision was in keeping with that spirit, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with Mr. Love’s 

appointment to the Labour Relations Board, the public is 

getting a sense of the Sask Party renewal in the public service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been many quotes about the 

minister’s inability to answer questions. From the CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] on March 7, there were 

still no answers as to how much this will cost taxpayers. Globe 

and Mail March 8, Mr. Norris, and I quote, “. . . didn’t answer 

questions about why he felt the three [LRB members] were not 

qualified to continue in their posts.” The StarPhoenix March 13, 

the minister “. . . refused to answer in question period and to 

reporters . . .” And in the Leader-Post yesterday, “. . . getting 

clear, reasonable explanations has been like extracting teeth,” 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even the Premier finally admitted on Monday that maybe the 

minister hadn’t done a very good job of communicating. Now 

here’s his chance. Here is his chance. Can he finally tell the 

people why he fired the former Chair and the two Vice-Chairs 

and how much is it going to cost the taxpayers? Will it cost as 

much as the 650,000 . . . 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate how 

attentive the member opposite is to the research that comes out 

of the media, and I hope that maybe she’ll explore some 

broader venues when she goes to do her research next time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in essence what we’re looking at, Mr. Speaker, is 

a sense of renewal across Saskatchewan. That sense of renewal 

is affecting agencies, boards, and commissions under this 

government as it has under previous governments, Mr. Speaker. 

What I’ve said on the cost, Mr. Speaker, is we will see because 

obviously there are some elements that are still under 

negotiation, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, not unlike every 

other provincial jurisdiction in our country, has dozens of 

administrative tribunals and quasi-judicial bodies like the 

Human Rights Tribunal, the Legal Aid Commission, the 

Saskatchewan Securities Commission. And the way the 

government has handled the Labour Relations Board really 

bodes very poorly for the way the government plans on running 

our province. 

 

Let’s review. They fired the Chair and the two Vice-Chairs. 

They still haven’t explained why. They’ve bypassed any normal 

hiring practices in hiring a Chair with obvious connections to 

the Sask Party and given their friend a $60,000 raise. And 

what’s worse, the Deputy Premier and the Premier have 

indicated that they expect the Labour Relations Board 

appointees to take into account their ideological predisposition. 

This is absolutely improper and downright frightening. 

Members of quasi-judicial boards should have not have to 

worry about what . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the member to place her question, 

please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Members of quasi-judicial boards shouldn’t 

have to worry about their rulings, and I would ask this: how 

does the member opposite justify this type of political 

interference in an administrative tribunal and a quasi-judicial 

board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. You know I’ve listened to that member for the last 

number of minutes talking about transition, and talking about 

records, and talking about the process that has been followed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share for the people in Saskatchewan 

today what that government did in 1991-92. In 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, the headline in the Leader-Post on October 23 said, 

“Transition begins.” And there’s a quote from the Premier Roy 

Romanow that says if you’re not politically compatible, you are 

not competent. Then there was the headline that said SEDCO 

and STC presidents dismissed. Mr. Speaker, it says . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The longer members 

take up time, the shorter the question period will be. Allow the 

minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post — 

this very confidential document — Tuesday December 3, 1991, 

“SGI President [Alex Wilde is] dismissed.” Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday December 7, 1991, the headline reads, “ Six more . . . 

jobs axed by NDP.” Mr. Speaker, the headline on December 10, 

’91, says, “Minister maintains dismissals not politically 

motivated.” Mr. Speaker, another headline, health official 

dismissed. There’s dozens and dozens of headlines that I hope 

to get on the record today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the 

three members of the Labour Relations Board that were fired 

went through a public competition through the Public Service 

Commission to receive their jobs. They were not politically 

appointed. Mr. Speaker, there is a person who’s been appointed 

to the Human Rights Commission who went through a 

competitive process. Mr. Speaker, the Ombudsman has called 

for a competitive process for all public tribunals or 

quasi-judicial tribunals, people who administer justice in the 

province who are not in the court system. Mr. Speaker, he has 

called for that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple question: can we expect 

further firings of people who’ve gone through a competitive 

selection process to receive their appointment to quasi-judicial 

bodies? Can we expect the person from the Human Rights 

Commission to be fired? And other people who have gone 

through this competitive process, are they going to put their 

political stamp on all of these tribunals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to share a few more headlines with the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on January 4, 1992, Mr. Speaker — and I want 

people to pay close attention to this — the headline reads, 

single mother took transfer then given the axe, on January 4, 

1992. Mr. Speaker, in January 1992 the heading is, more civil 

servants lose jobs. 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read this paragraph from a headline on 

January 16, 1992. It says, NDP fires PSC [Public Service 

Commission] chairman. The NDP government has dismissed 

the head of the Public Service Commission and released the 

names of several other employees it has dismissed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the headings continue. Three fired from Crowns. 

Former cabinet aide fired. Government dismisses six. Melville 

mayor fired. Mr. Speaker, there are dozens of people that were 

fired by that former government. 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s . . . 

Order. Order. I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Budget Expectations 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today this government will deliver a budget built on 

the largest surplus that’s ever been inherited by an incoming 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. They will build a 

budget on what is the strongest economy that this province has 

ever known. 

 

And yet today, Mr. Speaker, we have students in this province, 

we have seniors, we have low-income families, we have 

families in the North, on First Nations, and in our inner cities 

who are very concerned about the availability and affordability 

of housing. We have today, Mr. Speaker, in this province, 

families and students who are awaiting a place in a training seat 

so that they might become part . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. A number of government members 

have been trying to participate in the debate. I would ask the 

members to give the Leader of the Opposition the opportunity 

to place his question. Leader of the Opposition, would you 

place your question please. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we have 

families in this province who are awaiting real relief, real relief 

on their property taxes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today this government is sitting on a mountain 

of money. My question is to the Premier: will these 

Saskatchewan families and these Saskatchewan students feel a 

real difference in their lives tomorrow morning as a result of the 

budget this afternoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The good news, the good news, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the answer to that question, very directly, is yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Saskatchewan people are, in just a few 

moments, going to hear about perhaps the most exciting budget 

in modern history in Saskatchewan, an historic budget, Mr. 

Speaker, that seeks to do a couple of things. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition is correct. High commodity prices 

have set about an economic momentum in the province that we 

welcome. People are coming home to Saskatchewan. The 

numbers have even gotten better since the election, frankly, and 

they were moving in the right direction after the election. It’s 

true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s up to all of us in this 

House then to undertake those measures that will keep this 

momentum going, that will ensure that Saskatchewan is ready 

for growth, that will deal with a massive infrastructure deficit 

left behind by those members opposite when they were the 

government. Let me tell you something, Mr. Speaker. No one 

ought to doubt the resolve of this government to fix that 

infrastructure deficit left behind by those opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Final question. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Sit down. Mr. Speaker, invite the cheering 

section to sit down for a minute. We want one more question. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, some of us recall a former minister of 

Finance who had claims about his budget too. I think his name 

was Bob Andrew. And I wonder where he is today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the very first thing that this Premier said after he 

was appointed Premier, the very first thing he said publicly was 

to declare that the finances of the province of Saskatchewan 

were, quote, “stark.” And then in response to that tragic news, 

what did he do? Well his government went ahead and they 

raised — doubled in some cases — the political staff salaries in 

their ministers’ offices. The chief of staff salaries almost 

doubled. So today, Mr. Speaker, those salaries are more than 

the private members on the government side are getting paid. 

 

And since then, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen? Well we’ve 

seen a new Labour Relations Board Chair appointed. And what 

happens there? He gets a $60,000 raise, a 50 per cent raise. 

That’s in the case of stark finances. 

 

And so my question to the Premier is this. My question to the 

Premier is this. You’re sitting on a mountain of money. You’ve 

got oil at over $100 a barrel. You’ve got a stronger economy 

than ever before. As a result of your budget today, can 

Saskatchewan families expect the same kind of improvement in 

their lives as a result of this budget as you’re giving to your 

political staff and your politically appointed appointments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if I may, just 

if I may begin with a bit of truth and reconciliation of some of 

the purported facts that have been offered by the hon. member 

from Riversdale, let me just say, in his earlier question, he 

talked about property tax relief. We’re going to hear in a few 

moments about what is in the budget in terms of property tax 

relief. 

 

But I’ll tell you what. This party now sitting on the government 

side of the House, when we make a commitment on property 

tax in an election campaign, it is our intent — and more on that 

in a moment — to keep that promise, unlike that member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — When it comes to, when it comes to the 

political costs of this new government, let me tell you — and 

I’m not sure why the former premier wants to go here, but fine 

— we have made it a commitment that the political staff costs 

of this government will be lower than what we got from the 

NDP government. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we already 

know that that promise has already been kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — There’s about, there’s about 17 other 

promises that have been kept, from fixed election dates to 

cutting the NDP used car tax. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 

most important promise of all from our government is that we 

want to sustain the growth. We want to be ready for growth. We 

want to fix the infrastructure deficit left behind by the previous 

administration. Just wait for a few minutes more on that count, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Question period has elapsed. I call the 

members to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table answers to questions 294 to 

379. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 294 to 379 have been tabled. 

 

[14:15] 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I’ve got a motion first. Mr. Speaker, it 

is my pleasure to submit the estimates accompanied by a 

message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask everyone to rise for the message 

from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 

follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2009, and recommends the same 

to the Legislative Assembly. Honourable Gordon L. 

Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin I would like to take this opportunity 

to make some very special introductions. I would like to 

introduce some of the members of my family that are able to be 

here today with us, and first of all I’d like to introduce my 

daughter Pattie; my sister-in-law and her daughter Allison— 

Louise Gantefoer and Allison Gantefoer. I’d like to introduce 

my sister Jane and her daughter Janet. And most importantly, 

I’d like to introduce Carole. 

 

You know, Carole and I met in 1966, as hard as it is to imagine. 

We were married. We’ve been married for 39 years and in that 

time we’ve had three wonderful daughters and son-in-laws, 

Laurie and Mike in Calgary with their children — Hayley, 

Scott, and Rachael; Pattie who I’ve introduced, and her husband 

Tim in Melfort, and our grandchildren, Grant and Jack. And 

Bonnie, who is unable to be here today, and her husband Sam, 

from Regina, with their children Caleb and Sophie. And if 

you’ve kept count, that adds up to seven wonderful and 

delightful grandchildren. 

 

We as a family have shared much over these years and today we 

share the pride that I have in being asked to serve this great 

province. Welcome to you and thank you for being here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — It is my honour today as Minister of 

Finance to deliver this year’s budget — the first ever budget 

handed down by our new government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Last fall’s election came at a pivotal time in our province’s 

history. Saskatchewan was already enjoying a period of 

significant growth. Our economy was growing. New jobs were 

being created. And for the first time in many years, more people 

were moving into the province than were moving out. 

 

So the fundamental question of the campaign became, who is 

best able to sustain this growth and ensure it turns into lasting 

prosperity for all Saskatchewan people? All the parties put 

forward their best ideas to answer this very fundamental 

question. And on November 7, Saskatchewan people made a 

historic choice. They chose the first ever Saskatchewan Party 

government, based on our new ideas and the commitments we 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

made to sustain the economic momentum. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — For this honour and this great 

opportunity, we are both humbled by and grateful to the faith 

shown by the people of Saskatchewan in our Premier and in his 

government. But we are very mindful that along with this great 

opportunity, Saskatchewan people have also handed us some 

pretty clear expectations. They expect us to do what we said we 

would do. They expect us to keep our promises and to sustain 

the economic momentum. As my colleagues and I worked to 

prepare our first budget, these were our guiding principles. 

 

In fact, today I’ve chosen to wear a pair of special shoes as I 

deliver this first budget. Not just any shoes — they were the 

ones I wore as I campaigned last fall, as I went door to door 

talking to voters about our campaign commitments. And I wear 

them today to remind myself of these promises, and more 

importantly to remind myself it’s time to keep them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Today in Saskatchewan there’s a 

contagious optimism sweeping our province. After years of 

waiting, Saskatchewan people now sense that this is our time. 

Essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote, and I quote, “A creative 

economy is the fuel of magnificence.” 

 

Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of natural 

resources. Our resource-rich yet diverse economy is red-hot. 

We are the envy of the nation with opportunities others can only 

dream about. We have stepped away from the economic shadow 

cast by our neighbour to the west. Saskatchewan quite simply 

has come of age. 

 

And we’re no longer a have-not province. In fact in many areas, 

we’re leading the nation. Retail sales growth, number one in 

Canada. Growth in international exports, number one in 

Canada. Growth in the value of building permits, number one in 

Canada. Housing starts are number one in Canada as more and 

more young families build new homes and make a clear and 

confident statement: our future is in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We are currently experiencing the 

largest population growth in 30 years. Our population is rising 

as young families move back. Friends share with me and as a 

father and a grandfather I’m only too happy about the stories of 

sons, daughters, and grandchildren who are returning to this 

province. 

 

You know it used to be that when I drove through Melfort and 

saw the Alberta plates on the cars in the driveways, I knew that 

most were there for a very brief visit and soon would be 

packing up and heading back home to Alberta. Today I know 

that many of these Alberta plates will soon be coming off, and 

Saskatchewan plates will be taking their place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And that means a whole lot more than 

just trading in their car insurance. It means they’re also trading 

in and trading up for a future in Saskatchewan. 

 

Outside experts predict Saskatchewan will jump to the top of 

the economic growth in 2000 again. Again number one in 

Canada. More people are working in Saskatchewan than ever 

before. Our skilled labour force is hard pressed to keep up with 

the pace of demands for other workers. Simply put, 

Saskatchewan is on a roll. 

 

The task of our government and of this budget is to sustain the 

economic momentum to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

enjoy the benefits of a growing economy, and to ensure that we 

meet the challenges and avoid the pitfalls of the rapid growth 

we have seen in other jurisdictions. Which brings us to where 

we are today. 

 

If we are to turn the current economic surge into an enduring 

period of sustained prosperity for our province, we must be 

ready for growth. In other places we’ve seen the problems and 

the pressures that can arise when an aging infrastructure fails to 

keep up the pace of growth. Those same pressures are now 

emerging in Saskatchewan. Simply put, while Saskatchewan is 

ready for growth, our infrastructure is not. 

 

Our schools are in need of upgrades and renewal to ensure 

educators have proper facilities to teach the future generations 

of this province. Our schools and health care facilities are now 

overstressed environments and at times no longer a place to find 

wellness. Our roads and highways are crumbling under the 

weight of heavy traffic from heavier loads. 

 

Saskatchewan is ready for growth, but our infrastructure is not. 

We must address the infrastructure shortfall that we have 

inherited. We simply must build up our schools, our hospitals, 

our roads, and our highways. We must make them ready, for 

they have important jobs to do. We must prepare for growth and 

we must make a significant investment in the future. 

 

The time for that investment is now. Today I am pleased to 

announce a ready-for-growth initiative — the largest capital 

investment in the history of Saskatchewan. Our government 

will invest $1 billion in infrastructure across Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — One billion dollars to build and repair 

our hospitals, our highways, and our schools to ensure that 

Saskatchewan is ready for growth. Nearly $200 million will pay 

for key repairs and upgrades to our hospitals and health 

facilities, and will help to purchase new medical and safety 

equipment. We will enhance these centres of healing and take 

pride in their condition. For instance we’ll fix the leaking roofs 

at the health centres in Leader and Climax. And we must give 

hospitals in this province the capacity to keep up with health 

care demands. Capital dollars include plans to expand the 

Moose Jaw hospital and to also plan for a maternal child 

hospital within the Royal University Hospital. 

 

Over $160 million will focus on important upgrades and repairs 

to schools in rural and urban communities and make 

improvements to our universities and training centres. This 

money will give the green light to 11 new school projects across 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Over $400 million will help 

strengthen the crumbling roads and highways so that they can 

better carry the loads that go along with economic growth. This 

money will be used to help to reinforce roads so they are the 

lifelines connecting our communities, big and small. These 

dollars will support continued progress in northern First Nations 

access roads, to lessen the isolation they feel and ensure that 

they are fully ready to participate in a growing economy. 

 

This major investment will see the completion of twinning 

projects on major corridors, including Highways No. 1 and 16 

and continuing progress on Highway 11 between Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert. 

 

Nearly $140 million will flow towards municipalities, including 

the building communities fund. Significant money will improve 

the correctional centre in Regina, modernize our emergency 

communication system, and will also be used to maintain 

government buildings and replace equipment. 

 

We’re also dedicating more funds to the forest fire fleet and to 

regional and provincial parks to protect and enhance the natural 

beauty of this great province. 

 

We will be ready to embrace the opportunities coming to us. 

Today we can afford these upgrades thanks to our thriving 

economy. We can’t afford to ignore the infrastructure flaws, 

hoping that things are going to get better on their own. We can’t 

afford to let the pressures of growth outpace our infrastructure’s 

ability to handle growth. 

 

These improvements are big steps on the path to sustaining our 

economy. The time for this investment is now and we can make 

these improvements because of the strength in the economy and 

our strong fiscal position. This initiative, this $1 billion capital 

investment in our schools, our highways, our hospitals, and our 

future will ensure that Saskatchewan is ready for growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government came to power with 

an ambitious agenda. We were serious about the work ahead of 

us, and we will keep our promises to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I’m proud to say our government has already 

achieved significant progress. 

 

We have fixed election dates every four years, a smaller 

cabinet, stronger balanced budget legislation. We have kept 

these promises. We promised to remove the unpopular 

provincial sales tax on used cars, to provide cancer patients with 

access to drugs that will prolong their lives, and to make our 

streets and highways safer through stiffer penalties for drunk 

drivers. We have kept these promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. We promised to introduce 

changes to ensure greater democracy in the workplace and to 

protect essential services. We have kept these promises. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to assemble a unique, 

forward-looking group of leaders to form Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, and we promised to invite First Nations leaders 

to round table discussions on the duty to consult. We have kept 

these promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Today’s budget contains a fulfillment 

of funding of over 40 more commitments to benefit the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Today’s budget will benefit the 

hungry and provide care for the vulnerable adults and children 

in our society — the very poor, the very sick, the addicted, and 

people who can no longer care for themselves or their families. 

Today’s budget will support active and healthy families in 

Saskatchewan, and encourage safe and vibrant communities. 

 

Today’s budget will strengthen health care and fund an 

effective education system. Today’s budget will benefit the 

people of Saskatchewan in a time of great economic momentum 

and prosperity. These are the commitments we made during last 

fall election campaign. Today’s budget will fulfill these 

commitments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government has big dreams and 

big plans for the children of this province. We want 

Saskatchewan children to be happy and well cared for. We want 

them to be healthy, and we want them to be active. Today’s 

budget will benefit Saskatchewan children and families. 

 

We promised to increase funding to school lunch and hunger 

programs, so our children can fill their minds with knowledge 

and not be distracted by empty stomachs. Today we are keeping 

that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised an improved 

prescription drug plan providing a $15 cap on drugs for children 

aged 14 and under. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We want families to enjoy the 

beautiful vacation spots Saskatchewan has to offer. That’s why 

we promised to eliminate the unpopular campfire permit fee and 

to increase funding Saskatchewan regional and provincial 

parks, to upgrade facilities, and create more electrified 

campsites. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to make 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

Saskatchewan’s children activities more affordable for our 

families. Today we are keeping that promise by announcing the 

new active families benefit which will come into effect for the 

2009 tax year. 

 

Our government believes in a province where everyone is able 

to achieve their full potential, and we recognize the tremendous 

work done by community-based organizations to achieve this 

goal. And that’s why we promised to provide an additional $5 

million a year to CBOs [community-based organization] that 

provide life skills and employment training. Today we are 

keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government believes that a 

vibrant arts community is key to providing a high quality of life 

that attracts people to our province. And that’s why we 

promised to maintain funding for provincial arts organizations. 

And today we’re keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — A wonderful, popular saying among 

First Nations and indigenous communities around the world, 

which resonates with me as well, says treat the earth well. It 

was not given to you by your parents; it was loaned to you by 

your children. We do not inherit the earth from our ancestors. 

We borrow it from our children. That’s why we promised a 

significant boost of $10 million to green initiatives funding, so 

we can keep our environment healthy and balanced and that so 

Saskatchewan will remain a beautiful and clean place to live. 

Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government committed to 

doubling the caregiver tax credit to assist family caregivers who 

generously give of their time and compassion to help elderly, 

sick, or disabled family members. Today I am pleased to 

announce that we are not only keeping that promise; we will go 

further. We will also be increasing other tax credits that assist 

families in caring for their family members with disabilities. So 

we are keeping that promise as well today and enhancing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised relief for the significant 

burden of property taxes in this province by increasing the 

educational property tax rebate from 10 to 12 per cent this year 

from homeowners and from 38 to 47 per cent for farmers. 

Today we are keeping that promise and increasing this tax 

credit to nearly $160 million of tax relief. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This translates to an average farm 

landowner saving over $2,000 in taxes on their property, and 

we recognize that more work needs to be done to form 

long-term solutions to put this issue at rest. 

 

Today’s budget will benefit Saskatchewan as we work together 

to make our communities safe and vibrant. We promised to 

assist those in our society that need our help. We promised to 

commit major new funding to additional addiction treatment. 

Today we are keeping that promise. We promised over $1 

million to support transition houses and sexual assault centres. 

Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We also promised to make our 

communities safer by putting more police officers on the street. 

Today we’re keeping that promise. This budget provides an 

additional $3 million required to hire 30 more police officers 

who will be posted across the province. This is the first step in 

our four-year commitment to expand the police force by 120 

new members. And we promised to increase the victim 

surcharge paid by offenders to provide additional support to the 

victims of crime. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Philosopher Henri Frederic Amiel 

said, “In health there is freedom. Health is the first of all 

liberties.” Today’s budget will give a much needed boost to 

health care in Saskatchewan. Our first step was to increase the 

Ministry of Health’s budget by over $300 million to over $3.7 

billion. 

 

Health care professionals can expect the support they need in 

this year’s budget. We’ve recently announced that $60 million 

will flow towards a new Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

partnership to begin to address the nursing shortage in our 

province. We’ve also promised significant new dollars to 

support the additional training seats for physicians and nurses. 

Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We will encourage physician 

recruitment and retention for internationally trained medical 

graduates. We promised new funding to add more drugs to the 

prescription drug plan. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government will provide $6 

million to make new and more effective prescription drugs 

available to Saskatchewan people. We promised to increase 

support for cancer patients, to increase funding to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and to cover the cost of Avastin 

and other much-needed cancer drugs and supplies. Today we 

are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised proactive measures to 

promote health and wellness in this province, and we promised 

to establish a 10-year capital plan for health care to keep our 

system in good shape for the future, to ensure our hospitals and 

health facilities are repaired and maintained to better meet the 

needs of the sick and the injured. Today we are keeping that 

promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Today’s budget will benefit students 

in Saskatchewan. We are dedicating 75 million additional 

dollars to our university and post-education system to train, 

retain, and attract young people to Saskatchewan. This is the 

key to the prosperity of our province. We promised a bold, new 

initiative to keep more of our educated young people in 

Saskatchewan by offering $20,000 in tuition rebates over seven 

years following graduation. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. The budget speech is hot 

work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to help university 

students with their tuition costs, and we are providing another 

year of tuition freeze with an 8 per cent increase in operating 

costs dedicated to universities. Today we’re keeping that 

promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I reminded guests and ask them 

not to participate in debate. Thank you. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to increase support to 

the Johnson-Shoyama School of Public Policy to train brilliant 

minds for brilliant futures in the civil service right here in 

Saskatchewan. Today we are keeping that promise. We 

promised to address the labour shortage by increasing training 

opportunities throughout the province. Today we are keeping 

that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This budget supports the creation of 

300 more training opportunities for on-reserve adult basic 

education seats through local college and the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technology. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We’ll also be working to develop 

further training opportunities through the $15 million dedicated 

to enhance training opportunities for under-skilled individuals 

in a new 6-year labour market agreement recently signed with 

the federal government. In addition to a significant capital 

investment, Saskatchewan schools, under a ready-for-growth 

initiative, we have promised to increase operating funding from 

K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12]. Today we’re keeping that 

promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to maintain funding 

levels for child care and early childhood learning and 

development programs in Saskatchewan. Today we’re keeping 

that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — In fact this budget will add 500 more 

child care spaces, giving our respected child care workers a 

raise and including 38 new pre-kindergarten programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We feel it’s vital to nourish child care 

and early childhood learning and development so that our 

smallest citizens can learn about the wonders of education at a 

time when they are most receptive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Saskatchewan people will benefit 

from our thriving economy. We want to see everyone enjoy the 

benefits of opportunity and prosperity as we prepare for growth. 

We promised to fully fund our agricultural risk management 

programs, crop insurance and agri-stability and agri-invest 

programs formerly known as CAIS [Canadian agricultural 

income stabilization]. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government is committing over 

$220 million to fully fund these programs which includes a $25 

million increase to the crop insurance program. We will also 

keep our promise to initiate a crop insurance review this year to 

provide better coverage for our producers. 

 

We promised to provide additional funding for the petroleum 

institute technology research centre, and we’ve also expanded 

the potential of CO2 capture. Today we’re keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — And we promised to introduce 

five-year interest free loans to municipalities in our 

Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative to assist 

communities in dealing with a growing demand for both 

commercial and residential lots. Today we’re keeping that 

province . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — As our economy grows, affordable 

homes are more difficult to find, especially for first-time 

homebuyers and renters. Our government is reviewing this issue 

and will take necessary steps to ensure that we all benefit from 

our province’s prosperity. We promise to dedicate the proceeds 

from the sale of the NewGrade upgrader to fixing our roads and 

highways. Today we’re not only keeping that promise; we’re 

accelerating our timetable by committing $140 million over the 

next two years to municipal roads and highways. 

 

We will develop plans this year in partnership with the 

Saskatchewan universities for a transportation centre of 

excellence. The centre’s purpose is to do research and test new 

technologies on road construction and repair to provide 

innovation that will improve our highway system. 

 

We promised to increase municipal revenue sharing at 7 per 

cent for the year 2008-09. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to double tourism 

funding in this province to $16 million to spread the word of 

what a wonderful place Saskatchewan is to explore. Today we 

are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to reinstate the 

Saskatchewan mineral exploration tax credit to encourage all 

Saskatchewan residents to participate in our economic success. 

Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — We promised to increase grants for 

First Nations consultations, including support for the mapping 

of traditional territories. Today we are keeping that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Today’s budget also recognizes that 

full participation in the economy by First Nations and Métis 

people is vital to sustaining our economic momentum. That’s 

why we will boost loans to the Northern Development Fund to 

assist with business development and diversification and create 

more jobs in northern Saskatchewan. Our government wants to 

expand on programs promoting self-reliance in communities 

and employment and business development. We will continue 

to make grants available to Aboriginal entrepreneurs to create 

more businesses with the spinoff effect of more jobs to our First 

Nations people. We will also enhance partnerships and open 

lines of communications between employers, training centres, 

and Aboriginal people. 

 

Our government believes in the incredible talents, creativity, 

and skills of our First Nations residents. We believe in what 

they can achieve, and we will offer them the tools they need to 

get there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Our government believes that the 

foundation of a growing economy and long-term prosperity for 

our province is sound fiscal management, balancing the budget, 

and paying down debt. That’s why we promised our first budget 

would include $250 million for debt reduction in order to lessen 

the burden on future generations. Today we are keeping that 

promise. And we promised to balance the budget. I’m very 

pleased to announce today that we are keeping that promise. 

This budget is balanced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — French author, Anatole France who’s 

believed to have said: 

 

To accomplish great things, we must not only act, but we 

must also dream; not only [to] plan, but also to believe. 

 

Today’s budget provides not only a vision, but also a plan for 

securing Saskatchewan’s future. It’s about our dreams for the 

future. It’s about action, the action that we must take to be 

ready for this growth. 

 

Our government’s plan for the future is financially sustainable. 

Today I have presented a four-year fiscal plan that is balanced. 

We’ve developed a $1 billion ready-for-growth infrastructure 

plan to lead us into that future. To bring our hospitals, our 

schools, our roads, and our highways up to date requires the 

largest investment in public infrastructure in the history of our 

great province as we continue to strive to do better. 

 

This budget ensures we’ll keep our promises to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’ll follow up on every commitment I’ve 

announced today to ensure that every detail is done, right down 

to hammering the last nail. 

 

Today Saskatchewan people are looking to the future with 

unprecedented hope and optimism. Yet in typical Saskatchewan 

fashion, there’s a common sense sort of practicality in this 

optimism. They want it to be our unique own Saskatchewan 

brand of growth — growth that maintains everything that is 

great about this province: our high quality of life, our pristine 

environment, and our strong sense of community. 

 

And they are asking, are we ready? Are we ready for all the 

opportunities that are coming our way? Are we ready to fulfill 

the endless possibilities the future has to offer? Are we ready 

for growth? I believe the answer is yes and that, years from now 

when future generations look back on this pivotal moment in 

our province’s history, they will see that we did make the right 

choices. We did make the right investments in our future, and 

we were indeed ready for growth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Thank you. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers: 

 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved, seconded by the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise today to respond to the budget on behalf of the 



March 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

NDP official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset let me point out that this first 

Saskatchewan Party budget is also the first balanced budget that 

had been tabled by a right wing government in Saskatchewan 

since Ross Thatcher in the 1960s. We think this is 

commendable. We want to congratulate the Finance minister on 

his place in history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I remember a few years 

standing in this Assembly to deliver a budget to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and at that time the Saskatchewan Party called it 

a deficit budget. Back then the Fiscal Stabilization Fund which 

was in the budget was, to quote them, an NDP slush fund. 

 

My, Mr. Speaker, how things have changed. So now that 

budget, that budget is being recognized by the Saskatchewan 

Party government as being a balanced budget — part of a string 

of 15 balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. Now the Saskatchewan 

Party proudly points out to a $1.3 billion Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund as an example of some management and fiscal common 

sense, Mr. Speaker. You know the saying, imitation is the 

sincerest form of flattery. It’s somewhat belated, but thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there are some other 

similarities to a previous NDP budget. Millions of dollars for 

highways, new schools, hospitals, targeted tax cuts, and I could 

go on. Mr. Speaker, this government has taken the hard work of 

the NDP, the fiscal discipline of the NDP, and they have 

delivered a budget balanced with the money left behind by the 

NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — In fact I would go so far as to categorize 

this as an NDP almost budget. It almost addresses all the needs 

of the people of the province. It almost delivers on the promise 

of Saskatchewan. It is almost a people’s budget, and I say 

almost because we do have some concerns about this budget, 

Mr. Speaker. First of all, this budget does not do enough to 

address the need of people of Saskatchewan for property tax 

relief. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Both the NDP and the Saskatchewan 

Party campaigned on the recent election on this issue. I heard it 

on many doorsteps, particularly with the high seniors 

population in my constituency, seniors on fixed incomes who 

are crying out for a reduction in the education component of 

their property tax. This budget almost addresses that issue but 

not quite. There is some money set aside for property tax relief 

but not enough, Mr. Speaker, not nearly enough. It is not what 

was promised, and at a time when the government is sitting on a 

$1.3 billion Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget almost delivers on the necessary 

investment in environmental sustainability. There is some new 

money to deal with what many say in Saskatchewan is the 

greatest challenge facing this province, this country, and this 

world, Mr. Speaker. I speak of course of climate change and 

CO2 greenhouse gas emissions that are causing it. This budget 

almost addresses that issue but not quite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is taking advantage of the 

booming economy that the NDP helped to create in 

Saskatchewan, but what helps to fuel that economy, what helps 

to fuel that economy is skilled workforce, Mr. Speaker. That is 

something that the NDP government understood. That is what is 

why we continually invested in new training seats and new 

opportunities for people to get the training they needed to fully 

participate in the economy. This budget almost does that too. 

There’s some investment in schools, colleges, and university. 

There’s some expansion of the number of training seats 

available, but there’s not enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government risk choking off the economy due 

to a lack of skilled workers. The Minister of Finance said that 

this budget was about being ready for growth, but without 

skilled workers there will be no growth. So there’s almost a 

solution there, Mr. Speaker — almost. I would say this budget 

is almost ready for growth. 

 

Our fourth and final area of concern, Mr. Speaker, is the critical 

area of housing, whether it’s student housing, seniors housing, 

low-income housing, or the rising cost to rent. Everywhere we 

go in this province, the message is loud and clear. There is a 

housing crisis in Saskatchewan. This is an area where the 

budget falls short of being an NDP budget. There’s nothing in 

this budget to address this issue. There’s no hope for students, 

no hope for seniors, no hope for our northern citizens, no hope 

for renters. 

 

We believe we need to invest in people. Given an opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker, we raised the minimum wage in government. We 

cut the sales tax. We created a new statutory holiday for 

working people to spend with their families. We made sure that 

all people benefited from the booming economy. We made sure 

our budgets were about people. This is almost a people’s 

budget, Mr. Speaker, but not quite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have identified four key areas in my remarks 

today, four key areas that make this almost a people’s budget: 

property tax relief, the environment and climate change, skills 

training to put skilled people into the workforce, and the 

housing crisis. Mr. Speaker, what the members of the 

Saskatchewan Party never understood was that it’s simply not 

enough to oppose for the sake of opposing, to criticize for the 

sake of criticizing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose some changes that could 

and should be made to this budget, changes that would make it 

better but still a far from perfect budget. First, I am calling on 

the Saskatchewan Party government to stop the studies and 

delays and implement their campaign promise on property 

taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — This budget calls for the average 

homeowner to save $133 a year. I want the Sask Party to keep 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2008 

their promise and give the people of Saskatchewan $450 a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to point out the saving would be 

even more significant for our farmers and ranchers. Don’t 

almost deal with the property tax issue; actually deal with it. 

The money is there to do it. Well do it. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am calling on the government to 

double their commitment to increase funding for environmental 

change. On this side we are committed to the issue of climate 

change with dedicated funding and personnel. The 

Saskatchewan Party has adopted our targets for emission 

reductions, which is good, but they have cancelled much of the 

funding, which is bad. They almost got it right, Mr. Speaker, 

but not quite. Don’t almost deal with the biggest issue that’s 

facing our province, our country, and this world; start actually 

dealing with it. 

 

Third, I am calling on the government to double the increase in 

the number of training seats. This budget will only increase the 

number of training seats in the province by 1,100. That is 

almost as much as we did last year, but not quite. Last year we 

added over 2,000 training seats in the province and there’s 

absolutely no reason why the government cannot match or beat 

that number this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Don’t almost be ready for growth; 

actually be ready for growth. 

 

And my fourth and final proposal, Mr. Speaker, is as follows: 

start acting on the housing crisis facing this province. There has 

been enough study. There has been enough talk. The time for 

action is now. Don’t almost deliver a people’s budget; actually 

deliver a people’s budget. Don’t ignore this issue. Act on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to the prudent 

fiscal management of the former government, there is a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund in this budget worth $1.3 billion. 

 

This Saskatchewan Party government is sitting — to borrow a 

phrase — on a mountain of money. Take some of that money 

and make this budget a people’s budget. Act on property tax 

relief like you said you were going to do. Act on climate change 

— the biggest issue facing our world. Act on being truly ready 

for growth by having the necessary skilled workers in the 

workforce. Act on the housing crisis. Deliver a people’s budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have far more to say on this tomorrow. But 

at this time, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 20, 2008. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the debate on the motion that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 20, 2008. 

 

Is the Assembly agreed to the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this very 

historic day, it’s my pleasure to move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I would just like 

to thank our guests for coming and joining us, and invite them 

to join the members for tea in room 218, to your left as you 

depart from the Chamber; and in the library to your right, the 

right hall as you depart from the Chamber. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved that this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:59.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 371 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 371 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 371 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 371 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 371 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Contributions of Community Association 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 371 

 Focus on Women Trade Show 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 371 

 Seven-Year-Old Raises Money for Alzheimer’s 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 372 

 Dalmeny Students Support Schools in Afghanistan 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 372 

 Saskatoon Citizen Receives Global Citizens Award 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 372 

 Saskatoon Student Awarded Carnegie Foundation Scholarship 

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 373 

 Status of the Artist Bill 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 373 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Increased Fees 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 373 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 374 

 Housing Crisis 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 374 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 375 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 376 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 376 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 377 

 Budget Expectations 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 378 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 378 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 379 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 379 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 379 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 379 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 384 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 386 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




