




















































Hansard: October 28, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1399 

 October 28, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that Mr. Speaker is 

not here today to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

my honour to introduce to you and through you a group of 

guests visiting us today. They’re in your gallery. They are from 

the People’s Republic of China, and they are members of the 

Chinese National People’s Congress and the State Council of 

China. 

 

Saskatchewan and China have a long-standing relationship as 

trading partners. We have supplied large volumes of grain, 

potash, uranium, and manufactured goods to China. And 

Saskatchewan and China share some similar concerns on the 

environmental front and the challenges facing us with 

coal-generated power. The guests with us today are going to be 

visiting with the University of Regina to look at our carbon 

capture and storage systems, and also discuss, with SaskPower, 

clean coal technology. 

 

So I will introduce them and ask them to rise as I say their 

names, and I apologize to them in advance for any 

mispronunciations. 

 

Xu Xiaodong is the team leader and the director-general of the 

research department of the environmental protection and 

resources conservation committee of the National People’s 

Congress. Shang Jucheng is the deputy team leader and 

director-general of the administrative office of the 

environmental protection and resources conservation 

committee. 

 

Liu Shuguang is the director of the administrative office; Li 

Hailin, senior analyst in the research department; Yin Shukun, 

senior analyst in the research department; Xu Shufan, deputy 

director-general in the science and technology department of the 

Ministry of Environmental Protection; Hu Xiaojun, director of 

the department of agriculture, resources and environmental 

protection of the Ministry of Executive Supervision and 

Inspection; Wang Ying, director in the department of 

agriculture, resources and environmental protection of the 

National Audit Agency; Li Yingcai, director of the 

environmental protection and resource conservation committee 

in the Xi’an municipal congress of Shaanxi province. Wang 

Qian, researcher in the consulting department, China institute 

for environmental planning in the Ministry of Environmental 

Protection. Jiang Hengwei, staff member with the foreign 

affairs bureau in the general office of the National People’s 

Congress. 

 

And joining our Chinese guests today from AMEC Canada are 

Wit Siemieniuk, vice-president; Su Liu, environmental scientist 

from AMEC, Beijing office; and from the Saskatchewan 

Ministry of Environment, Liz Quarshie, deputy minister, and 

Zewei Yu of the corporate planning and policy branch. 

 

The visit from our distinguished guests to Saskatchewan 

reflects the shared commitment of the Chinese people and 

Saskatchewan people to protect our environment while 

sustaining economic growth. And I would ask all members of 

the Assembly to join me in welcoming our visitors today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. To you and through you to the rest of the members of 

the Assembly today, I’d like to introduce a number of guests 

that have travelled great distance to be here. They’re here in 

Saskatchewan to attend the International Health Co-operative 

Organisation symposium on the role of co-operatives in health 

care. This Thursday it’ll be in Saskatoon. 

 

Around the world, health organizations, co-operative health 

organizations, own hospitals. They manufacture 

pharmaceuticals and operate long-term care facilities that 

benefit millions of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Representatives from Brazil, Japan, Spain, Sweden, the United 

States, and Canada will be making presentations on their 

respective co-operative health movements. I am pleased to say 

that Saskatchewan will be discussing our province’s 

co-operative clinics and their role in our primary health care 

model. 

 

Joining us this afternoon are representatives from Japan, 

Quebec, Manitoba, and delegates from Saskatchewan as well. I 

understand that they’ll be in attendance at a number of our 

facilities, including the co-operative clinics, the community 

clinics, in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

So I’d like all members of the Assembly to welcome them to 

our province and, for the people from Saskatchewan, their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and through you three individuals seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. They are Chief Roger Bird of Montreal Lake Cree 

Nation, the past chief of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations], Alphonse Bird, and the vice-chief of the Prince 

Albert Grand Council, Ed Henderson. Please join me, Mr. 

Speaker, in welcoming them to their Assembly and wishing 

them luck in the meetings that they had here today and in their 

endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join the Minister of Health in welcoming the group of people 

who are going to be looking at our co-operative health facilities 

across Saskatchewan. As members may know, there are several 

people on this side of the House that presently receive our 

medical services from a co-operative health clinic. The 

co-operative health clinic in our province has a very proud 

history coming out of 1962 when our province became the first 

province in Canada to introduce universal medicare. 

 

So I want to welcome our guests from Canada and welcome our 

international guests to the Legislative Assembly and hope that 

you have very fruitful discussions with co-operators in our 

province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like 

to join with the member opposite to introduce to everyone in the 

gallery three individuals: Chief Roger Bird, chief of the 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation, Vice-chief Ed Henderson from 

Prince Albert Grand Council, and former vice-chief, FSIN, 

Alphonse Bird. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to publicly state that I 

appreciate all the discussions we’ve had with these individuals 

and that we have a shared vision and commitment for our 

province. So I ask everyone to join with me in welcoming these 

individuals to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary 

and Highways minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 

introduce two constituents that are sitting in the west gallery 

today. I was pleased to glance up there and notice Bryon and 

Judy Harkness from the community of Shaunavon. 

 

I want to make note of their attendance here today by indicating 

that I think it’s about 20 years ago now, they answered an ad in 

the newspaper for somebody to come to Shaunavon and 

establish a new car dealership. They were sequestered in north 

central Manitoba, I think. And I won’t say that they were 

looking for an escape, but they got to Shaunavon and they knew 

at last their opportunity had come. Not only was the economic 

opportunity real, the weather was much improved. And Bryon 

Harkness, along with his partner Rod Crockett, came and 

established an automotive dealership there, have been in 

business consistently and effectively for a number of years. 

 

And I want to welcome Bryon and his wife Judy here today. I 

understand Bryon has been facing some health challenges. I 

hope he is doing well, and we wish him the best on behalf of the 

members of this legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 

petition in support of public safety and security in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of the safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders, including the policing 

community, the corrections community, and community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs and understand the risks and challenges that gangs 

offer to our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to present 

petitions in support of reduction in the education portion of 

property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by petitioners from Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, I rise today to present a petition in regards to 

new child care spaces: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition against means testing the seniors’ drug 

plan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and to ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

National Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to speak 

about an issue that is near and dear to my heart — National 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month. It was 15 years ago, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that my mother, Ella, died of breast cancer 

after a courageous two-year battle with the disease. Since then 

my two sisters and I have been very diligent in preventive 

screening for the breast cancer, knowing how crucial early 

diagnosis and effective treatment are in combatting the disease. 

 

I recently read a statistic that stated one in nine Canadian 

women will develop breast cancer during her lifetime. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that means one or possibly two of the 11 

female MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] that sit 

before you today in the Legislative Assembly will one day 

develop this disease. In Saskatchewan an estimated 620 women 

will be diagnosed with breast cancer this year and 160 will 

perish. Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lesser-known fact is that 50 men 

will also die of breast cancer in 2008 here in Canada. 

 

With this fear, however, there is still hope. Two-thirds of 

women diagnosed with breast cancer will live through this 

disease and only one in every 28 Canadian women will die. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to encourage everyone to stop 

and remind the women in their lives to set up an appointment 

with their doctor to screen for this disease. With early detection, 

effective treatment, and innovative research, may we all look 

forward to the end of this terrible disease called breast cancer. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association 

Awards Banquet 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising to 

recognize the hard work and dedication of the members of the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, who on 

October 18 held their 62nd annual general meeting in The 

Battlefords, and to congratulate three local individuals who 

were honoured at the association’s awards banquet. 

 

The banquet pays tribute to exceptional individuals and 

communities who through their efforts and skills have made 

outstanding and extraordinary contributions towards the 

betterment of the parks and recreation movement in 

Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 

name to those congratulating this year’s volunteer award 

recipients who come from The Battlefords. 

 

The Facility Operator Award was presented to Kelly Oliphant, 

who for the past 13 years has been employed by the town of 

Battleford. The Fitness Leadership Award was presented to 

Nicola “Nikki” Holtzhausen, a 12-year fitness leader and now a 

fitness instructor with the city of North Battleford. And the 

Citation for Outstanding Achievement was presented to Bernie 

Albers, a professional for more than 25 years, who is the parks 

and recreation director in the city of North Battleford. 

 

Each of these recipients are well known throughout The 

Battlefords and I call upon all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join me today in recognizing and applauding their 

achievements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert. 

 

Prince Albert Physician Named Saskatchewan 

Family Physician of the Year 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

September 26, Dr. Brenda Hookenson was awarded the 2008 

Saskatchewan College of Family Physicians of the Year Award 

by the Saskatchewan College of Family Physicians during a 

banquet. I’m proud to say this fine individual is a constituent of 

mine. Dr. Hookenson is well deserving of this honour, and I 

was pleased to hear that she was recognized for her dedication 

and significant contribution to the health of the citizens of 

Prince Albert and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Dr. Hookenson has been practising 

medicine for over 30 years, and we recognize that she plays a 

critical role in the province’s health care system. Several of her 

co-workers thought so much of her that they nominated her for 

this prestigious award. In the nomination package, Dr. Thomas 

Smith-Windsor wrote, and I quote: 

 

Dr. Hookenson is a full-service family physician, who 

over the course of her career has provided emergency 

coverage, obstetrical care, anaesthetic work, operating 

room assists, and is a preceptor for rural family medical 

residents. As well, the care that she provides to her 

patients is exemplary. 

 

Dr. Hookenson also holds many appointments, including 

clinical preceptor for the College of Family Physicians of 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Canada and clinical assistant professor in the College of 

Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. She’s been 

involved with continuing medical education programs and sits 

on the board for the Saskatchewan College of Family 

Physicians and the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 

So today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as MLA for Prince Albert 

Carlton, I ask all members to join me in personally recognizing 

and congratulating Dr. Brenda Hookenson on receiving the 

2008 Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year Award. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Extended Transition Program Supports Former Students 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Prairie South School 

Division has created a pilot project to help make a difference 

for students transitioning from high school into post-secondary 

education, training, or meaningful employment. 

 

The extended transition program has been operating since 2007 

and is the first school-based program in Saskatchewan that 

offers support for former students. The program was created by 

career development consultant Jacky Lothian and the former 

superintendent of student services for the Prairie South School 

Division, the late George Falk. 

 

The goal of the program is to have participants employed, 

enrolled in an employment program, attending a career-related 

training course, or furthering and/or upgrading their education 

within a few months of accessing the program. Heather 

Gobbett, facilitator of the program, works individually with the 

students to help identify sources of support that fit with the 

students’ needs. Often it’s a matter of just directing students to 

community-based programs that already exist. 

 

This is an approach that is working. The one-of-a-kind program 

is now gaining recognition, given that all school divisions have 

students in need of extra support. It’s a relatively low-cost way 

of meeting the needs of youth involved and helping them to 

make the appropriate career choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

all those involved in this innovative program and extend their 

best wishes to all participants. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Weyburn Veterans Honoured 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This past 

weekend I had the great pleasure of attending Weyburn’s first 

military homecoming parade since the end of the Second World 

War in honour of returning veterans. Hundreds of Weyburn and 

area residents gathered along the streets of Weyburn on 

Saturday afternoon to welcome home Sergeant Jon Barth, 

Sergeant James Richards, Private Evan Kimber, and 

Bombardier Roy Matheson, all who have returned in recent 

weeks from a tour of duty in Afghanistan. 

 

The afternoon began with a military parade through the streets 

of downtown Weyburn with a large crowd gathered to greet the 

soldiers in front of the Legion. As the parade was making its 

way up 3rd Street back towards the Legion, the crowd was 

treated to a flypast by a B-52 bomber out of the Minot Air 

Force Base, and three local pilots. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the festivities continued inside the Legion where 

the sold-out crowd heard from numerous dignitaries and 

community members, and finally the veterans themselves who 

spoke of the mission and of its importance and also the 

overwhelming level of support that they and their families 

received by neighbours, co-workers, friends, and even strangers 

in the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this incredible day in the history of Weyburn was 

the work of many people, but it was really the hard work and 

dedication of Mr. Larry Pearson of the Legion, Weyburn 

branch, who worked so hard to arrange this special day for our 

returning veterans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the residents of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, I offer my thanks and congratulations to Larry for this 

incredible day. And to our returning veterans, thank you for 

your service to our country, and welcome home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Sheet Metal Workers Local 296 Celebrate Anniversary 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On Saturday, 

September 27 I, along with several of my colleagues, joined 

with the sheet metal workers to celebrate the 50th anniversary 

of Local 296. Fifty years ago Local 296 was born when three 

small local unions merged as one and would be guided by 

business manager Archie Dorn. Though small at first, Local 296 

has grown to represent sheet metal workers across the entire 

province. 

 

Local 296 has come a long way in the past 50 years with respect 

to wages, benefits, and working conditions — the very 

cornerstones for which it stands. At the same time the members 

of Local 296 have earned a reputation in the construction 

industry for being reliable, dedicated, and enthusiastic workers. 

The members of Local 296 have earned the respect of 

contractors in the industry through sticking to the principles of 

providing good workmanship and giving a solid day’s labour 

for a day’s pay. 

 

Local 296 has enjoyed success beyond the borders of 

Saskatchewan with the promotion of past business manager 

Bert Ottenson as international representative, and more recently 

the endorsement of present business manager Garry Kot to the 

fifth international vice-president. Once again I want to 

congratulate Sheet Metal Workers Local 296 on their milestone 

of 50 years of service. I wish them all the best in the next 50 

years. 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Member’s Comments About Party Leadership 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, he might not be able to play the 

piano but he can sure sing like a canary. Last week the member 

for Regina Dewdney, the same member who wouldn’t tell the 

public about prisoner escapes, had no problem telling the world 

about the shady world of NDP [New Democratic Party] 

backroom shenanigans. First we learned that the member was 

the mastermind behind the abortive 2006 attempt to force out 

the former premier. Then we learned that the only reason that 

the attempt did not succeed was that his caucus colleagues were 

sufficiently lacking in moral fibre. As he said, quote “I was the 

only one . . . [to] stand my ground.” 

 

So having insulted every one of his colleagues, the member 

then moved on to pontificating on his party’s leadership race 

and his friend Dwain Lingenfelter. We learned that Link has 

demanded and received overwhelming caucus support — that 

this was indeed a prerequisite for him to again grace our 

province with his presence. We learned that over half of the 

four women in caucus have pledged their support. Assuming 

that the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow is a candidate, that 

means that even the member for Saskatoon Nutana is 

supporting Link. Who would have thunk it? 

 

Perhaps the member for Regina Dewdney is the canary in the 

mine shaft — or perhaps Lingenfelter is thinking that with 

friends like this, who needs enemies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Notification Policy 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister 

of Public Safety assures us that his new policy will ensure that 

the public is kept informed when a person who poses a threat to 

their safety is unlawfully at large. But, Mr. Speaker, new policy 

is only good if it works. We have seen this minister’s new 

policy fail twice in the last week. To the minister: why did his 

new policy fail, was the policy put in writing, and will he table 

it for us today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Corrections and Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the escape in August I did ask my 

officials to develop a policy involving new public notification. 

It is in place. It was in place for this last incident, Mr. Speaker. 

It wasn’t followed, Mr. Speaker. Sorry to say that, Mr. Speaker, 

the previous government over there did nothing to ensure public 

safety because it did nothing to ensure public notification. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It might be 

easier for members of this legislature and the general public to 

understand why the minister’s new policy failed if we could see 

that policy for ourselves. I don’t understand his lack of 

willingness to table his new policy so that we can see what was 

communicated to his staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this goes to the minister’s credibility. Why won’t 

he table the policy? Again to the minister: will he table his new 

policy or will he admit he didn’t bother to write it down? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

policy’s clear. It’s in the central office: notify the public after 

notifying the police. Mr. Speaker, enough said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, people have real concerns 

about why this minister’s policy has failed to do what he said it 

would do. The minister is placing blame solely on the shoulders 

of his deputy minister, but we still don’t know how he arrived at 

that conclusion. Instead of announcing a study, the logical thing 

would’ve been to pick up the phone and ask his DM — his 

deputy minister — what happened. 

 

To the minister: did he ask his deputy minister what went 

wrong? Why do Saskatchewan people only have another 

government review instead of answers to their questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One 

only has to look to Hansard yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

see that the Minister of Justice and his deputy minister are 

going to do a thorough review of not my . . . but what happened 

in my situation with the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing, and his. The minister, Mr. Speaker, agrees with 

that policy and that direction, Mr. Speaker, for full public safety 

measures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Justice says 

he has put a new interim protocol in place to prevent any further 

incidents of inappropriate releases. To the minister: will he 

today outline for us his new protocol and will he table his new 

interim protocol for us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thank 

the member opposite for the question and welcome the 

opportunity to be able to give some information and some 

background on this. The protocol is an interim protocol, and it’s 

a first step, and it’s a significant first step. What it does is it 

requires the officials in Corrections or the officials in Justice to 

make a verification of the identity of the individual and to 

verify whether there is any other matters that the individual is 

being held on, or should be held on, before the individual is 

going to be released. That’s the first step. 

 

The second step, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that it deals with what 

would happen if there was a mistake or an escape or something 

untoward happen. And it would require the individuals involved 

to immediately contact their superiors and to advise their 

superiors as to what happened so that appropriate steps could be 

taken to ensure that the person is rearrested or captured as soon 

as possible. 

 

The third step, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to deal with public 

awareness and public notification. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Utility Rates 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 

10 we found out there was going to be a 20 per cent increase in 

SaskEnergy rates. This is at the same time the wholesale price 

of natural gas is dropping. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]: why is the price going up for 

Saskatchewan residents at the same time the price of natural gas 

is falling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As the hon. member should know, SaskEnergy when it 

does its pricing does not make a profit on the sale of natural 

gas. The natural gas price is calculated as the market at that 

period of time. Then a submission is made to the Public 

Utilities Review Commission, and that has been done. And they 

have come back and said indeed that that was the right pricing 

at the time. 

 

Since that time the price of natural gas has gone down. That 

will have a positive effect on the gas cost variance account and 

will be positively reflected the next time it’s reviewed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I quote from the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix from October 2. Quote, “. . . Crowns 

Minister Ken Cheveldayoff hinted Wednesday a SaskPower 

rate hike may be higher than expected when a five per cent hike 

this fall appeared likely.” 

 

Clearly the minister knows the rate increase is coming and that 

it’s going to be very large. Why won’t he share what he knows 

with the Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for CIC. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is 

reviewing their operations at this time and looking forward to 

ensuring that Saskatchewan residents get the lowest possible 

costs for their electricity. What we have here is a . . . The last 

increase was on January 1, 2007. There was no increase, Mr. 

Speaker, over the last year because of the election. 

 

We will be looking at the return on equity that SaskPower 

needs, and we will ensure again that Saskatchewan people pay 

the lowest possible cost for their electricity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

quote from a news release issued by the current Premier when 

he was in opposition. Quote: 

 

Wall said that the energy rate increase approved by the 

provincial rate review panel will hit Saskatchewan 

taxpayers hard. The provincial government has a surplus 

of several hundred million dollars. 

 

The news release also said, quote: 

 

This will be especially difficult for people on fixed 

incomes like our senior citizens and is another blow to 

farm families. It dries up whatever tax relief people have 

received from both levels of government. 

 

To the minister: when he was in opposition his leader said that 

high utility rates would dry up any tax relief and that people 

would be hit hard. Was he wrong then or is he wrong now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite should know that SaskEnergy or SaskPower or any 

other of the Crown corporations does not have the information 

on the financial wherewithal of its customers. Therefore the 

best way to ensure that that money gets into the hands of those 

that need it most are through a historic tax cut. And that’s 

indeed what this government has done. 

 

I hope the member opposite hasn’t forgotten what happened last 

week in the legislature — the largest tax cut ever in 

Saskatchewan history, some 80,000 Saskatchewan residents 

dropped from the tax rolls. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s more to 

come from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, on October 28, 2005, the 

Saskatchewan Party issued another press release calling for 

rebates. I will table this press release. I have no problem with 

tabling; the ministers across the way do apparently, Mr. 

Speaker. To the Minister of CIC: why were rebates a good idea 

when he was in opposition but a bad idea now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I’ll reiterate the answer to the last 

question. The best way to ensure that money gets into the hands 

of those that need it the most, the best way to ensure that all 

Saskatchewan residents benefit in the prosperity that we’re 

having in our province, is through the tax system. And that’s 

why we’ve instituted the largest tax cut in Saskatchewan 

history, some 80,000 people off the tax rolls. That’s why the 

senior supplement has been increased. That’s why people are 

feeling the way they do in Saskatchewan; they’re happy about 

this Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Out-of-Province Crown Investments 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister 

Responsible for the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, how much did the 

KPMG report on out-of-province Crown investments cost the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s always a pleasure to rise in this House and talk about a 

stronger future for Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. One 

way we’re able to do that is through an analysis through an 

audit. We have engaged KPMG. We’ve asked the people of 

Saskatchewan not to listen to the opposition, not to listen to this 

government, but to listen to KPMG, to take a look at the 26 

investments that have happened in Saskatchewan over the last 

19 years. The cost of the study, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 

$250,000. In light of a $9 billion operation within the Crown 

corporations, money well spent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, so at $25,000 a page, you’d expect 

to follow the advice of that report fairly closely. I want to quote 

from the report, quote: 

 

KPMG believes that its analyses must be considered as a 

whole and that selecting portions of the analyses or the 

factors considered by it, without considering all facts and 

analyses together, could create a misleading view of the 

process underlying our findings. 

 

That’s clear, Mr. Speaker. Why then did the Sask Party minister 

cherry-pick the results for his news release today? Is the report 

that difficult to understand, or did the Sask Party government’s 

ideological blinders get in the way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly why 

we engaged KPMG — to take it out of the political realm and to 

have the numbers speak for themselves. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

indeed what this report does. The numbers speak for 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The target by the NDP opposite when they were in government, 

the target was 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The results, the return 

— minus 15 per cent. Not missed it by that much, Mr. Speaker. 

They missed it by 37 per cent. The people of Saskatchewan 

deserve better, and they will get better from this government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, according to the KPMG report, the 

return on the concluded investments was 42 per cent for the 

people of Saskatchewan — 42 per cent. 

 

Now according to the minister’s news release, this government 

is looking at divesting some of the following: Igasamex, 

Heritage Gas, DirectWest, Gas Sur, MRM [Muskeg River 

mine] cogen, and Cooke Group. All six of these investments, 

Mr. Speaker, all six of these investments are profitable and 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

projected to be profitable over the next 20 years. To the 

minister: why is he looking at selling these six profitable 

investments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment to 

the people of Saskatchewan during the election campaign — 

and it remains our commitment today — is to ensure that these 

central Crown corporations are strengthened. And that’s what 

we are doing here, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made that commitment. 

That’s why we’ve engaged KPMG to ensure that they’ve taken 

an overall analysis of every one of the 26 investments. 

 

And that’s what they’ve found, Mr. Speaker — $2.1 million 

was put into these investments that are about to be divested over 

the coming years; $9.6 million was the overall return. Some of 

them were profitable. Many, many such as Navigata, 

DirectWest, Ag Dealer, were not profitable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In order to strengthen the Crown corporations, we have to get 

away from doing what was done in the 1990s and look forward 

at a Saskatchewan-first approach. And that’s what this 

government is embarking on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister to look at page 10 

of the KPMG report. I mean, this is a $25,000 page. One of the 

key conclusions of this report, one of the key conclusions is, 

and I quote, to date overall performance of three of the four 

subsidiaries has been largely in line with initial financial 

targets. Three out of four. Seventy-five per cent absolutely on 

line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why does the minister persist in portraying these 

subsidiaries as all losers when clearly, according to his own 

report, that’s simply not accurate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite, they can’t get their stories straight. When the Leader 

of the Opposition was asked, he didn’t have much credence in 

the KPMG report. Now the critic says that there is something to 

the KPMG report. Well there is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The KPMG report on an overall basis says that for every dollar 

that was invested in these out-of-province operations, only 60 

cents came back to the people of Saskatchewan. Much better 

can be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as far as commenting on investment in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I will take an investment in Davidson or in Herbert or 

in Shellbrook over an investment in Atlanta or Chile or Mexico 

every day of the week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s clear to virtually all in Saskatchewan, with perhaps 

the exception of members opposite, that our Crown utilities 

have been very good for the people of Saskatchewan. And this 

taxpayer-funded report that’s been delivered today is nothing 

but a thinly disguised, politically motivated attack on those 

Crown utilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now everybody understands that these utilities need to function 

in a business-like fashion. Part of a business-like fashion is 

accepting risk, there’s no doubt about that. But, Mr. Speaker, 

what should matter ultimately to the people of Saskatchewan is 

the bottom line — the bottom line of their Crown utilities. 

 

And so my question today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to the 

Minister Responsible for CIC. Is he prepared to stand in the 

House today and guarantee, guarantee the people of 

Saskatchewan that his new policy decision — which says no 

outside investment and no competition within the borders of 

Saskatchewan — is he prepared to guarantee that that decision 

will not affect negatively the bottom line of our Crown utilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to debate 

the Leader of the Opposition on the bottom line of the Crown 

corporations because it’s only he that can talk about a negative 

15 per cent return, missing the target by 37 per cent, and call 

that positive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations can do better. They can do 

better. They can do better by redeploying capital here in 

Saskatchewan to ensure that SaskPower has the infrastructure 

needed to move forward. That’s something that that government 

didn’t do; that’s something that this government will do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note that the minister 

was at pains not to guarantee that this decision of his will not 

negatively affect the bottom line of the Crown utilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this government first started musing 

about this last week, here is what the editorial board of the 

Regina Leader-Post had to say. And I quote, “Forcing the 

Crowns to put all their eggs in the tiny Saskatchewan basket 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

could threaten their economic viability.” Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

quote from the Regina Leader-Post. 

 

So if the minister has his way, all of the eggs of investment will 

be placed in the one basket. Crowns will not be able to invest 

outside of the borders of Saskatchewan. But then he says, Mr. 

Speaker, but then he says these same Crown utilities are not 

going to be able to compete with utilities or service providers in 

the private sector. So what he’s saying is that SaskTel is not 

going to be able to compete against Verizon for instance of 

New York City. That’s what he’s saying. 

 

And so to the minister: if you can’t invest, if our Crown utilities 

cannot invest outside of the province, and within the province 

they cannot compete with the private sector, how — Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I ask the minister — how are these Crowns to 

remain profitable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are no 

longer the wee province of Saskatchewan. I would submit that 

we were never the wee province. We are not the tiny province 

of Saskatchewan or the tiny market of Saskatchewan. And 

here’s why, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower alone will need some $5 

billion in infrastructure investments over the coming years 

because we will need up to 1,200 megawatts of new power 

generation in our province. 

 

That’s the priority of this government. That’s the priority of the 

people of Saskatchewan. And that’s the reason why the people 

are sitting on that side of the House, and that’s why there’s a 

new government with a forward vision here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this minister and this government 

today will not guarantee that their policy decisions are not 

going to hurt the bottom line of our Crown utilities. Now he 

refuses to answer the question how, how does he expect those 

utilities to remain profitable. And then he stands in his place 

and volunteers that SaskPower is going to need something like, 

I think he said, $5 billion in capital investment. But he’s also 

saying in the same breath, but not a penny of that could come 

from outside investment or in competition with the private 

sector. 

 

Where is it going to come from, Mr. Speaker? I tell you where 

it’s going to come from. It’s going to come from the ratepayers, 

the power consumers, the telephone consumers, the natural gas 

consumers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will this minister not stand in the 

House, or better yet have the Premier stand in the House, and 

guarantee to this legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan 

who own these Crown utilities that his decision will not 

negatively impact the bottom line? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Here it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

NDP economics for all to see — a negative 15 per cent return 

when there was a 22 per cent target. How did that strengthen the 

Crown corporations? Well I would submit to you that it did 

anything but, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Leader of the Opposition as well 

if he’s canvassed his caucus, if he’s canvassed his caucus 

members to see if they’ve agreed with it. Because I understand 

that his very seatmate, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, never 

agreed with these out-of-province investments in the first place. 

If the NDP had only listened to her, Mr. Speaker, they could 

have saved the Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is it that the minister 

responsible for our Crown utilities will not stand in the 

legislature today . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’m starting to have increasingly hard 

time to hearing the member that has the floor. I would ask that 

the other members respect the member that has the floor. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand why they do 

not want to hear this question because they refuse to answer. I’ll 

put it again to the Minister of the Crown Corporations. I’ll put it 

to the Premier, perhaps he would like to stand in his place and 

answer this question. Why is it that this policy which has been 

announced today that there will be no further external 

investments . . . They’ve already posted the bill of sale on some 

very profitable enterprise that’s happening outside of 

Saskatchewan, the for sale sheet has now been printed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

They are going to end out-of-province investment and activity 

of our Crown utilities, and then they’re saying to these same 

Crown utilities, you can’t compete. SaskTel, you can’t compete 

with Verizon Telecom out of New York City. You can’t do that 

any more. 

 

Why will he not stand in defence of this new policy? Why will 

he not stand or the Premier stand in this House and guarantee to 

the people of Saskatchewan this is not going to hurt the bottom 

line of their utilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

themselves and they’re here for all to see. What has hurt our 

Crown corporations over the last two decades are negative 15 

per cent returns — returns that are 37 per cent off target. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations will do well in this 

province. They will compete. They will be able to do their work 

inside the province because they are now working under a 

Saskatchewan-first policy. 

 

And I’ll give the opposition some credit. When the premier 

came in and he recognized in 2002 that they were going in the 

wrong direction, that the red ink was spilling everywhere, even 

he decided to make a change, Mr. Speaker. That change didn’t 

go far enough. We’ve made the change now, Mr. Speaker. It 

will be Saskatchewan first. It’ll be strong Crown corporations. 

The work will be done here in Saskatchewan, and every person 

in Saskatchewan will benefit because of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are simply not getting 

an answer from that minister or the Premier to a very simple 

question. Will he guarantee that this policy of his will not 

negatively impact the bottom line of the people’s Crown 

utilities? 

 

Now what does that then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tell you or 

members of this legislature, members of the public? It certainly 

tells me that this is nothing short of the same old Sask Party, 

Conservative Party, right wing attack on Crown corporations, 

on public ownership, on public utilities. They intend, Mr. 

Speaker, to weaken our public utilities to a point where they 

will have to be sold, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s going on here. 

That is what’s going on here. 

 

I’ll give the minister one more chance. If he can stand in his 

place and guarantee that his policy will ensure no negative 

impact on our Crown utilities, then I will say it is not an 

ideological attack. If he refuses to do that, then we all know it is 

an ideological attack. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I can 

guarantee the member opposite is, stopping the NDP 

money-losing investments outside the province will help the 

Crown corporations. It will help the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And it will help every individual 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s been enough red ink shed as far as the Crown 

corporations today. And today, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 

corporations are turning their . . . They’re turning the page. 

They’re embarking on a new Saskatchewan-first policy, and 

that will benefit each and every of the Crown corporations, and 

that will benefit the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people can only speculate what would have 

happened if the NDP took $250,000 and used that money 

towards due diligence in the Crown corporations instead of 

wasting it on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader and also 

the Minister of Education. 

 

Renewal of Memorandum of Intent 

with Chernivtsi Oblast 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with those few remarks in Ukrainian, I 

want to inform the legislature and the province of Saskatchewan 

of the tremendous opportunity I had last week. I had the great 

honour to be invited to Ukraine by the Chernivtsi Oblast 

government administration to continue the historic 

collaboration in education between Saskatchewan and 

Chernivtsi Oblast, a region in Western Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the four-year renewal of the memorandum 

of intent ensures education, skills development, and research 

activities will continue among our partners. Nearly 14 per cent 

of people living in Saskatchewan are of Ukrainian descent. This 

is reason enough to foster cultural understanding and continue 

building strong education, research, and economic ties with 

each other. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s education partnership 

with Chernivtsi Oblast is built on a strong foundation of 

goodwill and expertise. Since 1977 the partnerships between 

Ukraine and Saskatchewan have opened doors to opportunities 

of mutual benefit. We know from past experience the 

importance of continuing our work together. 

 

For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Ukrainian bilingual 

education, distance learning, and university language programs 

contribute an international perspective and understanding to 

high school and post-secondary programs. 

 

The promotion of exchanges expands student and faculty 

knowledge of research and technology and improves their 

employment and economic potential. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

economic and business activities support Ukraine as the country 

moves toward a market-based economy through agricultural 

and rural development projects funded by the Canadian 

International Development Agency. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, information and experiences gained 

through educational partnerships with Ukraine enables 

Saskatchewan educators, students, parents, and community 

members to better understand the needs of new immigrant 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

families. 

 

I am pleased to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our hosts in 

Ukraine expressed their gratitude for the Ukrainian famine and 

genocide, the Holodomor Memorial Day Act that was passed by 

the Saskatchewan government. It is important to note that 

Saskatchewan was the first Canadian province to pass such an 

Act. The Act adds Saskatchewan’s voice to the international 

recognition of the Holodomor. This is important for 

Saskatchewan’s citizens of Ukrainian descent who are impacted 

by this tragic period. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of placing a wreath on 

the Holodomor monument in Kyiv. I was accompanied by 

Canada’s ambassador to Ukraine, His Excellency, Daniel 

Caron. I would like to recognize the support and assistance we 

received from the Canadian embassy in Ukraine. I would also 

like to share the embassy’s sentiment that they are very pleased 

with Saskatchewan’s history of success with Ukraine. As such 

they expressed interest for supporting future collaborations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are just a few examples that signify 

the potential in future collaborations to foster communities of 

understanding and boost potential for personal and economic 

growth. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to building on the 

historic relationship our province has with Ukraine for the 

benefit of all citizens. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 

like to thank the minister for providing his ministerial statement 

in advance to his statement. Thank you. 

 

Certainly the official opposition are pleased with the four-year 

renewal of this meaningful memorandum which ensures 

education, skill development, and research activities between all 

partners. This partnership offers many benefits to our province. 

It represents the deep respect that our government, our province 

has for the proud Ukrainian descendants of our province that 

make up a significant portion of our province and make up a 

significant portion of our history and certainly our future. 

 

This is a historic relationship between our two countries. It’s a 

cultural affirmation, and certainly it’s important to us. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Investment Policy for Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

would like to announce a new Saskatchewan-first policy. 

Saskatchewan voters elected us with very specific expectations, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of their key expectations is that we 

will spend their hard-earned tax dollars very, very carefully. 

 

When in opposition, we were tremendously concerned with the 

government of the day using the people’s Crown corporations 

to buy and invest in high-risk ventures around the world. 

Therefore we recently engaged KPMG, the national accounting 

firm, a highly respected company, to conduct a review of the 

previous government’s investments made outside the province 

of Saskatchewan through our Crown corporations. As a result 

of this report, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations will now 

focus their growth in Saskatchewan. 

 

Their new investment policy is simple. It’s Saskatchewan first 

— the way it should be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are going to 

put Crown dollars to work right here in our province by adding 

more value through job creation and capital spending. This is a 

policy that we believe is fiscally prudent and the most 

beneficial to Saskatchewan people. 

 

SaskTel has a large number of opportunities right here at home: 

expanded cell coverage, high-speed Internet, and larger capacity 

lines to carry more data to people’s homes and businesses. And 

with ours being one of the hottest economies in Canada, why 

not invest right here at home in Saskatchewan? 

 

SaskPower also has considerable work to do right here at home 

with rebuilding our aging infrastructure and ensuring safe, 

reliable power supply for the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the report that I publicly released earlier 

today didn’t contain a lot of good news for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. KPMG’s report clearly demonstrates the previous 

government took large risks using the money of this province’s 

taxpayers. And in most of the cases the risks didn’t pay off, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The report clearly shows these investments 

were expected to show a return of 22 per cent and actually they 

had a negative return of 15 per cent — a 37 per cent shortfall, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The days of losing millions of dollars on out-of-province 

investments are over, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our new 

Saskatchewan-first policy will keep taxpayers’ dollars right 

here in our province, at work where they should be. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want to 

start by thanking the minister for providing the advance copy of 

his ministerial statement. So thank you, Minister. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today’s reannouncement of a now 

five-year-old policy, the Sask-first policy, is just that — it’s five 

years old. KPMG, in their report referred to by the minister, 

KPMG cautions its analysis must be considered as a whole and 

that cherry picking could create a misleading view. 

 

We just witnessed just such a misleading view where the 

minister talked about a 15 per cent loss on the investments 

because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the report says very clearly, of 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

the concluded investments, the return on investment to 

Saskatchewan people — to the Crowns, through the Crowns — 

was 42 per cent on the concluded investments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what that really says is there’s a difference 

between the now government and the then government, if I can 

describe it that way. We believe Crowns have capabilities. 

They’ve shown it in the past, and they can show it in the future, 

but there’s some difficulty. 

 

The first key conclusion on page 10 of the KPMG report — and 

I just want to refer to this one — is that to date overall 

performance at three of the four Saskatchewan subsidiaries, 

three of the four subsidiaries, has been largely in line with 

initial financial targets. That’s in the very report that we’re 

dealing with today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s doom and gloom about 

Saskatchewan Crowns’ abilities is the biggest impediment to 

Saskatchewan Crowns and indeed our province’s future. This is 

a report that I know the government is going to use to justify its 

starving the Crowns and setting them up for a sale, and that’s a 

shame. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 

No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Justice 

minister that Bill No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act be 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 

No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Justice 

minister that Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act be 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 

No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Justice 

minister that Bill No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act be introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 

No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Justice 

minister that Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act be 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Finance minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move first reading of Bill No. 46, The Labour Market 

Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that Bill No. 46, The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act be introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 47, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Energy and Resources that Bill No. 47, The Pipelines 

Amendment Act be introduced and read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that pursuant to rule no. 90, Bill No. 9, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be reinstated to the order paper. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Finance 

minister that Bill No. 9, The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 be reinstated to the order 

paper at the same stage it had reached at the time of prorogation 

of the previous session. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can say it truly is an honour to rise and to take part in 

this debate on the Throne Speech. It’s a privilege to do so on 

behalf of the fine folks of Regina Northeast who have asked me 

to continue to represent their thoughts and their needs and their 

wants and their wishes in this great Assembly. 

 

I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would agree with me that 

whenever and wherever we travel in Saskatchewan, no matter 

where we go, who we talk to, we meet nothing but good, 

honest, hard-working people who make you proud to be a part 

of this great province. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that in 

Regina Northeast there are no finer people in this province than 

the good folks there. And I’ve had the pleasure of representing 

them now for a number of years, and I’ve had the pleasure of 

meeting with them at their doorstep not only during the election 

campaigns but in between election campaigns, and I’ve grown 

to know many of them. And I’m very proud, very proud to have 

the privilege of representing those good folks in this fine 

Assembly. 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start out by congratulating the 

newest member of this Assembly, the member from 

Cumberland, upon his election and his taking his place in this 

great Assembly. I have the pleasure of not only sitting in this 

Assembly in close proximity to him and sharing comments 

throughout the day, but also in our office structure within this 

Assembly, my office is just across the hallway from his, so I get 

the pleasure of having comments from him and hearing 

statements from him and hearing some of the stories he has to 

tell, and they’re very enlightening. And I know from that brief 

experience and getting to know the individual that he will do 

himself fine in this great Assembly. He will do the New 

Democratic Party representation here fine, and he will represent 

his constituency with a great amount of dignity and honour. 

And to him I congratulate him. 

 

This Throne Speech, like any other Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is designed to give a very broad outline of the 

government’s intent for the future. Throne Speeches are 

designed to be short on specifics and large, I guess you would 

say, on rhetoric, and this Throne Speech is no different. 

 

It certainly gives us a broad outline of what the government 

intends to do over the next year, and when you look at this 

Throne Speech you can’t help but think it’s probably like any 

other Throne Speech that’s been given in this Assembly or 

elsewhere. It’s a mile wide and about a quarter inch thick. 

 

And generally Throne Speeches, because they’re written by the 

government, they are full of good news and they have a 

government spin on it that the government wants to portray, and 

of course they give nothing but the positive view. And when 

you look at this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, at first glance you 

would say, yes, it’s a fairly positive Throne Speech considering 

the time in which this province is enjoying some of the greatest 

prosperity in our economy. It’s a Throne Speech that you would 

expect when a government is in power in this province with 

revenues far beyond their wildest imagination — certainly far 

beyond the imagination of those people who served in this great 

Assembly in government in the past when we were dealing with 

debts and dealing with the deficits and attempting to get the 

fiscal house of this province in order. So it’s certainly been 

quite a turnaround in the last, say, 15 years or so. 

 

But when you take a little closer look at this Throne Speech, 

you recognize that there are some who win. There are some 

who win. But there are many who lose. There are many that this 

Throne Speech has missed. 

 

It’s interesting. There was an article just not too long ago in one 

of our daily papers. The headline was, “A majority of 

Canadians want government action.” And it’s to deal with 

poverty — something that this Throne Speech has missed. If 

you look closely at this Throne Speech, you’ll see no real 

meaningful reference to the poverty in this province. And yet 

the article in the Canwest News, Monday, October 27, clearly 

indicates that the vast majority of Canadians want federal and 

provincial governments to lead the war on poverty — including 

raising the minimum wages and creating low-income child care 

spaces — according to the survey that was carried out on behalf 

of the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. 

 

And the threat, according to the folks that were contacted and 

asked their opinions, according to the threat of a recession 

should not deter government from acting to eradicate poverty. 

But it should almost be the very reason for trying to do so, 

according to the findings of the survey. 

 

The majority of Canadians believe that Canada should try to 

distinguish itself in the world as a country where no one lives in 

poverty. Ninety-eight per cent said that they would be proud if 

their Premier took the lead in reducing poverty in their 

province. It’s noted that an additional 88 per cent also said that 

they would like to see Canada as a leader in the world in the 

eradication of poverty. 

 

Ninety per cent said it is time for strong leadership to reduce the 

number of poor people in our province and in our country. 

Ninety-two per cent said that if the countries of Great Britain 

and Sweden can do it, then so can Canada. Eighty-six per cent 

believe that if governments took concrete actions, poverty could 

be greatly reduced. Mr. Speaker, the people polled did not just 

look at the federal government and suggest that the federal 

government should be the one leading the way on fighting 

poverty. No sir, they thought that their Premier should take a 

leadership role on the war against poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Throne Speech, we see that 

that’s not the case by the government opposite. Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at this Throne Speech, we see also missed has 

been our seniors; the seniors who live on fixed income — the 

seniors who are today facing increased food costs, increased 

SaskEnergy rates, and soon increased SaskPower rates. And 

I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there isn’t a member in this 

House who unlike me gets letters on a weekly basis from 

seniors in their constituency who outline the struggle they’re in. 

 

I have letters from seniors in my constituency who are living on 

fixed income and who have retired 8, 10, 12 years ago, and at 

the time of retirement their income was satisfactory, certainly 

large enough so that they could enjoy a reasonable standard of 

living. But costs, increased costs of living, has eroded that, and 

today these folks are living on the verge of poverty. They have 

cut back. They have cut back on every aspect of their living in 

order to continue to be able to live in their own homes and 

continue to survive, but they’re finding that struggle harder and 

harder. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, out door knocking in my constituency this 

summer, I had the opportunity to talk to a senior citizen, a 

gentleman in Rothwell Place in my constituency. And a nice 

conversation, I had a nice conversation, we had a lengthy 

conversation. And he wasn’t bitter, Mr. Speaker. He wasn’t 

bitter, but he just took the opportunity to share with me the 

concerns and the situation that he finds himself in. 

 

He and his wife retired eight years ago, going on nine years ago 

now, and they retired on a fixed income. And at that time they 

thought they would have the opportunity to and the financial 

resources to visit with their children and their grandchildren on 

a monthly to six weeks basis. 

 

Now their son, who is a federal government employee, his job 

has taken him to Calgary, and of course that’s where their 

grandchildren is. And as much as they’d like to visit with their 

children, they also want to see their grandchildren, and they 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

were hoping that in retirement they would be able to do that on 

a regular basis, even once every month or every six weeks. 

 

But now with the increased costs and the eroding away of their 

ability to enjoy a quality life, they’re seeing their inability to 

visit with their children and their grandchildren. At best, at best, 

he tells me, it’s once every six months. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same gentleman I had the conversation with 

and he shared with me, very honestly he shared with me the fact 

he did not vote for the Sask Party in the last election. But he 

said when the Sask Party formed government in this province, 

he did look forward to the fulfillment of one of their election 

platform planks, and that was the reduction, the elimination in 

fact, of the education portion of the property tax. He looked 

forward to that. He expressed a great deal of disappointment to 

me that that had not happened. He shrugged his shoulders and 

said, well it’s just one more Tory trick; they say one thing at 

election time and do something totally different when they 

become government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just oh probably two weeks ago now, maybe 

going on three, I had a senior come and visit me in my office 

and we had a nice little chat. She had retired, her and her 

husband retired just about 15 years ago, and since then her 

husband has passed away. And at that time, she sold her home 

because it was too much for her to look after, and she moved 

into an apartment where it would be easier for her to look after 

and maintain, and she’d be able to enjoy the quality of life in 

her golden years without having to worry about the stress of 

looking after a house. 

 

Well she was in my office and she was close to tears because 

she lived in an apartment now for a number of years. And it’s 

an area in what used to be in my riding; it’s now in my 

colleague’s riding, in Kleisinger Crescent. But she was just 

about in tears because the increased rent rates that she’s 

experienced in her apartment now over the last couple of years 

had brought her to a point where she can no longer afford to 

live there and she’s going to have to move. 

 

She’s being forced out of her home. She’s being forced out of 

her home and she’s going to have to look at other 

accommodations. And not based on the quality of 

accommodation, not based on the area in which it might be in 

— she’s going to have to look at what she can afford to live in 

regardless of the condition of the facility or the location of the 

facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech lets her down; let’s the seniors 

of our great province down. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shameful. Shameful. 

 

Mr. Harper: — And it’s shameful. As my colleague says, it’s 

shameful. Because who are our seniors? Our seniors are the 

people who have lived in this province, who have worked in 

this province to build this great province. They struggled. They 

sacrificed. They handed us a province of prosperity. And how 

did this government treat them? With the back of their hand, 

that’s how they’re being treated. And that’s shameful, Mr. 

Speaker, shameful. 

 

This Throne Speech has missed our students. Post-secondary 

training in our universities or skilled training in our schools is 

absolutely essential if we intend to maintain a strong and 

competitive economy. Our young people today must be given 

the tools to be able to meet the challenges of the future. Our 

future is in the hands of the young people who we are educating 

and training today. And they must be, they must be trained to 

meet the challenges of our society and the challenges of our 

economy — ever changing, rapidly changing. And we must 

ensure that they have those tools, Mr. Speaker, and this Throne 

Speech does not outline any of that ability. 

 

In fact we’re not giving them the opportunity to have the tools 

and the resources and the education to be able to maintain that 

strong economy. After all we’re no longer in competition with 

people across the street or around the corner or down the road a 

few miles. We’re in competition with people around the world. 

 

And if we intend to enjoy a strong economy like we have 

enjoyed in the past, in order to do that we have to be fully 

equipped. We have to have a workforce that’s trained, a 

workforce that’s educated, a workforce that’s capable of 

competing with those sources around the world. And in order to 

do that, we have to ensure that we have every opportunity to our 

young people to receive that quality of education, the quality of 

training that they need to meet those challenges of the future. 

After all we live in an economy, we live in a society that is 

rapidly changing with our technology and other new 

innovations coming on stream. 

 

Experts tell us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, experts tell us that the top 

10 in-demand jobs in 2010 — that’s only two years from now 

— the top 10 in-demand jobs in 2010 did not exist in 2004. 

That’s the changes we are experiencing in our economy. That’s 

the changes we are experiencing in our society. And that’s the 

challenges that we need to ensure that our young people have 

the tools to meet those changes. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing today, we are currently 

preparing students — particularly in our high school system, 

students in about that range — we are preparing these students 

for jobs that don’t yet exist, that don’t yet exist. That’s the 

changes we’re seeing, the rapid change that we’re seeing within 

our economy. 

 

It is estimated that today’s learners will have 10 to 14 jobs by 

the age of 38 years. The changes, we speak of the changes, and 

we must be ready to meet the challenge of those changes if we 

want to continue to enjoy a strong and prosperous economy. We 

must ensure, we must ensure that our students have those tools, 

have those tools and are equipped to meet those challenges, 

otherwise we will not enjoy a strong and prosperous economy 

as we have in the past. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech has missed on health 

care. Waiting lists continue to grow. Many are waiting years 

now for surgery. Many are waiting years for medical treatment. 

The people in this very building who have loved ones who have 

been on a waiting list for surgery in excess of a year and still 

have no clear date as to when that surgery can take place. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has not done enough in that direction 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan receive the quality 

health care that they need and deserve at the time they need it. 

They haven’t done that, Mr. Speaker, and that is shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a flaw . . . There’s a gap — I wouldn’t say 

a flaw — but there’s a gap in our home care system that I would 

like to see this government move on. And I know that 

governments of the past have certainly had it on the agenda and 

was moving in that direction. And there’s a gap that needs to be 

filled, and that is a desperate need by our seniors. 

 

We have seniors, Mr. Speaker, who have enjoyed the ability to 

live in their homes, but as time goes on, as time goes on, their 

ability starts to diminish. Their ability to live alone in their 

homes starts to diminish. Home care provides a level of support 

to a point, but not far enough. They soon find themselves in a 

situation where they can no longer safely live in their homes on 

their own, and yet when they’re assessed they’re not in a 

situation where institutionalized care will kick in. So there’s a 

gap there that puts an awkward pressure on families who, in 

many cases, are unable to look after their loved ones because 

both members of the household are working. And it’s really a 

stressful thing. I know that we’ve gone through it in my own 

family. And when you have a loved one who needs that care, 

and yet there is no vehicle there to provide it, I believe that 

home care needs to step up and be stepped up to provide that 

service. 

 

And I believe that the ability is there, Mr. Speaker, by this 

government, because I think that if you look at the $3 billion 

that this government is sitting on, it certainly, certainly has a 

financial ability to address those concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that I need to look at concluding my 

remarks here now, and it’s well before I had originally planned 

on. But if you look at, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech, it 

outlines the government’s willingness to help some while 

they’re willing to forget others. This Throne Speech has failed 

our seniors, the very people who have worked and sacrificed to 

give us this great province. It has failed to provide the services 

needed by our seniors in their golden years. Mr. Speaker, this 

Throne Speech has failed the people who have used our health 

care system by doing nothing about the ever increasing surgical 

lists. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve better than 

this. 

 

This Throne Speech has failed our students by not ensuring that 

all students will have access to affordable secondary education 

or skills training. Mr. Speaker, our future and the future of our 

province lies in the hands of a well-educated, well-trained 

workforce for the future. This Throne Speech has failed to meet 

those challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech has betrayed the livestock and 

hog producers of Saskatchewan by leaving them to be knocked 

around by world economic forces without any meaningful 

support from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is noticeably void of any 

reference to our forest industry. The forest industry has been 

and continues to be very important to our province, and yet this 

government saw fit to break its own promise and not do 

anything about securing the future of the industry or reopening 

the P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech slowly reveals this 

government’s hidden agenda to privatize our Crown 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the light of the failures of this Throne Speech, I 

cannot in clear conscience support it. Therefore I will be voting 

against the motion and for the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Good 

afternoon, my fellow members, and members opposite. Thank 

you very much for giving me the opportunity to address you 

today. I’ll be happy to update you with what’s been happening 

in the riding of Saskatchewan Rivers in 2008 and what we hope 

to accomplish in this riding for the future. 

 

First of all I’d like to congratulate all the MLAs for their efforts 

during the summer. Our positions require long hours and busy 

schedules, and I know that our constituents appreciate what we 

do for them. As an MLA, I find there’s no greater reward than 

to make a lasting impression on someone in my community. 

This is one of the most important aspects of the job for me. And 

I’m sure that we all pledge to do everything we can to honour 

our obligations to our constituents, and I would like to 

acknowledge them. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge and congratulate the member from 

Cumberland and wish him well. There he goes. 

 

Secondly, I would like to welcome the many newcomers to our 

province this year, and I trust that our government’s recruitment 

drive out east helped to get the message out about 

Saskatchewan. As our province produces more and more jobs, 

Saskatchewan people and newcomers alike are discovering how 

much our province has to offer. For the years our government 

has advocated and promoted the strengths of this province — 

and I commend our government for continuing to project 

Saskatchewan as a national leader — this tree is now bearing 

fruit as hope, not fear, has propelled our province into the 

limelight. 

 

The RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] financial services group 

recently announced that they expect our province to lead 

Canada in economic growth for years to come. This work for 

the people of Saskatchewan has not been without substantial 

effort and hard work. And I’d like to congratulate all my 

colleagues for their continued dedication to achieving this 

vision with the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan history. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers experienced a fair 

share of up and downs in 2008. Our collective strength as 

people pulled us through some of the tougher times. On August 

26 a tornado tore through our riding causing extensive damage, 

some repairable and some not. The Paddockwood, Christopher 

Lake, and Buckland areas were hit especially hard, and I 

witnessed the devastation firsthand, having toured throughout 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

the riding that day immediately after the tornado. My thoughts 

and prayers continue to pour out for them. Some residents lost 

more than others, part of their farms, their investments, and 

their years of hard work. Thankfully no one was seriously 

injured. 

 

I have pledged to do all that I can for these people, and I want 

to thank all branches of the government for lending their 

support during this rough period. The Ministry of Public Safety 

came to our aid swiftly, and for their efforts I’d like to 

commend them. I, along with the people of Saskatchewan 

Rivers, are indebted to you. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The rural municipalities in this riding also deserve recognition 

as they showed great proficiency through organization and 

charity. I would like to commend the administration and 

councils of the RMs [rural municipality] of Paddockwood, 

Buckland, Lakeland, and Garden River for their efforts during 

and after the disaster. 

 

Our government is working with municipalities. Seventy-five 

million dollars in interest-free loans were distributed to 

communities to improve and expand residential lots and 

infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very proud of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. We exhibit a strength and spirit which 

few communities rival. One of our chief industries that attract 

outsiders to our riding is our excellent tourism industry. We 

offer almost every outdoor activity imaginable — fishing, 

camping, hunting, sports, nature, golf, and community events. 

 

I especially took great joy with taking part in several parades 

throughout the towns and villages in Saskatchewan Rivers. 

Parades are still a large part of the rural structure throughout our 

province. They give any local community an opportunity to get 

involved and meet new people, and to introduce themselves to 

local businesses and services. 

 

I was greeted warmly upon attending the Canada Day parade at 

Candle Lake, one of my favourite spots for outdoor fun. Candle 

Lake offers exceptional tourist sites and the town’s population 

quadruples during the summer. Tourism is a growth sector in 

Saskatchewan and we will keep our commitment to increase 

tourism funding. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my riding draws people from around the 

world to experience our lakes, nature, and our wildlife. 

Saskatchewan is home to some of the world’s most unique 

wildfowl, bear, deer, and moose, making outfitting another very 

popular industry in my riding. Hunting and trapping has been a 

traditional way of life for many Canadians for centuries and I 

will continue to speak on behalf of this industry. 

 

Sustenance hunting as well as outfitting is a tourist industry of 

huge importance, and I want to thank the Ministry of 

Environment for working with me on several issues. I have 

been attending wildlife meetings where I most recently 

volunteered to work at the Prince Albert Wildlife Federation 

fundraiser and wild game banquet. 

 

I had a chance to meet many outfitters from across the province 

where they shared their concerns and projections for the future. 

Outfitting and outdoor sports are important industries for 

Saskatchewan, and I pledge to work with all levels of 

government to guide the direction our province will go in 

relation to the outfitting industry and tourism. Our government 

will continue to upgrade our provincial parks. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another milestone this summer was the 

long-awaited remodelling of Sturgeon Lake central facility 

schools. I recently attended their event to celebrate these 

renovations, and I would like to again congratulate everyone 

who helped make this renovation a success. This school has 

been transformed into a striking modern facility and will benefit 

the students of Sturgeon Lake for years to come. 

 

Our young people are another one of these communities’ most 

valuable assets with a growing student population and 

throughout the entire province. 

 

I would like to applaud the funding increase for education 

contained in our most recent budget for school capital projects. 

Maintained schools and infrastructure are important to 

accommodate an increasing population, and making sure our 

children are safe and secure will help them be successful in both 

the classroom and in life. 

 

Sturgeon Lake Central School has a long, proud history and is 

this year celebrating its 27th anniversary. I wish to congratulate 

everyone who was involved with the remodelling project. Our 

government will work towards giving a better life for First 

Nations and Métis. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was also lucky enough to attend the 75th 

anniversary for the Emma Lake school in Tweedsmuir. A 

plaque commemorating this momentous occasion was unveiled 

at the celebration, and we also shared a parent pancake 

breakfast, a barbeque, and a PowerPoint presentation of the 

school’s history, staff, and past students. It was interesting to 

see how education in our province has evolved from one-room 

school of many years ago. 

 

So many former students attended this celebration of this 

historical landmark, including Mrs. Greening, founder of Land 

of the Loon Resort at Anglin Lake. If you haven’t had a chance 

to vacation in my constituency or partake in some of the 

outdoor activities I previously mentioned, Land of the Loon 

Resort at Anglin Lake would be a most unforgettable 

experience. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also attended the Christopher Lake Walk 

to Breakfast with the Saskatchewan Nutrition Advisory Council 

for Kids, or SNACK for short. This program encourages 

schools to make healthy lifestyle options available for students 

through nutrition and physical activity. I congratulated the staff 

of the project and the community on their success of this event. 

 

I also commend the organizers of the SNACK program for 

raising awareness for health and nutrition initiatives in our 

province and promoting nutrition and physical activity for 

young people in our communities. I think we can agree that 

nutrition is extremely important in order to raise healthy, 

capable children and that it’s never too soon to promote healthy 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

lifestyles for our children. The children of our province will 

benefit from the child tax credit, which increased by 2,000 a 

year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this summer I also met and spoke with 

many people throughout my riding and listened to what they 

had to say. I met many new Saskatchewan Rivers constituents 

at community meetings and events. Almost everyone that I’ve 

spoken with is happy with what they’re seeing in this province. 

People are moving back, new homes are being built, businesses 

are thriving, highways are being fixed and maintained, and new 

programs are being implemented. 

 

I noticed another trend emerging among the people of 

Saskatchewan Rivers and most, probably all, Saskatchewan 

citizens — optimism. I feel that the people of Saskatchewan 

view their province as a land of opportunity and they’re trying 

to make the best of it. It’s also up to us to do the best we can for 

future generations. This mentality of dedication, hope, and hard 

work reflects well the sentiments of the people of Saskatchewan 

Rivers. We are kind, able, smart, hard-working, and ready for 

growth. The Growth and Financial Security Fund has an 

additional 1 billion to pay down the debt. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to make a few honourable 

mentions today. Jim Chad and Tyler Pellegrini, owners and 

operators of Exclusive Auto Marine of Prince Albert, were 

recently awarded the title of operating number one Tahoe sports 

boat dealer worldwide. They were also recently ranked as 

Canada’s number one Tracker marine dealer. I would also like 

to take this opportunity to acknowledge their hard work, vision, 

and dedication. These gentlemen are great examples of how 

entrepreneurs can achieve great success through innovation and 

perseverance. Their team has been a great asset to the people of 

Saskatchewan Rivers and are actively involved in lake 

communities throughout the riding. Congratulations to them. 

 

To help businesses thrive, our government has made a 

commitment to infrastructure. We’re now increasing by 50 per 

cent to 1.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to make an 

announcement concerning my family. My father will soon be 

celebrating his 80th birthday and I promised to mention his 

name today, so I’d like to wish Walter Helbig of Candle Lake a 

very happy birthday in February. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — He was an original pioneer of this country, and 

his service and dedication to our province makes me very 

proud. My father stressed the importance of family, hard work, 

honesty, and perseverance. I strive to raise my children with the 

same dedication and ideals he instilled upon me — to take pride 

in our home country and to give 110 per cent effort to achieving 

one’s full potential. I constantly remind myself that I should not 

take for granted what my forefathers did for my family and 

what they did for the constituency I now call home. 

 

Our government will provide an increase to the Saskatchewan 

income assistance program to help seniors maintain their 

quality of life. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers in my riding look forward to 

our report on the education property tax system and making 

changes to address the high education property taxes that 

Saskatchewan people face. Our government has begun to look 

at long-term strategies for stability in the livestock sector. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have attended many economic 

committee meetings and am constantly gathering information 

from locals. We talk about ways to attract employment to our 

constituency and also ways to make small businesses more 

viable. We’ve seen more work on highways completed in 

Saskatchewan Rivers than in many years combined. Our 

ready-for-growth initiative is being universally praised. And 

although this project will be many years in the making, we’re 

already seeing great results. 

 

Infrastructure is important, but our government also recognizes 

another priceless and very important investment — people. Our 

government will be introducing a new program soon to 

encourage homeowners to install geothermal heating systems. 

 

We’ve seen the largest population increase in 50 years — 50 

years. I think that Saskatchewan is due to have some time in the 

spotlight, and I think we should all be proud of our dedication 

to this province over the years. 

 

With a larger population, Saskatchewan will see an improved 

quality of life. For this reason it’s very important to keep up our 

infrastructure to accommodate an increasing population. We 

will have more jobs and opportunities for our workers of all 

ages. We will have a sense of diversity and advantage like 

we’ve never seen before in this province. And most 

importantly, we are forming a great place to raise a family and 

care for the weak and our vulnerable. This government believes 

that we must protect the vulnerable in our society. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to conclude with a summary of 

this government’s achievements in the past year. I believe that 

slow and steady growth is important for Saskatchewan’s 

development, and through this model we can achieve lasting 

prosperity in our province for future generations. 

 

The ready-for-growth initiative is exactly what this province 

needs to set us on course for a successful future. And I would 

also like to thank the many constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers 

who came forward with their ideas and suggestions from our 

province. I’m here today and every day as their spokesperson, 

and I thank them for their direction and all their concerns that 

they bring to us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion, I support the Throne 

Speech and I do not support the amendment. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Well there’s the gallery over there, okay. I am both 

pleased and honoured to take part in this debate today and to 

express my support for the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Deputy Speaker. I would like to specifically thank the Premier 

for allowing me this honour. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted to introduce guests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I apologize, 

Mr. Minister, for interrupting. I thought before you got too far 

into it, I would like to introduce a very good friend of mine to 

you and through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Assembly 

here, Ms. Patti Sebestyn sitting in your gallery. Patti has been 

teaching at-risk youth for more than 35 years, even though she 

doesn’t look like it. And she is, still in her retirement, working 

with at-risk youth. I met her in Saskatoon and I learned a great 

deal from her when dealing with youth issues and drug issues, 

and I’d like to just thank her for all of her help over the years, 

and friendship, and welcome her to her legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

[15:15] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — And now I’ll get back up again. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Should I start over again from the 

beginning? 

 

After five months of being away from the House, it feels really 

great to be back in session, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s been 

almost a year now since the Saskatchewan Party formed 

government and what a year for Saskatchewan it’s been. These 

are exciting times for the people of Saskatchewan. This year for 

the Saskatchewan Party has been a year defined by keeping our 

promises, and this is something I’m incredibly proud to be part 

of. 

 

First off though, I want to thank my wife Charlene and my two 

daughters, Alyssa and Mackenzie, for their support this past 

year and for giving me a sense of normalcy at times when I 

needed it. I wasn’t completely sure what to expect when I was 

first elected, but I can tell you the surprises have been mostly 

good ones, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I need to thank the constituents of Prince Albert Carlton for the 

vast amount of support I have received over the past year. I was 

humbled and honoured to be the first Saskatchewan Party 

candidate to ever be elected in the city of Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — I held my first annual barbecue in the 

park this past September and it gave me a great opportunity to 

talk to my constituents, one-on-one and find out what is really 

important to them. My constituency is incredibly diverse, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. First Nations and Métis people account for 36 

per cent of the population in the city of Prince Albert. I 

understand that in order to make a better life for Saskatchewan, 

no one individual could be left behind. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can stand here with confidence and say that this 

Throne Speech has something for everyone in it. Every single 

one of my constituents has something to benefit and be proud of 

from this Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also need to quickly thank my constituency assistant, Lora 

Parenteau, and my ministerial staff here at the legislature for all 

the hard work and all the extra hours they put in throughout the 

year. I really could not do my job without them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, after hearing the Throne Speech being 

read in the House last Wednesday, I was excited for the future 

of our province. This past year really has been a time of 

profound change for Saskatchewan. This province is seeing 

things that have never been seen before. We are hearing things 

that have never been heard before. And most importantly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this government is doing everything that has 

never been done before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Just one week ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier made one 

of the biggest and most significant announcements in 

Saskatchewan’s history. Due to our strong economy and our 

new-found prosperity, this government is now able to share its 

wealth with the people of this province. And from talking to my 

constituents this summer, the one thing they wanted to see the 

most was a direct benefit from a strong economy. 

 

Basically the constituents of Prince Albert Carlton were asking 

for the government to put money back into the pockets of the 

hard-working women and men in Saskatchewan, and I’m more 

than pleased to say that this is exactly what the government did. 

We implemented the largest single-year income tax reduction in 

the province’s history. 

 

We put $1 billion against debt reduction. That means since 

taking over in 2007, the Saskatchewan Party government has 

reduced the provincial debt by almost 40 per cent — 40 per 

cent, 40 per cent, 40 per cent — big four zero. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that is more money into debt reduction in one single 

year than the NDP put into debt reduction over the course of 

their 16 years. 

 

Furthermore, we have expanded our rate for growth of the 

infrastructure program by 50 per cent. That is again the largest 

capital commitment in Saskatchewan’s history and three times 

the capital spending of just four years ago. This money will go 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

into education, health care, and highways. Over the past 16 

years under the NDP, our hospitals, schools, highways, and 

infrastructure of other ministries was ignored. This government 

has been left to pick up the pieces of our crumbling 

infrastructure system. This $500 million is a huge step forward 

in the right direction to rebuild this province. 

 

We understand it is going to take years to rebuild what the tired 

old NDP has torn down. Let me quote John F. Kennedy who 

once said, and I quote: 

 

All this will not be finished in the first 100 days. Nor will 

it be finished in the first 1,000 days, nor in the life of this 

Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this 

planet. But let us begin. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has put those words into 

action. We have begun. This government stands for keeping our 

promises, sustaining the current economic momentum, and 

working to ensure all Saskatchewan people benefit from the 

current growth. These announcements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

will affect every single individual in Saskatchewan. We believe 

the people of this province have a right to share in our current 

prosperity in order to build a better life and a better future for 

their families. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the Leader of the Opposition is 

supporting our Premier’s economic plan, saying it is good news, 

and I quote: “The member from Saskatoon Riversdale admitted 

last week that it is tough to find fault with the plan.” That is 

because he is starting to see what the rest of the province knew 

before last year’s election. The NDP have been holding 

Saskatchewan back for too many years now. It was time for a 

change, and what a change this province has seen under the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, business groups across Saskatchewan 

applauded this government’s Throne Speech for emphasizing 

tax and debt reduction and investments, innovation, and 

infrastructure. And in last Thursday’s Leader-Post Steve 

McLellan, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, said, and I quote, he “. . . liked the 

throne speech’s positive tone.” 

 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon, Saskatchewan vice-president of the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Businesses, said the 

Saskatchewan Party’s plan outlined in the Throne Speech quote 

“should be good for business.” She also said, quote: 

 

Tax relief, debt reduction, infrastructure spending, all of 

these are priorities of our members. So they’re listening to 

small business. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you bet we are. We understand that for too 

many years these businesses and individuals were ignored by 

the previous administration. It’s time that changed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population has grown by 

over 16,000 people in the past year. Our current population is at 

1,015,985 and growing every day I might add. And in the near 

future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province will have at least one 

more new person when the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 

becomes a grandma, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — This is creating quite the phenomenon. 

We no longer have a job shortage, but we actually have too 

many jobs and not enough people to fill them. Was that ever the 

case under the previous administration? The need for skilled 

workers is good for all Saskatchewan people, including First 

Nations and Métis people. We are enjoying unprecedented 

opportunities. New employees from across Canada and 

throughout the world are being recruited by this government, 

and a new focus has been given to our immigration strategy. 

These efforts have been successful so far and will continue on 

into the future and many coming years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no question that education is a key 

component to ensuring a stronger Saskatchewan and a better 

life. As a father of two teenage girls and the husband of a 

teacher, I know first-hand the need for enhanced facilities and 

top-of-the-line technology for the schools. That’s why our 

government has committed over $177 million in the past year to 

new construction and refurbishing of existing schools. 

 

One of the schools being affected is right in my constituency of 

Prince Albert Carlton. After years of being overlooked, St. 

Anne School is being completely rebuilt. St. Anne School has a 

rich history in Prince Albert. It was first built in 1958 in the 

West Hill to meet the needs of the much expansion in the area. 

The school delivers education to children kindergarten to grade 

8 in English or French immersion. I was so pleased to be part of 

that plan to build these folks a new school, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But the key is that when these children grow up and attend 

post-secondary institutes, they see their future here in 

Saskatchewan. That’s why this government will also be 

introducing improvements to the graduate retention program so 

that every post-secondary graduate chooses to stay in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Like much of the infrastructure in Saskatchewan, our health 

care facilities have been neglected for years. This has become a 

major concern to both patients and employees alike. And now, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is taking action; action 

that has already seen $100 million of improvements into health 

care facilities. I can assure you that this is just the beginning. It 

is anticipated that 400 recently recruited Filipino nurses will be 

working in Saskatchewan by the end of March 2009. Some of 

these nurses recently made their home in Prince Albert. I’m so 

pleased to have these hard-working individuals and their 

families in my constituency. I’d like to say to these nurses, 

welcome to Prince Albert but more importantly welcome to 

your new home. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Thursday Minister Harpauer 

announced almost $80 million investment in a four-year 

program to eliminate the wait-list for services currently faced 

by people with disabilities. 

 

Let me take you back to a time where there was no wait-list, 

where people with disabilities were able to access the services 

they desperately need in a timely manner. That time was 18 

years ago, in 1990. Since that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

wait-list has emerged. 

 

Minister Harpauer read out some shocking numbers last week 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

in the House, but the one that hit me the hardest was that 440 

individuals with disabilities are currently on the wait-list. That 

is unacceptable. Our government has a plan, a three-part plan, 

that Minister Harpauer outlined last week, to address this issue 

and reduce the long wait-list. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so many of our families’ roots are here in 

Saskatchewan and they’re tied to farming. It is our past and this 

government is committed to ensuring it is our future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am certain the members opposite do not 

feel the same way about farmers in the province. The NDP 

increased crop insurance premiums and they decreased the 

coverage. The member from Wood River said it best last week, 

quote: “. . . if your premiums are going up and coverage are 

going down . . .” who would want to stay in it? 

 

And just last week the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

made a remark about the member from Kindersley that is 

offensive to farmers and people of rural Saskatchewan. The 

member from Prince Albert Northcote said, and I quote: 

 

Bill Boyd is from Kindersley. He can fall asleep on his 

tractor for four hours and not hit a tree. 

 

This is his proof of his government’s commitment to the P.A. 

pulp mill. I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does the fact 

that Minister Boyd is a hard-working farmer have anything to 

do with the mill? Those comments were mean-spirited and 

completely irrelevant to the issue. 

 

Throughout my life, I have known many farmers. They are 

some of the hardest working women and men I know, and I 

could assure you that they do not fall asleep at the wheel, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The change, that is the purview of the tired, 

old NDP government that got voted out nearly one year ago. 

 

While I’m on the topic of the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote, I want to also make mention of some statements he 

made last week in regards to uranium development partnership. 

It appears the member from Prince Albert Northcote does not 

approve of the people this government has chosen to move 

forward this initiative. He said the Saskatchewan Party quote 

“is playing with a stacked deck.” 

 

I will agree with the member that the representatives on that 

panel are some of the most successful individuals in the 

business community. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are well 

aware, this initiative is really a means to advise the government 

on how best to develop the province’s uranium resources. So 

why would we not choose the best and the brightest in the 

industry to give us advice? When looking for advice, doesn’t 

one normally ask an expert? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you bet we are playing with a stacked 

deck and we would not have it any other way. We are keeping 

one thing in mind here and it is to use this province’s resources 

as wisely as possible to ensure the people of Saskatchewan 

benefit from our choices. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our commitments in the Throne Speech 

are guided by the following values: growth and opportunity, 

security and compassion, and most importantly, keeping our 

word. 

 

Saskatchewan citizens have a right to feel safe in their homes 

and communities with their families. This means ensuring there 

are programs in place to protect the public and to reduce 

criminal activity. The Throne Speech outlined some important 

measures our government will undertake this year, but I believe 

that is just the beginning of the work to be done. 

 

After the election, I was deeply honoured when the Premier 

gave me the responsibility of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing. For obvious reasons in my past, this is a portfolio I 

feel incredibly passionate about. Unfortunately the past 

government did not feel as strongly as I do about corrections 

and policing in this province. I am sad to have to stand in the 

House today and acknowledge the impact that 16 years of 

neglect has had on this ministry. 

 

In December 1991, the Leader of the Opposition said he dreamt 

of a Saskatchewan where a person could walk the streets safely. 

But the state his party left the province in is more of a 

nightmare than a good dream. Our correctional facilities are out 

of date and crumbling. Our police are overworked and 

understaffed. And worst of all, Saskatchewan has led the 

country in violent crime for 10 consecutive years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the crime stats speak for themselves. Over 

the past decade . . . [inaudible] . . . in 2006, crime in 

Saskatchewan increased by 17 per cent while on a national 

basis crime dropped by 11 per cent. In 2006 and 2007, 

Saskatchewan had the highest sexual assault and assault rates in 

the country, the highest youth crime rate in the country, and the 

highest impaired driving rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is not 

a record to be proud of but it is the NDP’s record. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why I’m pleased to support this 

year’s Speech from the Throne. It is full of initiatives that will 

reduce crime and make people feel safe in their own homes 

once again. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is obvious that problems of 

this magnitude that existed for so long under the NDP cannot 

and will not be fixed overnight. However every one of the 

commitments in my mandate letter from our Premier will be 

kept prior to the next election. I can assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that this government takes their safety seriously. 

It is our children’s futures at stake and that is too much to risk. 

 

Our government is committed to cracking down on gang 

activity. As a former police officer and as minister, I am well 

aware of the impact of gangs in our communities. We see the 

headlines everywhere. Organized crime and gangs are more of a 

threat now than ever before. This government will not stand for 

crime against our families, friends, and neighbours. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have said it before and I will say it again: 

we are a government who has proven we are keeping our 

promises. Those promises include a promise to add 120 new 

police officers over the next four years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

am pleased to say we are one-quarter of the way there. 

 

In the current budget year, provision has been made for 30 new 

police officers, nine of which are designated to combat 

organized crime and gangs in our combined forces and special 

enforcement units. We made a commitment to double existing 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

funding for police resources aimed at protecting children from 

sexual exploitation over the Internet. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am happy to say in this current year’s 

budget we added 11 brand new positions to our integrated child 

exploitation units across Saskatchewan — just one more 

promise kept. 

 

This coming year we will add at least 30 more police officers to 

our police services, helping to reach our goal. In recent weeks a 

joint effort to combat the drug trafficking issue in Saskatchewan 

has resulted in the arrest of 55 people in 17 communities with 

more than 172 charges being laid. This large-scale provincial 

drug sweep involved municipal police departments and several 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] detachments working 

together to make Saskatchewan a safer place to live. 

 

This drug sweep involved the combined forces and special 

enforcement unit that I mentioned earlier — nine new positions 

that this government funded this budget year. You see, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we are already seeing results. 

 

Also in recent weeks, the Saskatoon Police Service released 

their crime stats for the first nine months of 2008. The results 

are a dramatic drop in crime — armed robberies in the city are 

down more than 23 per cent, robberies are 32 per cent, break 

and enters in the homes are down 19 per cent, break and enters 

in the businesses are down 27 per cent, and theft under $5,000 

is down more than 44 per cent. Saskatoon police chief, Clive 

Weighill, attributes the drop in crime to having a more visible 

police presence in the city, something this government is 

helping to achieve by giving cities more boots in the street. 

 

I would like to take this time to commend Chief Weighill and 

his entire police service and force for their great dedication and 

achievement. I look forward to seeing those numbers continue 

to decline over the next three years and on into the future. 

 

This fall I will be introducing new legislation that will protect 

potential witnesses from the threats of violence and 

intimidation. You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, government’s 

increased focus on suppressing gangs and organized crime 

through targeted enforcement activity has resulted in an 

increase in the level of dangerous and violent gang members 

and organized crime figures facing charges before the courts. 

 

Police and prosecutors advise they frequently learn of witnesses 

who are threatened or intimidated, thus placing successful 

prosecutions in jeopardy. In a number of instances, cases have 

been lost because crucial evidence to secure conviction is not 

being tendered in court due to these tactics. Presently the 

RCMP administers the national witness protection Act. This 

Act is designed to protect very high-level witnesses by 

relocating them and, when necessary, changing their names. 

Although this Act is successful, many of the witnesses who are 

required before Saskatchewan’s courts do not fit the national 

criteria. 

 

In most cases, the only action required is to provide some form 

of security and assistance to the witness until the trial is 

completed and the threat is no longer present. At the present 

time, the police and prosecutors do their best to manage 

witnesses throughout the duration of the threat. The lack of an 

established program as to provide protective services to 

witnesses compromises successful management of the threat. 

 

Police and prosecutions do not have resources or the capacity to 

competently manage at-risk witnesses at this time nor is it their 

responsibility. 

 

This is where we come in. In short the witness protection Act 

will offer a safe place to stay and possible police protection to 

ensure the potential witness and their family are not harmed at 

all. This will ensure valuable and crucial evidence will not be 

lost due to witnesses either choosing not to testify or changing 

their testimony due to fear of reprisal at the hands of society’s 

most violent and active criminals. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is the fourth province to introduce this type of 

legislation with other provinces sure to follow in our footsteps 

over the coming years. 

 

Now unfortunately for the member from Regina Dewdney, 

although this government acts quickly and decisively, we 

cannot enact this legislation quickly enough to protect him from 

the wrath of the party’s current leader after the member 

confessed to organizing a leadership coup against the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale in a recent media interview. 

 

Provided no further details of the coup are leaked in the near 

future, we may be able to use this legislation to offer some 

measure of protection to the fourteen members of the coup that 

the member from Regina Dewdney chose to implicate in his 

interview. In addition to the obvious need for this legislation, 

I’m hopeful that self-interest will spur some members from the 

NDP caucus to vote in favour of this Bill. 

 

I am pleased to be able to talk about a brand new initiative 

announced by the Premier in Prince Albert during the election 

campaign. As a Saskatchewan Party candidate for Prince Albert 

Carlton at the time, I was so proud to stand next to the Premier 

while I introduced the senior citizens home security initiative. It 

is a program designed to help low-income seniors and seniors 

affected by a previous home invasion make their home safer 

through a complimentary home security audit, followed by the 

installation of basic home security devices such as deadbolts 

and outdoor lighting. We are hoping to roll this initiative out in 

the spring and make good on yet another election promise. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will turn my attention once again to the 

disgraceful record of the NDP. While crime statistics were 

rising in the province, the previous government just ignored 

their friends. They ignored request after request from ministry 

officials for additional bed space and new facilities year after 

year. The list is long, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so please bear with 

me. 

 

In 2001-2002, the NDP denied funding of 1.125 million for the 

design of the 1913 Regina Provincial Correctional Centre 

replacement project. In 2003-2004, the NDP denied security 

enhancements at the Saskatoon Correctional Centre for a 

second perimeter fence, upgraded control room and video 

surveillance equipment. In 2004-2005, the NDP denied the 

same security enhancements at the Saskatoon Correctional 

Centre. In 2005-2006, the NDP denied the same security 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

enhancements at the Saskatoon Correctional Centre once again 

— three times in a row. 

 

In 2006-2007, the NDP denied construction of 40 new cells for 

Pine Grove Correctional Centre and 216 new cells for 

Saskatoon Correctional Centre. In 2007-2008, the NDP denied 

a new admission/discharge unit for the Saskatoon Correctional 

Centre. In 2007-2008, the NDP denied construction of a 

permanent facility at the Saskatoon Urban Camp. In 2007-2008, 

the NDP denied construction, denied construction of 40 secure 

cells for the Prince Albert correctional centre and the addition 

of 216 cells for Saskatoon Correctional Centre once again. Mr. 

Speaker, that is not a record to be proud of. With a record like 

that, I would be ashamed to show my face again in this House. 

 

But here is the good news. Here’s the good news, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This government is once again committed to taking 

action, committed to cleaning up the mess that the NDP left us. 

My ministry is currently in the process of making a five-year 

capital plan and has already completed an assessment of the 

correctional facilities in the province. 

 

Last week in the House, the member from Regina Rosemont 

read some quotes from the August 29 Leader-Post. I will take a 

moment now to address those false accusations. 

 

One, I should have alerted the public as soon as possible. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the policy of the previous administration was 

to let the RCMP release information on escape. In fact the NDP 

never once released information on any escape in their tenure. 

They counted on the RCMP to release the information with that 

once happening more than two days after an escape, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

I too was concerned with the fact it took 15 hours to notify the 

media and the public. However I immediately took action and 

made a new policy, so that this government will take the 

initiative and alert the public to any escapes from secure adult 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just last week this new policy was used 

when one of our inmates was mistakenly released from a 

courthouse. I made sure this government immediately notified 

the public as we said we would. I should have provided the 

public with as much information as possible. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the members across from here may 

or may not know or respect is that after the escape, an RCMP 

investigation immediately came into effect. As a former police 

officer, I understand that to comment on anything regarding this 

escape and the investigation, until the investigation’s complete, 

would not only be making assumptions, but also could 

jeopardize the investigation. 

 

Number three, I should acknowledge here as . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I should have acknowledged that there is a problem 

related to gangs. If the member opposite would have read or 

listened to any of the media on August 29, he would know that 

after the news conference, I immediately called the media to 

acknowledge the fact that I misspoke, apologized for my 

statement, and acknowledged the fact that there is a problem 

related to gangs. I did so again yesterday. And I did so when I 

had my press scrum, the day of my press scrum. 

So clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Regina 

Rosemont should get his facts straight before making baseless 

accusations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, back to the reason I’m speaking to the 

House today — the Throne Speech. The number one reason I 

can stand here today and support this year’s Speech from the 

Throne is that our Premier’s vision and new economic policies 

will afford my daughters and their friends a brighter and 

stronger future. Our children’s future is truly in our hands. 

 

So I challenge the members opposite, before you support the 

amendment, think long and hard about your children and 

grandchildren’s futures. I urge you to join the majority of the 

Saskatchewan electorate by voting in favour of the 

Saskatchewan Party’s policies and initiatives and against the 

amendment. Members opposite should join me in supporting 

the Throne Speech as I am today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to enjoy this opportunity to engage in the Speech 

from the Throne and to share my views on what the state of the 

nation is, so to speak, in Saskatchewan today. 

 

I want to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by thanking my 

constituents for their continued support. Regina Coronation 

Park is very much a family oriented, working-class . . . Many 

are blue-collar workers, but we have our share of professionals 

— doctors, lawyers, that sort of thing — as well in my 

constituency, but very family oriented. 

 

Schools are important. Community is important. Housing is 

important. And I just have always respected my constituents 

and always appreciated their continued overall support of me as 

their MLA. 

 

I want to thank also my constituency assistant, Fred Kress, for 

the work he has done and continues to do. It’s very important 

for all MLAs to have constituency assistants that we appreciate 

and trust and who will look after many of the day-to-day 

requests that our constituents have, be it for pins for travelling, 

or maybe some advocacy respecting some issue that . . . perhaps 

dealing with the Crowns, that sort of thing. Anyway thanks very 

much, Fred, for the work you continue to do on our behalf. 

 

And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank my wife, 

Lorna, who’s the rock of my life and my life partner, and just 

keeps me relatively anchored. I love her dearly and really, really 

have enjoyed our life and look forward to many more years of 

that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a great time to be in Saskatchewan. 

It’s a great time to be an MLA in Saskatchewan. It’s a great, 

great time. Here we are, we have a Speech from the Throne that 

brags about paying debt. We have a Speech from the Throne 

that brags about the surplus, that we had a $3 billion-plus 

surplus this year alone. 

 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a great time to be in Saskatchewan. The 

government has more money at their command than any 

government in the history of Saskatchewan has ever had. More 

money, more ability to deal with issues now than any 

government has ever had in the history of Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan Party government MLAs have riches beyond 

their wildest dreams. 

 

And New Democrat MLAs in opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we have pride — pride in knowing that we helped, along with 

the people of Saskatchewan, we helped set the table. The $3 

billion surplus didn’t simply materialize overnight. It took years 

of getting things in place, and we caught the wave. And I’m 

really, really, really pleased for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I seem to have hit a bit of a sore spot across the 

way. So I think I have to talk a little bit about our 16-year run in 

government. Mr. Speaker, when we formed government from 

the previous Conservative government, there was a $13 billion 

total debt and an annual deficit of $1.3 billion. Saskatchewan, 

the province of Saskatchewan had a credit rating that was so 

bad, so low, it was a junk bond credit rating. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan couldn’t invest money in the 

pension plan for its own civil servants and Crown corporation 

employees because the national government, the federal 

government sets the rules, as they appropriately should, for 

pension funds. But that meant that people who worked at 

SaskTel or SaskPower or the Department of Agriculture or 

Department of Social Services, educators — all of these people 

were investing pension money through the professional pension 

investors, and not a dime of it was able to be invested in 

Saskatchewan. That was the situation we inherited. That’s what 

we lived through 16, now 17 years ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, unemployment was a huge issue in those 

days. I remember running for the nomination for the New 

Democratic Party in my constituency that I have spoken 

proudly of earlier in this speech. I remember vividly going to 

one house. The first time I’m there, the gentleman — about 55 

years old, he’d worked all his life — he needed a few more 

years before he could retire, but he was looking forward to 

retirement. But he was looking for work, and he’d been 

unemployed for over a year — a blue-collar worker, been 

unemployed. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The second time I visited this gentleman’s house, I noted that 

there was less furniture, significantly less furniture. The third 

time I visited this house, all he had left was the kitchen table 

and a couple of chairs. He was virtually reduced to tears, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. He couldn’t find work, and he’d watched his 

life savings erode. And I know from first-hand experience he 

lost his house because he couldn’t find a job. 

 

And I hear the heckle, that was under our administration. Let 

me say unequivocally. I served my first term in opposition. 

Grant Devine, the Conservative, was the premier. Grant Devine 

was the Conservative that the now premier served with at that 

time as a senior ministerial assistant. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

was under Tory times, and Tory times are tough times. My 

constituents know it. Tory times are tough times. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we left government some 

16 years later with a much reduced debt. Actually the first two 

years we deficit financed as we tried to turn it around. We 

raised taxes. We cut services. And times were tough for 

Saskatchewan people — you bet they were — but we kept 

meeting payroll. And we got improvements in our credit rating. 

And we could again invest pension monies into our own 

Saskatchewan people’s pensions through the Government of 

Saskatchewan, through the Crowns, that sort of thing. And 

things started to turn around, but we were still stuck with this 

total debt that was causing our biggest single expenditure after 

health. 

 

Our second biggest expenditure was interest on the debt. 

Interest on the debt. That was the situation that we inherited. 

And we fought and we scraped and we did everything we 

possibly could to get that turned around. And I know that 

members opposite are amused because all they know is the 

good times. I’m pleased. Members on this side are so pleased 

that the government only enjoys the good times, only enjoys the 

riches. And I hope that continues. I really want that for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to tell you it was a huge sacrifice by the people of 

Saskatchewan. No big sacrifice for me to pay a few more 

dollars in taxes; I have a good paying job. But I’ll tell you my 

constituents sacrificed. My constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

worked hard. They’re constituents who understand you had to 

cut the frills and pay the bills and that’s what they did, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m so proud of the people of Regina Coronation 

Park and I’m proud of the people of Saskatchewan collectively 

for understanding that that is what we needed to do. 

 

We got to the situation where we were able to deliver tax cuts. 

Taxes, we had reduced the PST [provincial sales tax]. We had 

done the biggest single reduction in income tax and in corporate 

income taxes in Saskatchewan’s history. We had done all of 

that while maintaining balanced, surplus budgets and every 

single year paying down the debt. We had done all of that over 

the 16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And at the end of the day, what we had left was a economy that 

I’ve described it as hotter than a $2 pistol. And many young 

people may not know $2 pistol or a Saturday night special — 

just illegal, they’re so hot. You shouldn’t own them. You 

shouldn’t buy them. They shouldn’t be available. But our 

economy was so hot, virtually full employment, we’ve got taxes 

clearly trending lower. 

 

We’ve got an announcement this year of a tax cut that’s very 

significant and my constituents are going to be grateful for that 

tax cut. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the tax cut 

that was introduced this year amounts to 10 per cent of the 3 

billion-plus surplus. Ten per cent of the surplus went into 

income tax cuts that we’re going to see in April and May when 

we get our income tax refunds. 

 

I want to come back, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Never before has a 

government had more resources and more ability to deal with 

issues of the day than the Government of Saskatchewan today 

enjoys. No government’s ever had more resources. They know 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

it, we know it, and the people of Saskatchewan know it. 

 

But that begs the question then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why so 

tight-fisted when it comes to home heating? Why so tight-fisted 

when it comes to the SaskEnergy and natural gas? Why is it that 

there is no immediate relief for people who are starting to heat 

their houses in a very, very real way today and for the last few 

weeks? I mean it’s winter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s winter. 

 

I do unequivocally say, because I checked with my constituency 

assistant Mr. Kress, the thing that I get the most calls on in my 

constituency office is the high cost of home heating. I’ve never 

experienced that in 21 years as an MLA. I’ve never had that 

before. 

 

We’ve had questions around minimum wage. We’ve had 

questions around, oh, my power’s cut off, can you help? Oh, my 

phone’s cut off, can you help? I’ve had all of that. Or, I’ve got 

workers’ compensation problems. Those things have happened 

for 21 years. Never ever before have I had where the clear 

majority of calls is dealing with the high cost of heating homes, 

and that’s right in north Regina. Every single constituent I have 

lives in north Regina. Every single one of them has natural gas 

as an option. SaskEnergy provides well over 99 per cent of the 

home heating requirements in my constituency. 

 

And that, I tell you, is what the biggest question is. And the 

government sits on this huge surplus and day after day refuses 

to deal with the high cost of home heating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have that going on. Earlier today we have the 

Minister Responsible for CIC releasing a KPMG, which is a 

national firm, report, the KPMG report dealing with the 

Crowns. And I know the hon. member for Wood River takes 

great glee because he is of the philosophical belief that 

government shouldn’t be in business, that government should 

not be in Crowns. And I see the hon. member nodding, and I’m 

trying to be gentle. This is a genuine difference between the 

member from Wood River and the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

We have got, of all of the investments that the Crowns had done 

through CIC, of all of the investments we’d done, of the ones 

that are finished — they invested and then sold, took the money 

out, all of the out-of-province investments — the rate of return 

is 41.6 per cent, nearly 42 per cent. The return into 

Saskatchewan people’s pockets, 51 million extra dollars. That’s 

$51 million that had the Sask Party been government, they 

wouldn’t have got. 

 

That’s $51 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been used to 

help increase SaskTel’s cellular coverage to the point where 

Saskatchewan has the largest percentage of population covered 

by cell coverage than any other province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we have taken that $50 million and used it, of course, for the 

benefit of Saskatchewan people. And I’m awfully proud, as I 

know my colleagues are, awfully proud of our ability to do that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Wood River says, now 

explain all of the others. He says, explain all of the others, the 

ones that we’re still in. I want to tell the hon. member, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that you’re in government now. And I want to 

say this: we got a 42 per cent return on investment on the things 

we divested, and that’s according to the KPMG report. That’s 

according to the minister’s own report that was tabled earlier 

today. That’s not my numbers; that’s out of the KPMG report. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we got 42 per cent return on investment. 

This new Sask Party government . . . And here’s why I predict 

you’re not going to get that. Here’s why I predict you’re not 

going to get it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to personalize it too 

much, so it’s like if two people inherit at the same time a corner 

confectionery store, you know, in the same city, same basic 

neighbourhood — even across the street from each other if you 

like — and they’re both going concerns. The difference is I 

inherit one of them from my grandparents and I’ve never liked, 

never liked the confectionery. The other person inherited from 

. . . It doesn’t matter. They’ve got their confectionery at exactly 

the same moment, and they’ve had a dream that they could run 

a confectionery and they’ve wanted to run that confectionery all 

of their lives. Well guess who’s going to have the confectionery 

a year from now. Not me. It’ll be that person whose dream it 

was. 

 

And that’s the way it is with Crown corporations. Your vision, 

the government’s vision collectively, is a non-vision respecting 

Crown corporations. It’s a vision of sell them, lose them, lose 

them. It’s not even use them or lose them. It’s lose them. That’s 

their philosophical bent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our view is the 

Crowns are there to provide service for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for my constituents, my family, my friends. It’s 

to provide services. We’ve got electrical services at a very 

reasonable rate. We’ve got gas services, all of this very secure 

and very reasonably priced, recognizing some differences in 

geography. We don’t enjoy British Columbia’s hydro. We have 

hydro and it’s important, but we also have more of a reliance on 

coal, which is a little more money. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe in Crowns. Simply put, the 

government members believe in Crown sell-off. And that’s why 

they’re going to take the KPMG report, they’re going to use it 

as an excuse to starve the Crown corporations — SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, SaskTel, and SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance], the four major utility Crowns. They’re going to 

starve them and they’re going to try and find ways to . . . Mark 

my words, these Crowns will not be like they are. They’re 

going to be hugely, hugely different. Mr. Speaker, change is 

good, but not change that this government sees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close where I began. I want to thank my 

constituents. I want to thank my constituency assistant. I want 

to thank my family and friends and, particularly, my wife. But I 

want to thank all members of this legislature. It’s not my swan 

song. All members are diligently trying to do our collective 

jobs. I have a bias, I have to confess. I think that members on 

this side of the House do the jobs better, but I do know that all 

members are trying to do their jobs. I’m proud to stand up and 

speak on behalf of my constituents. I hope I’ve made some 

cogent argument. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting with the 

amendment, but against the main motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Attorney General and the Minister of Justice. 

 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise to comment upon and speak in support of the 

Speech from the Throne. It’s a practice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that members use this time to offer thanks and make comments 

about their constituency and people in their constituency. And I 

would like to certainly do that. 

 

My constituency, as you’re aware, is Saskatoon Southeast, 

which I regard as one of the most wonderful places in our 

province. We have some very significant and rapid growth. We 

now have new neighbourhoods of Rosewood and Stonebridge, 

and our very rapid increase in the number of acreages south of 

Saskatoon. I’m pleased to add these new constituents and I met 

a number of them over the summer. We had a series of 

barbeques and events through the summer months, and was able 

to have a lot of contact with the people that live in these new 

areas. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was pleased to report to the House that 

the type of things that they had to mention and their concerns, 

one was the significant issue of the provincial debt and what we 

were using excess revenue for. And the most common theme 

was, what are you doing for debt repayment, and are you able to 

reduce the debt? And I’m very pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that over this fiscal year we will be reducing the provincial debt 

by approximately 40 per cent. This was very, very warmly 

received by the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast, and I’m 

pleased to be able to deliver that to them. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We also heard the concerns about high taxes, and I’m extremely 

pleased that we were able to deliver tax relief earlier this week. 

We are now the province that has the lowest personal income 

tax of any jurisdiction in our country. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that is going to start to pay some significant dividends. 

 

We had people paying personal tax that chose to leave the 

province, to go and live in Calgary, chose to go and live where 

there was a more favourable personal tax regime. Those people 

still have businesses and still have interests in this province, and 

there’s a good chance that those people may very well be 

coming back to Saskatoon. Or the ones that have not yet left are 

very much more inclined to stay here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another significant point that we heard 

about was the aging and infrastructure deficit in our province. 

I’m also pleased to say that we’ve made one of the largest 

commitments in the province’s history towards updating the 

province’s infrastructure. We’ve made a major commitment, a 

billion dollar commitment to roads, schools, hospitals, and a 

variety of other things. 

 

And the amount of money that we’ve committed continues to 

increase as the province’s history goes on. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I’m pleased that that is going on and am delighted that we as a 

government are able to deliver that to the citizens of our 

province. 

 

One of the remaining things that we’ll be working on, by the 

member from Rosetown, is the issue of property tax. The 

people in my constituency regularly report that they’ve been 

burdened with high property tax for far too long. And the 

member from Rosetown is doing some very good work. He’s 

met with school boards. He’s met with municipalities, with 

homeowners’ group, and I understand we’ll have a report in the 

next few months. And hopefully that’s going to provide some 

significant benefit. And I look forward to going back to my 

constituents and being able to say, this is another commitment 

and another promise that we are able to fulfill and live up to. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I live in, of course, in Saskatoon and we 

have, as a city, a new police chief — who’s actually not that 

new anymore, slightly in excess of a year. We have former 

deputy chief Weighill from Regina who’s now chief of police in 

Saskatoon. 

 

We’re extremely pleased and want to thank the citizens of the 

city of Regina for having given Clive Weighill to us because 

our city’s police force is working hard, competently, and I have 

yet to hear a negative comment about Chief Weighill. I felt 

somewhat guilty about having effectively stolen this individual 

from the city of Regina, but I’ve had the privilege of meeting 

the new police chief in Regina, Troy Hagen, and find him to be 

an excellent person. And I’ve talked to some of the Regina 

police members and they have strong support for him. And I’m 

sure that Regina will be equally well served as Saskatoon with 

their new police chief as well. So I’d like to commend both 

police chiefs and look forward to working with them as we 

continue our efforts to reduce crime and to bring our province 

forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, something new and significant in my 

constituency is the announcement I’m going to speak to more 

later, but one of the significant things is the new south bridge 

that will go along the south edge of Saskatoon. For the people 

that know Saskatoon, this will go along immediately north of 

the new auto mall past the old Yanke Transfer building and 

through a portion of the Saskatoon Golf and Country Club, and 

have another bridge across to the west side of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is something that is more than just 

another conduit for traffic to cross. This will bring the 

Saskatoon east side and west side together, promote the two 

communities from working together and go a long ways to 

reduce the divide between the inner city and the rest of the city. 

So we look forward to having that come about. 

 

Usually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that’s done at this 

time as well is recognizing some of the individuals that have 

been significant in the MLA’s life and I’m going to mention a 

few of them. One is of course my wife, Sandy, who has been 

incredibly supportive. Before I was elected we used to carpool 

to work. My office was downtown, hers was downtown so we 

would travel in the vehicle together and save some travel 

expenses, some gas expenses. 

 

Now I can advise you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the 

things that we did when we were travelling to prevent us from 

wallowing in self-misery about the usual problems in our lives 

was we made a rule; we made a pact between ourselves that 

from the time we left downtown to the time we got home, that 

was our venting time. We could say whatever gossip or misery 

that we wanted to share about our day, the people we worked 

with. 

 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

As you’re aware, my wife used to work with the member from 

Meewasin, and I’m pleased to report to him that he was not one 

of the ones that she usually vented about. She was usually 

venting about me and about other things. Occasionally by the 

time we would get home one or the other of us would say, I’m 

not done venting yet; drive around the block. And we would do 

that. 

 

She has asked me recently, now that you have to travel from 

Regina to Saskatoon, do you vent by yourself all the way 

home? And yes, Sandy, I do. 

 

I also appreciate the continuing support of my mother who lives 

in a senior’s facility in Saskatoon. She’s very keenly interested 

in politics, and when she had decided a year or two to sell her 

home and to move into a senior’s facility, she was on several 

waiting lists. And the one that she got into first happened to be 

in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. I was somewhat 

disappointed because I felt this was one of the votes that I 

would be able to count on had she been able to move into my 

constituency. Well the member for Saskatoon Nutana, to give 

her credit, campaigns in there regularly and vigorously. My 

mother has indicated to me that if it keeps up, she will be 

moving herself into the undecided category. I will be troubled if 

that actually happens. 

 

I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would like to comment and thank 

my constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, for her 

continuing hard work and the excellent relationship that she’s 

developed with my constituents. She is going through a 

personal crisis with the health of her son, Brennan — 

B-r-e-n-n-a-n, for the benefit of Hansard — who last year 

during the election was diagnosed with testicular cancer. Since 

that time he has had surgery on his heart and lungs to remove 

tumours, and the family is wrestling with that and dealing with 

that. And I want to ask members to provide their thoughts and 

prayers to that family. Things are going relatively well. The 

surgery was somewhat successful although he looks at some 

ongoing treatment. So I would like to mention him and indicate 

to them that my thoughts and my prayers are certainly with 

them. 

 

I’d like to thank all of the volunteers that come out to our events 

and continue to work and continue to provide input and ongoing 

support. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to comment very briefly about how 

our province has been somewhat insulated and somewhat 

removed from some of the global financial issues that were 

there. 

 

Immediately prior to the legislature going into session, my wife 

and I spent some time in Fort Lauderdale. And I was reading 

the newspaper there, and there was advertisements from home 

builders and developers that were discounting new homes that 

had never been occupied, and the discounts were anywhere 

from 30 to 70 per cent from the original list price. And when 

you would drive around you would find entire condominium 

complexes that had never been occupied. People were not 

paying the condominium fees. Security, utilities, taxes were not 

being paid on those properties. 

 

I also heard a radio ad from a Chrysler dealership, full-sized 

Chrysler SUVs [sport-utility vehicle] and trucks, two-for-one 

sale. I contacted the dealership by phone when I heard the radio 

ad and saw the newspaper in front of me, and they indicated 

that if you purchased one vehicle at full price, you could have 

another one up to the same price because of their financing 

arrangements with Chrysler. You couldn’t buy one, but you had 

to buy two if you wanted that special price. So that’s a sign of 

how drastic things are in other parts of North America. 

 

We should be extremely pleased that we have a strong resource 

sector and more pleased that we’ve got a government that’s 

willing to manage things carefully. I’ve listened to some of the 

members’ speeches from across the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and some of them are talking about wanting to spend 

money on this, spend money on that, do things quicker. We 

would rather be sitting on a significant amount of money to help 

our province weather any of the vagaries that come about in the 

continuing marketplace. 

 

This is a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that takes the 

financial situation of the world and our province very seriously. 

The 40 per cent debt reduction is something that we should take 

a lot of pride in and want to deal with. That is something, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that I would regard as not just significant but 

as actually historic, and this government should be commended 

for doing that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a Throne Speech that sets out our 

government’s agenda with much optimism for coming days, 

weeks, and months. It has been said around the world that 

Canada is the best country on the planet when it comes to 

quality of life. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been all over this country of ours and 

I’m convinced that Saskatchewan is the province that offers the 

best quality of life in Canada. So since Canada is the best 

country and Saskatchewan is the best province in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, we are right here, right now living in the best place in 

the world. 

 

It was during the election campaign a year ago that 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs and candidates were telling the 

people of our great province about our new ideas for 

Saskatchewan and stating what we needed to secure the 

province. Well, Mr. Speaker, since forming the new 

government almost a year ago, we have shared those new ideas 

and have a big head start on securing what is a very bright 

future for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As Justice minister and Attorney General, I’m most pleased to 

be moving forward with a number of justice-related initiatives. 

We will be moving forward with important steps towards a 

stronger democracy. 

 

First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is keeping the 

promise of establishing fixed election dates. In fact we know 

that the next provincial election will occur on November 7, 

2011. As the Throne Speech indicated, set election dates will 

remove some of the political gamesmanship and voter cynicism 

that we have seen in the past. We have fulfilled that election 

promise during the first session. 

 

This session we will keep another promise relating to elections. 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

A new law will restrict the amount of government advertising in 

the periods leading up to an election. This is going to prevent 

abuse that happened under the previous government. The NDP 

spent almost a million dollars on unbudgeted health care 

advertising leading up to the last election. Our legislative action 

would be good news for Saskatchewan. People told us they 

don’t like to see their hard-earned tax dollars being spent on 

political advertising. It’s interesting to note that, just less than 

one year under a Saskatchewan Party government leading this 

province, the entire country is now learning about our robust 

provincial economy and our growing population. Yes, we’ve 

delivered the message to people outside Saskatchewan and to 

the rest of the country that our future is wide open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the session our provincial government will 

introduce legislation that will make it possible for people in 

Saskatchewan to elect the next nominee for the Senate, an 

important step towards a democratic, elected Canadian Senate. 

Mr. Speaker, another important piece I’d like to mention from 

the Ministry of Justice is part of our promise to make our 

communities safer. We will strengthen laws and step up 

enforcement so that provincial government police services can 

seize property. We are going to deal in a better manner with the 

collection of fines and collection of monies that are owing to 

the province. The provincial government will also move ahead 

to make other adjustments to ensure that renters are protected as 

recommended by the Merriman and Pringle report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week’s Throne Speech not only highlighted 

these important issues from the Ministry of Justice, it also 

highlighted several initiatives that will make life better for my 

constituents in Saskatoon Southeast and for the people across 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatoon 

Southeast and everyone in Saskatchewan will benefit from the 

fact that Saskatchewan is number one in wholesale trade 

growth, export sales growth, and retail sales growth. More 

people in Saskatchewan are working more than ever before. It 

wasn’t that long ago our young people were graduating from 

high schools, trade schools, and universities to find that they 

had no place to go. That is, no place to go to get a job in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Times have changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our young people 

can now find suitable employment for compensation that is fair 

and competitive with other jobs in other provinces. Now our 

young people can go to school and focus on their studies 

without a constant concern about where they might have to go 

to find a job when they graduate. Now our young people can 

feel secure about their future because our government is 

securing the future for the entire province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan Party government took the time 

this past summer to consult with the people of Saskatchewan. 

We asked the people what we should do with our substantial 

revenues. A $3.1 billion surplus amount is a lot of money. We 

thought it only right to ask Saskatchewan people what they 

want to do with their money. They told us they wanted lower 

taxes. They told us they wanted us to improve infrastructure — 

specifically hospitals, schools, and highways. They told us they 

wanted us to be responsible with their money. Mr. Speaker, we 

are stewards and guardians and trustees of that money. We will 

look after it carefully. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan 

delivered on those demands last week, making some truly 

historic announcements. The Premier announced the largest 

single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan history, the 

largest amount of debt reduction in Saskatchewan history, and 

the largest investment in infrastructure in Saskatchewan history. 

Mr. Speaker, the tax relief we have announced will make a big 

impact on every child, woman, and man in Saskatchewan. Our 

government’s plan is solid, and we believe it will ensure future 

growth while at the same time address the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents of Saskatoon Southeast, and in fact 

all residents of Saskatoon, are looking forward to the 

completion of their new bridge. In June our provincial 

government, in partnership with the federal government, 

announced a new $234 million south bridge in Saskatoon. 

Prime Minister Stephen Harper attended the announcement and 

confirmed that the federal government would contribute $86.5 

million to the construction of the new bridge, matching our 

provincial government’s funding. The city of Saskatoon is also 

a partner having committed some $70 million. Mr. Speaker, on 

that day, the Prime Minister of Canada acknowledged the fact 

that the Saskatchewan economy is on a roll, pointing out that 

our rapid and spectacular success was the reason that we need 

an additional bridge in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Circle Drive south river crossing will be a new 

six-lane bridge and will complete the final section of the centre 

city’s ring road. It will ease traffic congestion in Saskatoon by 

giving commercial traffic a better option than moving through 

the downtown area. It will also tie the east side and west side of 

Saskatoon together from the south point as well to give greater 

access from citizens on both sides of the street to stores, 

markets on the other side of the river, things such as the 

farmers’ market and giving access to the big box malls that are 

on the east side of the river. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to finish by saying our government’s 

Throne Speech not only outlined our plan for continuing 

economic growth, it also states how our province’s prosperity 

will be shared among all Saskatchewan people. Looking 

forward, Saskatchewan’s future is certainly bright, Mr. Speaker. 

I am proud to serve the residents of Saskatoon Southeast as 

their MLA and proud to serve the people of Saskatchewan as 

their Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will certainly be supporting the vote on 

the Speech from the Throne and would like to urge the 

members opposite to read it carefully, review it, and would like 

to solicit their support. Too often when we were in opposition 

and when they were in government, they called out to us and 

said, will you support this, will you support that? And we 

reached out to them and we said, we would like to support this; 

we would like to support that. There was never a willingness on 

their part to work with us, and today I would like to reach 

across once again and give them the opportunity to vote for this 

Speech from the Throne and show that they support the people 

of Saskatchewan, and they want to make Saskatchewan a better 

place. 

 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting for the Speech from the 

Throne and want to invite them to do so as well. Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, standing here, looking across the aisle as I am at the 

moment, reminds me of a recent conversation I had with one of 

my colleagues. It went something like this. You know, I said, 

we ought to have a ugly tie day here at the legislature. And her 

advice was, don’t need it because here at the legislature, every 

day is ugly tie day . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, 

you wear a tie like that, Mr. Speaker, maybe you should be 

considerate enough to bring sunglasses for your colleagues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a great pleasure and an honour 

to rise in the House today to speak in support of the 2008 

Speech from the Throne, subtitled “A Stronger Saskatchewan. 

A Better Life.” The contents of this document, along with other 

recent announcements, form a group of commitments from 

Saskatchewan’s new government that are truly historic for our 

province. Our colleagues across the way obviously agree with 

this. 

 

Let’s take a moment, shall we, to outline them. As mentioned 

by other members, highlights include the largest income tax cut 

in Saskatchewan’s history, the largest payment on the 

provincial debt in Saskatchewan’s history, and the largest 

investment in infrastructure again in Saskatchewan’s history, 

Mr. Speaker. Impressive indeed. In addition nearly $2 billion 

has been set aside in the province’s Growth and Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. This is our rainy day fund designed to 

protect us from economic troubles currently being experienced 

in other jurisdictions around the world which may affect us in 

ways that we can’t entirely perceive. It is in fact an insurance 

policy for the people of Saskatchewan, paid for in advance. 

They will ensure the viability of important programs serving 

our needs. It’s a rock that will form a strong foundation on 

which we can build our future together. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech makes reference to 

increases in financial and program support for society’s most 

vulnerable that are absolutely unprecedented. With the above in 

mind, I’d like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank our 

province’s residents for sharing their hopes and dreams with 

their new government, along with their ideas on how best to 

invest the approximately $3 billion in extra revenues this 

province has seen this year. In doing so, they’ve played a key 

role in shaping the direction outlined in the Throne Speech 

itself. 

 

It was these community-minded people who took time to 

indicate that their top priorities included paying down the debt 

and aggressively attacking the infrastructure gap. It was they 

who confirmed that the right thing to do would be to introduce 

broad-based tax cuts for Saskatchewan families and individuals. 

And it was they who underlined their strong belief in providing 

increased support for those in need so everyone can benefit 

from Saskatchewan’s new prosperity. As the Premier has said, 

everyone should share in this new prosperity. 

 

Here’s how the ground-breaking public consultation was 

summed up in this speech delivered here by the Lieutenant 

Governor himself. The quote says: 

 

This money rightfully belongs to everyone in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is why . . . government asked the people of 

Saskatchewan for advice on the . . . steps it should take. 

 

Many people from all across our province have responded. 

 

Their wise and steady counsel has built on my 

government’s vision for reduction of debt, lower taxes, 

better infrastructure and sound financial management. 

 

That’s the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. Again, our sincere 

thanks to all those who participated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have taken this excellent advice to heart and 

have responded with a range of initiatives that address the 

people’s priorities in ways that are innovative, effective, and 

actually transformational for our province. The response has 

been very positive indeed. Here is one comment that is typical 

of many, taken from an editorial in the October 23 edition of the 

Regina Leader-Post: 

 

Saskatchewan’s government seems intent on transforming 

and re-energizing the province. 

 

Transforming and re-energizing the province, Mr. Speaker. Yes 

indeed, that’s exactly what we’re working hard to do. 

 

Just as much as these goals apply to other policy areas clearly 

mentioned before, they apply equally to the province’s 

relationship with its nearly 800 municipalities and its firm 

commitment to working with them in partnership towards 

achieving their top priorities. These intentions are made clear in 

the Throne Speech section titled, Stronger Communities By 

Working With Municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province’s new government is fully aware that 

an enormous amount of the new growth that we are 

experiencing today is taking place in our municipalities. A lot 

of it is occurring in our cities and towns, to be sure. But 

tremendous growth is also happening in our rural areas, our 

villages, and in our northern communities as well. 

 

And while the individual circumstances may vary considerably 

from place to place, many of the needs all come down to the 

same thing and that is infrastructure — infrastructure for new 

residential neighbourhoods, commercial areas, and industrial 

parks. Infrastructure to provide for a new capacity in water 

treatment plants, waste water treatment facilities, and landfills 

to accommodate the required incremental growth. Because we 

are planning for success, we foresaw the need to assist our 

municipalities in meeting this exciting new challenge. 

 

That’s why, together with our municipal sector partners, we 

created the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth initiative, a new 

$300 million loan program rolled out over four years, with the 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

province financing the interest costs for five years to make 

access to much-needed capital more affordable for all. 

 

Many of the program’s important features, including the 

eligibility of extra capacity in water, waste water, and landfill 

systems, were added at the request of our colleagues at the 

table. 

 

In addition, review and adjudication of the applications for 

funding is done by a close-working group of municipal and 

provincial officials. It’s a real team effort, Mr. Speaker, and an 

excellent example of the success that is being achieved through 

the province’s commitment to building and maintaining a true 

government-to-government relationship with municipalities. 

 

So how’s it going so far, you might ask. The program’s . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . How is it going? I’ll tell you; I’m 

happy to. The program’s very first year has been an enormous 

success. All $75 million for the first year have been allocated 

and essential projects in 38 communities have been approved 

for funding all over the province. 

 

A typical example is the city of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, which is 

accessing over $10 million under the program to build new 

water treatment facilities and install infrastructure for a new 

residential subdivision. Yorkton’s growing. With an annual 

budget of about $13 million, the interest savings of about a half 

a million dollars per year for each of the next five years will, in 

the mayor’s opinion, be huge. Very clearly this is the right 

program at the right time. 

 

Last fall I started touring communities — large and small, urban 

and rural, in the North and in the South — and in fact we’re still 

doing it today. Everywhere I saw an unprecedented level of 

confidence and optimism about the new Saskatchewan and the 

opportunities for economic development, job creation, and 

growth. And the municipal sector partners I met with all 

expressed great interest in and support for the new 

infrastructure growth initiative. With a very successful first year 

under our belt, we can now move forward with confidence to 

successive years, knowing that we are meeting key priorities in 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities. 

 

Now as mentioned in the Throne Speech, we are keenly aware 

that, just like the province, municipalities are facing an 

enormous infrastructure debt. Many years of drastic cuts to the 

provincial revenue-sharing program carried out by the previous 

government actually cut the program funding in half — an 

indisputable fact. The inescapable consequence of this very 

regrettable and regressive policy was that large numbers of 

critically important local infrastructure projects were cut back, 

were delayed, or were abandoned altogether. 

 

The cost to Saskatchewan’s municipalities goes far beyond the 

$300 million taken away from urban communities alone, and 

even well beyond the more than two-thirds of a billion dollars 

when considering cutbacks to all 800 urban, rural, and northern 

communities. Due to the spiralling costs of construction, the 

years of waiting and standing by have likely doubled the impact 

in a large number of these cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as somebody who served in municipal 

government for 12 years during this troubled period, I can 

confirm that the outright abandonment of Saskatchewan’s 

communities by the former government and the enormous 

damage done to the relationship between our two orders of 

government represents one of the darkest eras of 

Saskatchewan’s political history. Shame indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

Shame indeed. 

 

And to cap it all off — and this is a point worth noting — when 

the former government finally got around to restoring some of 

the lost revenue, they withheld all new funding in 2006 so they 

could double the amount in 2007. Why? Well it just happened 

to be the year of the provincial election. Mr. Speaker, such 

actions define arrogance. They define disrespect for municipal 

partners. 

 

The new provincial government has decided to turn this sordid 

state of affairs around. We are determined to clean up the mess 

left behind by the previous government. We are committed to 

rebuilding the damaged relationship and establishing a 

long-term revenue-sharing solution tailored quite specifically to 

the needs of municipalities, in consultation with them. After all, 

we respect municipal partners as full participants at the table. 

We recognize the essential role that they play in economic 

development, job creation, and providing services that ensure 

an attractive quality of life for everyone. 

 

We also know that when municipalities succeed, everyone in 

the province succeeds. And we understand that the 

infrastructure gap in municipalities is an enormous barrier to 

growth that must be resolved. And so we promise to revive the 

discussions about revenue sharing. We promise to identify a 

provisional revenue source for sharing with our municipal 

colleagues that, as they had requested, grows with the 

provincial economy, Mr. Speaker. We promised to get it all 

done in two years with successive 7 per cent increases on an 

interim basis to the current formula. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done all that and we’ve done more. 

We began by meeting with not only the cities, as the former 

government had, but also with representatives of towns and 

villages, rural municipalities, and northern communities as well 

— all simultaneously — in order to dramatically accelerate the 

pace of this process. We introduced a 7 per cent increase to 

revenue sharing in our very first budget, as promised. Further, 

when unprecedented resource revenues became available and 

made it possible, we quickly added another 8 per cent for a total 

increase of 15 per cent — more than double the commitment in 

one year. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, with the project well in hand, I am truly 

confident that a new revenue-sharing formula that provides 

more funding and more predictability in funding to 

municipalities will be part of the 2009-2010 provincial budget 

as promised. 

 

The bottom line is that what the old government couldn’t do in 

16 years, Mr. Speaker, the new government will accomplish in 

a mere 16 months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what direct 

benefits from the Throne Speech and its related announcements 

will the good people of Regina South constituency see? Mr. 

Speaker, to list them all would take more time than we have 

here today, so I’d like just to focus on a few of the more 

interesting highlights. 

 

Certainly residents of the constituency that I have had the 

honour of representing welcome the extraordinary retirement of 

nearly 40 per cent of the provincial debt in just one fiscal year. 

They clearly understand that the savings in interest costs in the 

coming years will be in the hundreds of millions of dollars, 

which can be used for other worthy initiatives. And they look 

forward, as does their new government, to the day in the 

not-too-distant future when Saskatchewan may be debt free, 

knowing that we’ll be an even stronger province at that point. 

 

They are pleased with the largest ever reduction in income 

taxes, which allows families and individuals to share in the 

prosperity of the new Saskatchewan. And they warmly approve 

of raising personal income tax exemptions and adding new 

low-income tax credits to specifically assist low-income 

earners, including students, seniors, and others, to meet today’s 

higher costs of living. 

 

They strongly support the largest ever investment in 

infrastructure — a whopping $1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker — 

recognizing that it means better highways, better health care 

facilities, better schools, and better post-secondary institutions. 

 

They are pleased that there will be increased funding for the 

University of Regina and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], along with Regina public 

and Regina Catholic school systems as well. 

 

They like Canada’s most aggressive post-secondary student 

recruitment and retention program and look forward to their 

government’s planned improvements to it. 

 

They welcomed the new emphasis on innovation in research, 

the continued emphasis on recruiting nurses and doctors to 

reduce surgical wait-lists, and a new direction in environmental 

stewardship based on reducing greenhouse gases through clean 

coal technology and investigating a variety of alternative power 

sources. 

 

They support any and all efforts to solve the shortage of skilled 

tradespeople and professionals by providing more training 

opportunities for our young people, more actively engaging 

First Nations and Métis youth in education and job skills 

programming. And once again as before, reaching out to nations 

around the world to help build the new Saskatchewan — 

something which hasn’t occurred in decades. 

 

They’re also very pleased that the city of Regina will finally be 

receiving an appropriate level of funding from the province to 

support the wide range of services they depend on the city to 

provide for their quality of life. 

 

There is also broad support for an increased funding for the arts 

and culture, investment in the tourism industry, plus a 

commitment to putting more police officers on the street and in 

specialized teams to protect our children and combat the 

activities of organized crime and gangs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an impressive list of highlights to be sure. 

But there’s one other item that the people of Regina South will 

be particularly proud of. That’s the attention being paid to assist 

society’s most vulnerable members: initiatives that will 

eliminate 80,000 of the province’s lowest income earners from 

the tax rolls altogether; increases for child care and 

pre-kindergarten programs; over $76 million to address the 

critical wait-list of people with disabilities in need of support 

and desiring an independent income of their own for their own 

dignity’s sake; a four-year commitment to $20 million in 

additional funding for community-based organizations who 

provide essential front-line services in this city and all over the 

province along with an unprecedented $18.6 million top-up, the 

largest ever in Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

There are increases in shelter rates for low-income renters along 

with per diem rates offered to organizations operating 

emergency shelters, along with more funding for school lunches 

and other child hunger programs as well. 

 

And in order to help low-income seniors, Mr. Speaker, stay in 

their homes and maintain their quality of life, the first increase 

in the Saskatchewan income assistance program in 16 years — 

something which our colleagues across the way clearly didn’t 

think was important enough to address. Here we’ve addressed 

an incredible oversight. As with so many other things, I suppose 

the other folks will be saying, we were going to get around to it. 

But, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t get around to it; they just never 

did. So we will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I predict the residents of Regina South will be 

pleased with what has been laid out both in the Throne Speech 

and other recent announcements by their new government. It is 

of course based directly on their wise advice. I think they’ll 

agree with the Leader-Post editorial that “. . . Saskatchewan’s 

government seems intent on transforming and re-energizing the 

province.” 

 

Sadly it seems the only people that don’t share this view are 

likely the members of the opposition. As an article in the 

October 24th edition of the Regina Leader-Post states: 

 

This is the bitter reality for the . . . Opposition: It’s hard to 

be unhappy in these happy days . . . or at least it’s hard to 

without looking exceedingly petulant or bitter. 

 

While the language used by the scribe may be overly exuberant, 

Mr. Speaker, the message is abundantly clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here on the government side of the Legislative 

Assembly, we’re a helpful bunch. And we’re pleased to offer 

our colleagues on the other side the following good advice 

which we hope you will take. Vote in favour of the Throne 

Speech. Vote in favour of huge tax cuts for Saskatchewan 

families and individuals. Vote for an historic reduction of the 

provincial debt. Vote for the largest ever investment in 

infrastructure. Vote for the security of a solid growth and fiscal 

stabilization fund. Vote in favour of increased support for those 

most in need so everyone can share in a new prosperity. Vote 

for all of these good things, colleagues. You know it’s the right 

thing to do. And deep down in your unhappy, little hearts, you 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

know that if you do it will make you feel better. 

 

I’d like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by thanking my wife, my 

colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, the folks in our 

constituency executive, and all the good people in Regina South 

constituency for their continuing, solid advice and great 

support. Thank you very much. I will be proud to support the 

Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always it’s a 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly to represent the good people 

of Saskatoon Massey Place. Before I enter into my comments 

on the Throne Speech, I would like to take this opportunity to 

thank the constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place for their 

continued support. It has been great getting to know many of 

you over the past year, and I look forward to serving you in the 

years to come. 

 

Also before I comment on the Throne Speech, I want to join 

with my colleagues in welcoming the new member for 

Cumberland to this Assembly. I certainly look forward to 

working with him in the months ahead to hold this government 

to account. I know the member brings a great deal of experience 

and enthusiasm to the legislature, so I wish him all the best as 

he begins his time representing the vast and beautiful 

constituency of Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was rather entertaining to watch as those Sask 

Party members practically tripped over one another following 

the Throne Speech to congratulate themselves for putting a 

string of words together and calling it a vision. So for the sake 

of those Sask Party members who may not have an 

understanding of recent history in this province and who may 

think they’ve come up with something fresh and new, I would 

like to take a few moments to provide some facts. 

 

Let’s look at the one main aspect of the Throne Speech 

trumpeted by the Sask Party — debt reduction. Paying down 

debt is not a Sask Party innovation. It’s something that those 

Sask Party members learned as they sat and watched New 

Democrats consistently pay down debt over the last decade. In 

fact over 1 billion of debt was eliminated in just the last term of 

NDP government. This commitment to debt reduction occurred 

when commodity prices were much lower than they have 

recently been. Make no mistake, reducing debt is part of the 

NDP legacy. So it is good to see that the Sask Party learned 

some lessons on that front. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, several constituents of mine have 

quite rightly pointed out that it is entirely appropriate for that 

group of former Tories in the Sask Party to keep paying down 

the debt because it was their horrible creation in the first place. 

It was a Conservative government that took Saskatchewan to 

the brink of bankruptcy and left us with a mountain of debt. 

And Saskatchewan people believe that it is only right that those 

same people continue to pay down the crushing burden of debt 

they created. 

 

Another central element of the Throne Speech is a focus on 

lowering taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats lowered 

taxes significantly in the last seven years of government. New 

Democrats cut the PST, income taxes, and property taxes. New 

Democrats lowered the education portion of property tax on 

farm land. New Democrats instituted the most significant 

business tax review and reduction in the history of 

Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see the Sask 

Party learned some lessons from the NDP on the importance of 

lowering taxes because make no mistake, lower taxes are part of 

the NDP legacy. 

 

A third component of the Throne Speech identified by the Sask 

Party is an investment in infrastructure and innovation. Mr. 

Speaker, this is most definitely not new either. New Democrats 

have been investing in infrastructure and innovation for years. 

The Sask Party government mentioned the synchrotron, the 

Petroleum Technology Research Centre, VIDO [Vaccine and 

Infectious Disease Organization] and InterVac [international 

vaccine centre] at the University of Saskatchewan in their 

Throne Speech.  

 

Those institutions are part of the great NDP legacy of investing 

in innovation. And New Democrats invested significantly in 

highways, hospitals, schools, universities, and other important 

infrastructure projects across Saskatchewan. Make no mistake, 

Mr. Speaker, significant investment in infrastructure and 

innovation is part of the NDP legacy. So, Mr. Speaker, not only 

did the Sask Party inherit the largest fiscal surplus in the history 

of the province, they also inherited the know-how and 

experience of sound New Democratic management. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d understand if some people glanced through 

the Throne Speech and thought to themselves, you know, there 

the Sask Party goes again following in the footsteps of New 

Democrats. That would be somewhat understandable, Mr. 

Speaker. After all the Sask Party is in many ways following in 

our footsteps by continuing the NDP policies of significant debt 

reduction, lower taxes, and investment in infrastructure and 

innovation. But imitation is never quite as good as the real 

thing, Mr. Speaker. Imitation always falls short. Like any 

knock-off, upon closer examination, it’s clear that the fake 

goods are not as bright and not as durable as the real deal. 

 

Perhaps the Sask Party ministers, as they travelled the world on 

junkets this past summer, had a chance to visit some of the 

foreign markets where knock-off goods are sold. I think they 

too will agree that you can buy a fake Rolex or look-alike 

Versace glasses, but don’t expect for a second to get the same 

quality product. Expect a product that is disposable. Expect a 

product that was made for expediency. Expect a product that 

could cause harm to your family. In sum, Mr. Speaker, expect 

to be let down. 

 

In the same way, the Sask Party’s attempted imitation of NDP 

policies only goes so far. In this Throne Speech, we are starting 

to see how the Sask Party’s approach may seem fine at first 

glance, but upon closer examination we can see that it’s not the 

real deal. It’s like the bride-to-be that took her engagement ring 

to be appraised for insurance purposes. You can imagine her 

shock and disappointment when she learned that her 2-carat 

princess cut diamond was nothing more than a cheap cubic 

zirconia. 



October 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

You see, here’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. New Democrats 

certainly value fiscal prudence. We value debt reduction. We 

value lower taxes. And we value infrastructure and innovation. 

But we also value social progress. We value increasing 

prosperity and broadening opportunity. We value looking out 

for one another and helping each other in times of need. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly we value the 

responsibility of government to address the immediate needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It’s a pity that the Sask Party members haven’t tried to imitate 

all of those values, Mr. Speaker, because for far too many 

Saskatchewan people the benefits of the boom are passing right 

on by, and instead they are facing only the negative aspects of 

rising costs for everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my response to the Throne Speech last year, I 

shared with this Assembly some of the struggles and challenges 

faced by constituents in Saskatoon Massey Place. I, like most 

members in this Assembly, value the interaction and feedback I 

receive from my constituents. Again this year, I judged the 

Throne Speech by the needs and concerns of my constituents. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year I spoke about a family in Dundonald with 

two children attending the University of Saskatchewan. They 

were concerned about accessibility for their children and all 

Saskatchewan students. Recent talk from the Minister of 

Advanced Education has suggested that the tuition freeze 

enjoyed for a number of years will come to an end. To this 

family, it is clear that the new paradigm will mean that they are 

paying more. Last year my constituents were worried about 

tuition costs. This year they have even more reason to worry. 

Affordable post-secondary education is an immediate need and 

the Sask Party is doing nothing to address it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents continue to struggle in 

finding affordable housing, or continue to face huge rent 

increases. This is a major challenge for people in Saskatoon 

Massey Place and for people across the province. In the past 

year we’ve seen a report to buy some time, and we’ve seen the 

Sask Party’s willingness to cut ribbons on NDP projects, but we 

have yet to see a real commitment to address the supply of 

affordable housing. Mr. Speaker, last year my constituents were 

worried about affordable housing and in this year, due to the 

Sask Party’s lack of action, they have more reason to worry. 

Affordable housing in Saskatchewan is an immediate need and 

the Sask Party is failing to address it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my neighbours are very concerned about 

the environment and issues of sustainability. But what have 

they seen from the Sask Party government this past year? 

They’ve seen the Premier slash the Green Future Fund which 

would have helped to address the climate crisis, and now the 

Premier hints that they will abandon the current emission 

targets — targets that were adopted by the Sask Party. Mr. 

Speaker, last year my constituents were concerned about the 

future of the planet, and in this year the Sask Party has failed to 

address their concerns by not having their actions match their 

Throne Speech words. Real action on climate change is an 

immediate need, but the Sask Party has completely failed to act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of my constituents do not always feel safe in 

their community. My constituents want to know that the Sask 

Party takes these concerns seriously and they want to know that 

they are working to make their lives more secure. Unfortunately 

what we’ve seen from this government has been alarming. 

Admittedly, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech does talk about 

gang activity. This however is completely incongruous with 

what we’ve heard from the Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety. This minister went so far as to suggest there isn’t a gang 

problem in Saskatchewan jails. 

 

We’ve also seen how this Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety is completely unable to manage his ministry. Inmates are 

escaping, and some are even being let out by accident. These 

breaches are worrisome, but it’s all the worse when the public 

isn’t notified for hours or even days. While the Throne Speech 

talks a lot about gang activity and fighting crime, my 

constituents are not able to take these pledges seriously so long 

as the current minister is still in charge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year my constituents wanted safer streets. 

This year they still want safer streets, but because of the 

minister’s failure of leadership, they’re feeling less secure. 

Safer communities are an immediate need for Saskatchewan, 

but the Sask Party is jeopardizing the safety of our 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents also want Saskatchewan to be 

treated fairly by Ottawa. They want to know that they have a 

Premier who will always represent their best interests. The 

Throne Speech provides no indication that the Sask Party is 

willing to take fairness for Saskatchewan seriously. 

 

Last year my constituents wanted Saskatchewan to be treated 

fairly, as other provinces already are. But this year they know 

they have a sycophantic Premier who will bend over backwards 

to do Stephen Harper’s bidding. Having federal Tories keep 

their word to the province is an immediate need for 

Saskatchewan people, but the Premier has failed to stand up for 

Saskatchewan and has instead chosen to stand up for Stephen 

Harper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents have expressed to me 

how they have benefited over the past years through the NDP’s 

low-cost utility bundle promise. At a time when the cost of 

living is going up across the board, higher utility expenses 

simply are not an option for many of my constituents. I know 

this is the case in many parts of the province as well. Sadly 

we’ve heard the Sask Party call this promise a gimmick. My 

constituents have been disappointed to see the Sask Party’s 

complete disregard for a program that has been such a help to 

them. The Throne Speech has done nothing to alleviate their 

concerns. 

 

Last year my constituents were hoping the Sask Party wouldn’t 

scrap an important pledge that helped many. This year they’re 

worried about heating their homes as our cold winter 

approaches. Addressing skyrocketing utility rates is an 

immediate need, but what’s the Sask Party doing to help? 

Nothing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, in some areas where the Sask 

Party has been following the NDP footsteps, they’ve gotten 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2008 

some things right. But in many other areas they’ve simply failed 

to recognize the immediate needs of people in Saskatoon 

Massey Place and across the province. 

 

And these are just some of the shortcomings of this Throne 

Speech. I’ll have to leave it to my colleagues to address holes in 

the Throne Speech in the areas of First Nations and Métis 

people, continued property tax relief, and support for our 

agricultural producers. 

 

Now members opposite chirp endlessly about the tax cut and 

how this will address all the affordability issues that 

Saskatchewan people face. How completely out of touch for 

those members to believe that a simple tax cut will address the 

multitude of affordability issues that Saskatchewan people face. 

The reality for many Saskatchewan people is that any realized 

gain from the tax cut will pale in comparison to the financial 

strain and burden they experience. 

 

With increasing economic uncertainty around the world, 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to address the 

critical issues of sustainability and affordability. But that’s not 

what the Sask Party government is delivering. 

 

Saskatchewan people know that New Democrats are on their 

side. New Democrats are working for them because, unlike the 

Sask Party government, we believe that a booming provincial 

economy should benefit everyone. And we are on their side 

because we cannot allow the Premier to squander our future 

prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech 

because my constituents in Saskatoon Massey Place deserve 

better from a government that is boasting more than a $3 billion 

surplus. For this reason I will be supporting the amendment, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

that we adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It carries. I 

recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. This 

Assembly now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:53.]



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1399 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1399 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1417 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1400 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1400 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association Awards Banquet 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 Prince Albert Physician Named Saskatchewan Family Physician of the Year 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1401 

 Extended Transition Program Supports Former Students 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

 Weyburn Veterans Honoured 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

 Sheet Metal Workers Local 296 Celebrate Anniversary 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1402 

 Member’s Comments About Party Leadership 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Notification Policy 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1403 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1404 

 Utility Rates 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1404 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1404 

 Out-of-Province Crown Investments 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1405 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1405 

 Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1406 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1406 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Renewal of Memorandum of Intent with Chernivtsi Oblast 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1408 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1409 

 Investment Policy for Crown Corporations 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1409 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1409 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1410 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1410 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1410 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1410 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1411 

 Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1411 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1411 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1411 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1414 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1416 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1421 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1424 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1427 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




