




















































Hansard: April 15, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 26A  TUESDAY, APRIL 15, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 933 

 April 15, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

three individuals seated in the west gallery. These three 

individuals are with the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living. Earlier today the members of the legislature 

were treated to a breakfast that was very interesting, and we had 

a puppet show. We had some special guests that were with us 

that made us get some understanding of the Adopt an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce Judy Hannah who 

resides in my constituency — welcome Judy; I speak about her 

first because she‟s a constituent — Faith Bodnar who is the 

executive director of Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living, as well as Judy McLaughlin. All three of these people 

are from Saskatoon, and they travelled down to assist a number 

of people to put on the breakfast. 

 

It was an informative and interesting and very pleasant 

breakfast, especially given the late night that the members are 

now seated. So I would ask that all members join me in 

welcoming them to their legislature and thanking them for the 

very good work that they do. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in welcoming the guests and introducing 

them again to you, through you to the rest of the House, the 

folks from the Association for Community Living. 

 

It was a great breakfast. Thank you so much. And also that they 

are here this morning promoting their program, adopting MLA, 

which is a great way of us getting to know the work that they do 

in a very special circumstance by getting to know families who 

have members who live with disabilities. It‟s a wonderful thing. 

So welcome to Faith and Judy and Judy, and thank you for 

being here and welcome to your House. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise this morning to present a petition on behalf of 

Moose Jaw constituents. And it speaks to the surprisingly 

shabby way that the residents were treated with the closure of 

our South Hill liquor store, with no consultation and no input. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents signing the petition are throughout 

Moose Jaw. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition in support of Station 20 in Saskatoon. The petition is 

signed by a number of people across the city of Saskatoon and 

also in the province. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Colonsay, 

Saskatchewan; Grasswood Road; Kingsmere Boulevard; 

McKercher, as well as Fairlight Drive; Ross Crescent; Avenue 

K; Rural Route Saskatoon; once again McKercher; Colonsay; 

Saskatoon Gladmer Park; Third Avenue; Main Street; as well as 

Greaves Crescent, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present this 

petition on behalf of these petitioners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions in opposition to Bills 5, the essential services 

Act, and Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act on the 

prairies as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents from Moose Jaw, 

Regina, Kamsack, Canora, Pelly, Springside, and Wroxton. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Support for Families Dealing with Disability Issues 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

opportunity, along with other MLAs, of attending the 

Saskatchewan Association of Community Living Adopt an 

MLA program. And that started on April 2004 to give families 

dealing with disability issues an opportunity to talk personally 

with the members of the Legislative Assembly. It‟s an 

important opportunity for connections that are making a 

difference to both the MLAs and to the families that have the 

opportunity to meet them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the aim has always been to keep the concept 

simple. MLAs meet with the families and talk about issues 

facing these families such as education, respite, and medical 

supports. With the meetings with the families around the 

kitchen table, it offers us, the MLAs, insight and opportunity to 

connect with our constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as past fundraising Chair for the Regina 

therapeutic riding program, I worked with many people with 

disabilities who benefited from the riding program, and I know 

the benefits that come from such programs. Mr. Speaker, I had 

Zoe Deutsch and her mom and dad at the breakfast table, and I 

had the opportunity to discuss with her parents about the 

therapeutic riding program. They are hoping she will be 

accepted soon. Mr. Speaker, Zoe is an amazing person, and I 

was inspired by her strong spirit and smile. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Terry Fox Award 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on March 12, 2008, at the Prince 

Albert city council meeting, a Prince Albert teen was presented 

with this year‟s Terry Fox Award. Kevin Sasakamoose was 

honoured with the award. 

 

This is the 27th year that the Terry Fox Award has been 

presented in Prince Albert. The award serves to perpetuate the 

memory of Terry Fox while also acknowledging the 

accomplishments of its recipients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, council chambers were filled with Kevin‟s friends 

and family who came to honour this young man. His 

great-uncle, hockey icon Fred Sasakamoose, made a surprise 

visit to present Kevin with the award. Although Fred had tears 

in his eyes during the presentation, he told everyone that, 

“These tears are not sad tears . . . They are good tears.” 

 

Kevin Sasakamoose is 16 years old and is in grade 10. And 

what is so incredible, Mr. Speaker, is that Kevin, while bound 

to a wheelchair and unable to communicate verbally, uses 

gestures, an alphabet board, and a speaking machine to 

communicate. Kevin has spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy and 

faces daily challenges with courage, perseverance, and a sense 

of humour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his nominator, Peggy Diehl, special education 

tutor at St. Mary High School, my alma mater, said, “What 

other people may see as a life full of challenge and adversity, 

Kevin has embraced as his life.” “He considers himself to be 

just like everyone else.” 

 

Using his speaking machine, Kevin told Mayor Scarrow that he 

was very honoured to have been selected as a Terry Fox Award 

recipient. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of the House join 

with me in acknowledging the spirit and determination of Kevin 

Sasakamoose and congratulating him on receiving the Terry 

Fox Award. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Family Sets Good Example 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yorkton resident 

Wendy Wilson went to Kenya as a project consultant through 

the College of the Rockies and the Parkland College to do 

small-business workshops at Kimathi Institute of Technology in 

Nyeri, Kenya. 

 

While there, she went above and beyond her duties, Mr. 

Speaker. She helped a group of women help themselves by 

getting them started in a sewing business now called Mwangaza 

Designs, women building a better future for their families and 

communities by making environmentally friendly projects — 

quite something, Mr. Speaker, especially when you consider the 

group Ms. Wilson helped — KENWA, the Kenya Network of 

Women with Aids. This was in June 2007. 

 

Many people don‟t accomplish a feat like this in a lifetime, but 

in February of ‟08, while most people take a winter holiday, 

Wendy Wilson and her husband, James, children Katelyn, 

Chelsea, and Bryce went to Mexico through Prairie Harvest 

Christian Life Centre for the Erma Fennell Foundation for 

Needy Children. They built a house for a family of four adults 

and seven children. While there, James rewired a church and the 

family fed the poor — all in a week. 

 

The Wilsons are a humble family, Mr. Speaker, not looking for 

recognition, but they set a good example. And as their daughter 

Katelyn says, “If you have the ability, you have the 

responsibility”. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Honoured 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, recently Riverview Collegiate in my constituency of 

Moose Jaw Wakamow honoured the Saskatchewan Roughrider, 

Scott Schultz. 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

Scott graduated from Riverview and played four years of high 

school football there. Scott addressed the staff and students 

after a ceremony where the school retired the jersey that he 

wore during his high school football career. He was the first 

person in Moose Jaw high school history to have his number 

officially retired by their school. No other athlete, male or 

female, will be able to don number 55 for the Riverview 

Royals. 

 

Schultz stated that he had been part of some pretty amazing 

ceremonies, but nothing meant more to him than being 

honoured by the people from where he was from. Schultz said 

to come back to my alma mater here at Riverview is a really 

special day for me. 

 

Schultz started his football career with the Riverview Royals as 

a running back. Now an incredibly popular Saskatchewan 

Roughrider defensive lineman, Scott is relishing a Grey Cup 

win in his home province. After getting a degree from the 

University of North Dakota, through a football scholarship, 

none of which would have happened without trying out for the 

Riverview Royals football team. 

 

Scott Schultz was also honoured with a spot on Riverview‟s 

wall of honour. His plaque will join those of John Konihowski 

and Lorne Calvert, both former graduates. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

of the members in the legislature to thank Scott Schultz and 

congratulate him on his community involvement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Frontier Midget Flyers Win Provincial Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to rise and speak 

about the accomplishments of the Eastend Jets senior men‟s 

hockey team that defeated the northern D men‟s championship 

team from Davidson for the provincial title. However, my 

colleague from Arm River-Watrous already told of their victory 

in double overtime. 

 

So today I‟d like to speak about another great local hockey 

team, the Frontier Midget Flyers. Mr. Speaker, the Flyers 

captured the SHA [Saskatchewan Hockey Association] 

provincial D championship earlier this month after a season that 

can only be called unbelievable. 

 

This group of young men skated through every game of league 

play undefeated — not one loss, Mr. Speaker. Coach Jamie 

Pegg gives the credit to this special group of kids who worked 

hard all year and were willing to sacrifice everything they could 

for the team. Under Pegg‟s leadership and with the help of 

assistant coaches Greg Gryde and Jared Nelson, the players 

achieved a perfect record. They continued their dominating 

performance throughout the playoffs, taking the league 

championship by sweeping all competition away and capping 

the year by winning the midget provincial D title. 

 

The Shaunavon Standard quotes Pegg as saying, “It‟s the kind 

of year you could never even dream about.” Though they play 

under the Frontier banner, the team is made up of boys from 

Frontier, Climax, Eastend, and Val Marie. And I‟d like to take 

this opportunity to congratulate each of the players and their 

parents and the coaches on this tremendous achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Walker School Participates in Mayor’s 

Mega-minute Reading Challenge 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure to 

attend as guest reader, Walker Elementary School‟s community 

kickoff to our Mayor‟s Mega-minute Reading Challenge on 

April 3. This event was organized by the Walker‟s School 

Community Council. They should be very proud. The event 

promoted literacy by inviting the community in for a used book 

sale; Métis dancing led by a local renowned author, Wilfred 

Burton; book reading led by myself; as well as cookies and hot 

chocolate, Mr. Speaker. I found out, Mr. Speaker, that I‟m a 

better book reader than Métis dancer. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that a great indicator of student success 

is family and community involvement with their schools as well 

as taking time to read together as a family. By this measure, this 

was a fantastic success as it was filled with students, families, 

and community members. 

 

I would like to pay special thanks to all the members of the 

Walker School Community Council; principal Judy Campbell; 

and Walker staff; author, literacy consultant, and dancer, 

Wilfred Burton; our city‟s mayor Pat Fiacco; and all of the 

students, parents, and community members who attended. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in extending 

thanks to all those individuals for their valuable contributions to 

literacy within our community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Provincial Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

talk about 281,000 reasons the members opposite oppose our 

government‟s changes to the provincial labour legislation. 

 

In recent days, Mr. Speaker, those members have spoken ad 

nauseam about the proposed legislation, how it intimidates and 

manipulates working men and women, full of righteous 

indignation, pointing, posture, and pontification, painting 

themselves as the protectors of the people. But are they really 

what they say they are, Mr. Speaker? Are their motives really so 

pure? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s time the members opposite did a 

reality check. In reality, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

doing the bidding for their union masters. In the last election 

campaign, Mr. Speaker, NDP [New Democratic Party] 

candidates received campaign contributions from the unions to 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

the tune of 281,000. In fact a whopping 50,000 was given in 

hopes of defeating my quiet friend from Saskatoon Northwest, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

With two-thirds of Saskatchewan people saying they support 

our proposed legislation changes, including many working 

people, Mr. Speaker, it‟s time to expose the members opposite 

for exactly what they are. They are puppets doing the bidding 

for their union masters. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before . . . Order. Order. Before I call for oral 

questions, I would remind members that sometimes statements 

by members can become very personal and not necessarily 

uplifting to the Assembly. So as we word our statements in the 

future, I would ask that we be somewhat mindful how we word 

our statements and be more . . . just recognize our role and 

responsibilities as members. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it seems the Minister of Municipal Affairs is on a very 

steep learning curve. Yesterday the media had to explain to the 

minister that infrastructure would not be a solution to property 

tax hikes. They also had to point out that the financial picture in 

the 1990s was slightly different than what it is today. And I 

have tried on a number of occasions to explain to the minister 

that his 7 per cent increase in revenue sharing is in fact less than 

the 11 per cent that municipalities received last year and seen in 

increases over the past several years. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: with all the enlightenment 

that he‟s received over the past days, will that minister finally 

admit that he has underfunded municipalities to the point where 

he is forcing property tax increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank the hon. member for that question. She points out quite 

rightly that the Saskatchewan Party during the campaign 

promised a 7 per cent increase in revenue sharing to 

municipalities and then delivered on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

Additionally we have committed to find a long-term solution 

that escaped members opposite when they sat here for years. 

For year after year they refused to move towards an own-source 

revenue sharing formula. We will not make that same mistake, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have seen in the last number of days is an 

unprecedented and almost inconceivable amount of land sales 

in terms of oil and gas for the province of Saskatchewan. Our 

forecast from Energy ministry officials was about $100 million. 

This is $265 million. So perhaps we can make some progress 

here in the near future with respect to even exceeding our own 

commitment to the municipal sector that we made in the 

election campaign — that we‟ve kept. Perhaps we can do a little 

bit better so that we can continue to be ready for growth and 

sustain the economic momentum of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Interesting argument, Mr. Speaker. We can‟t 

give the municipalities more money because we‟ve got another 

265 million in our bank account. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister was asked point-blank by a reporter if 

taxpayers should brace for a property tax increase. The minister, 

in a very rare moment of clarity, said, and I quote, “I expect 

so.” He didn‟t defend his budget. He didn‟t say that with 

billions of dollars in the bank and more cash, as the Premier‟s 

just said, flowing in on a daily basis, that he would act to 

prevent property tax increases. No, that minister told taxpayers 

to get ready for tax increases. 

 

To the minister: is he really okay with telling taxpayers to brace 

for more hikes or might it be better for him to use some of this 

windfall revenues his government has on hand and do a better 

job for municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

not sure if the hon. member was listening to the answer but I 

will say this, Mr. Speaker. Municipalities in this province have 

a right to expect to be treated a lot better than they were ever 

treated when that party opposite sat over here. 

 

And I‟ll make this other commitment. That has already been the 

case under the leadership of this minister and this government. 

They have been treated with greater respect. They have been 

treated better. We will keep our commitment for that long-term 

revenue-sharing formula and because of the unprecedented and 

amazing $265 million in land sales for oil and gas activity and 

exploration in the province, I would say, Mr. Speaker, caused at 

least in some measure by the good work of this brand new 

government . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And because of that, Mr. Speaker, because 

of that our Minister for Municipal Affairs will be meeting with 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] to 

find out what exactly will be possible in terms of exceeding the 

promises that were kept with respect to municipal revenue 

sharing in the election. 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier‟s arguments 

just speak to the question. He‟s talking about increased activity 

right across the province. Right across the province there is 

increased activity, but yet he refuses to support the 

municipalities who are feeling the strain and need to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, he‟s talking about increased 

activity. Who does this increased activity put pressure on? On 

the municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — We gave the municipalities an 11 per cent 

increase of $30 million last year. We increased it whenever we 

had increased revenues in our provincial General Revenue 

Fund. This Premier is content to sit on huge surpluses while the 

municipalities struggle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier if he would like to 

answer: why is he intent on forcing municipalities to build the 

province on the backs of taxpayers and not help them out 

appropriately? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I don‟t know. Maybe we could send 

an earpiece over to the hon. member. I don‟t think she‟s paying 

attention at all to the answers. She‟s following her script and 

fair enough, I guess. 

 

I will just say this again, to that member and to all members of 

this Assembly, that our minister will be very soon meeting with 

the municipal sector to discuss the ability and the possibility of 

our government being able to exceed our election commitment 

on revenue sharing because of the amazing activity that‟s 

occurring in the oil and gas sector that‟s exceeded anyone‟s 

expectations by many, manyfold. 

 

I would also say this, Mr. Speaker. It‟s pretty rich coming from 

that member opposite who sat in a cabinet, who was part of a 

government that downloaded to the tune of $300 million on the 

municipal sector of this province. That is a big, cavernous, NDP 

hole that we will have to dig ourselves out of, but make no 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan Party government 

will do just that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Potential and Process for School Closures 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the spokesman for Save 

Our Schools and the head of SARM are not impressed with the 

Sask Party‟s much touted changes to The Education Act 

introduced in the House yesterday. The word underwhelming 

jumps to mind, and it seems even the minister agrees. When 

asked by reporters whether the new legislation would make it 

easier or harder for schools to close, the Minister of Education 

replied, and I quote, “I don‟t know that it changes that.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a far cry from what the Sask Party was 

saying back when they were in opposition, when they travelled 

this province telling communities that they had a plan to keep 

schools open. To the minister: will he admit today that his 

legislation falls far short of what communities are expecting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question is, absolutely not. This legislation was prepared with 

our stakeholders in consulting with many different groups. It 

was prepared, unlike that group over there when they sat in 

government, who didn‟t do anything for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Education Act has a process in place that allows boards of 

education to review a school. We committed, Mr. Speaker, in 

the platform . . . On page no. 14 we indicated that our promise 

was that there would be a revising of The Education Act to 

improve the consultation and assessment process before 

significant changes are made to school facilities. Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s what we said we would do. That‟s what we‟re doing. We 

are putting in place a process that will allow far greater 

community involvement. It will extend the process that people 

want, unlike that government who didn‟t do a single thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I‟ll tell you what is clear, Mr. Speaker, 

is that these guys are far more about hype than any bit of hope. 

With 1 billion sitting in the Sask Party bank, that government 

has brought down a provincial budget that sets aside just $1 

million for schools of opportunity. And let‟s not forget that 

schools of opportunity are able to access up to $350,000 each. 

Do the math. Mr. Speaker, that‟s three schools that can access 

full funding, four fewer than the Sask Party led people to 

believe when they released the plan in opposition. 

 

To the minister: when his party criss-crossed this province, 

promising communities that they had a plan to keep schools 

open, did they mention that they‟d only be setting aside a 

measly $1 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that we as a 

government have done exactly what we said we would do. We 

have consulted across the province. We have extended the time 

period. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite may not understand 

that the current process means that a board of education can 

notify the community in February. We‟re moving that to 

October 15, and I‟m sure the member‟s had an opportunity to 

review the Bill. Mr. Speaker, that‟s an extensive amount of time 

that now allows a community and its residents to be involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a community sees now, in this month of April, 

that it has potential of having its school under review, it‟s 

beginning its work today, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not waiting for 

October 15. We have put in place a standardization of the 

process. It will now be understood by all boards and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re going to be publishing a handbook that will be 

distributed to the public to ensure that they know the process of 

school closure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the meaningless gestures 

of a handbook and the three and a half months addition falls far 

short. This is stated by the head of SARM; it‟s stated by Save 

Our Schools. 

 

The minister has implied that more than three schools could 

benefit from his funding because not all schools applying would 

receive the full $350,000. Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to 

have some idea of how many schools will apply for funding 

under his schools of opportunities initiative, how much money 

each will get, and who those will be. But one thing he has told 

us is that not all schools can potentially benefit. Only rural 

schools have any hopes of applying. There is no hope and no 

funding for urban schools. 

 

To the minister: does he have any indication whatsoever from 

schools or school boards or any other body or organization of 

how many schools of opportunity we have within this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we put in place a plan to 

move education as a priority. Education is a priority of this 

government, unlike that government, Mr. Speaker. And I have 

to review — I know the member hasn‟t been involved long — 

but, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, that they 

delivered minus two, minus four, minus two. These are 

percentages of decreases in the grants to school boards. That‟s 

what they were responsible for. There were hundreds of schools 

closed during the decade of the ‟80s and the ‟90s, Mr. Speaker. 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the members to come to 

order. The minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there will be an 

opportunity for communities to review whether or not they see 

their community and their school as being a school of 

opportunity. There will be criteria that they will apply for and 

they will apply to the ministry based on the fact that they see 

themselves growing and becoming a viable school. That‟s what 

the process is. That‟s what will be followed and that will allow 

the community to determine whether or not they see themselves 

as a potential viable school. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess schools of 

opportunity should consider themselves lucky. At least they get 

mentioned in the Act and at least they‟re getting some money 

even if it isn‟t as much as the Sask Party led us to believe in 

previous years, but if communities were hoping to have schools 

of necessity, they‟ve got a bit of a problem. There‟s not even a 

mention of it within the new changes to the Act. 

 

In case the minister has forgotten, he said in opposition that 

schools of necessity would guard against children spending too 

much time busing and not enough time in school. But let‟s 

recap. The minister has now admitted that 1 million won‟t be 

enough to keep schools of opportunity open and when it comes 

to schools of necessity, he‟s not even trying. To the minister: 

why did he forget about schools of necessity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, that is a bizarre question. 

In the foundation grant, in the foundation grant under section F, 

there is a category that is called schools of necessity/Hutterian 

schools. That is in the foundation operating grant manual. And 

I‟m sure that that member has read that manual. It provides 

additional funding to schools that are outside 40 kilometres. It 

provides under two factors, an enrolment factor and a distance 

factor. 

 

That is in place, Mr. Speaker. So for the member to suggest that 

schools of necessity have suddenly disappeared, he needs to 

read the manual. Schools of necessity and schools of 

opportunity are entirely different, Mr. Speaker, and that 

member better be aware of what he‟s talking about before he 

rises in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

Dental Sealant Program 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We thought the 

members opposite might have wrapped up their attacks on 

Saskatchewan‟s disadvantaged . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It‟s difficult for the Speaker to 

hear the question being placed, so I ask members to come to 

order, and I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, we thought the members opposite 

might have wrapped up their attacks on Saskatchewan‟s 

disadvantaged residents with their mean-spirited cut to the 

Station 20 project, but it seems they might just be getting 

started. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the cut of the day. The official opposition has 

learned that the government has axed the dental sealant 

program, a program that was costing about $300,000 to provide 

dental sealants to disadvantaged children in Saskatoon and 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: can he confirm the 

program has been axed, and can he please tell us why? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m pleased to be filling in for the Minister of Health, 

and I can assure the members that the minister will be pleased 

to provide a detailed answer for him, so I take notice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the dental sealant program was 

introduced in the 2007 provincial budget. The program 

provided children in grades 1 and 7 in community schools in 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw with dental sealants. In case the 

minister hasn‟t found out, sealants are plastic compounds which 

are painted on the back of teeth to prevent cavities. And as the 

minister surely knows, cavities may contribute to many serious 

conditions, including heart disease, diabetes, respiratory 

disease, and other ailments. Apparently preventative medicine 

isn‟t that minister‟s priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: with over $1 billion in the bank, 

why is he making this petty cut at the expense of children‟s 

health? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

Minister of Health, I take notice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, many saw the program as a first 

step toward a return to a universal children‟s dental program. 

Saskatchewan people have benefited from a children‟s dental 

program in the past, a program that was both popular and 

effective. 

 

But the Blakeney era program was dismantled and the 

equipment sold when the Premier‟s old boss, Grant Devine, 

took office in the 1980s. While our government had a history of 

starting programs that improved the health of Saskatchewan 

children, it seems the members opposite have a penchant for 

taking those programs away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: is this just a case of history 

repeating? Why else would the minister make this cut that is an 

important part of preventative medicine? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again on 

behalf of the Minister of Health, I take notice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — . . . more, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health 

claims to listen to health care professionals, but we now know 

that his hearing is selective. In 2007 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member to place her 

question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — In 2007, SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations] passed a resolution commending our 

NDP government on introducing a targeted dental sealant 

program, and this year they‟re going further at their convention, 

proposing a resolution to lobby the government to implement a 

province-wide children‟s dental program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why has this program been axed 

when health professionals firmly believe in it, and will he admit 

that he again got it wrong and restore funding to the program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, again on behalf of the Minister of Health I take notice 

of the member‟s question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

Eaglestone Lodge 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

week we learned that Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack would be 

closing its doors permanently, and that the 30-some residents 

would need to find somewhere else to go. The images and the 

stories that go with this news has been devastating. 

 

We‟ve seen seniors who have helped build our great province 

ask where they should go, wondering if they are going to have a 

roof over their heads after Eaglestone closes its doors in 60 

days. We have family members who are concerned about their 

loved ones. To the Minister of Health: what is he doing with 

respect to Eaglestone Lodge residents who will soon have to 

find somewhere else to go? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take that question on 

behalf of the Minister of Health because Eaglestone Lodge is 

my constituency in the town of Kamsack. Mr. Speaker, people 

have to understand that it is the NDP who decided to not fund 

level 1 and 2. They made that decision a long time ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Level 1 and 2 homes are not funded by government. Mr. 

Speaker, when I found out that indeed Eaglestone Lodge is 

under consideration for closure — and they‟ve given 60 days 

notice — immediately on Friday morning I had an opportunity 

to meet with town council members in the chamber in the town 

office in Kamsack. I met with three of the board members — by 

the way the only three that are still sitting board members — to 

discuss what might be alternatives. 

 

There is concern about the fact that people, 34 residents in fact 

who are in that home, have been given 60 days in which they 

are going to vacate if that lodge closes. We need to explore all 

the possibilities to ensure what can happen to fund, possibly 

fund, or to ensure that there is a mechanism in place to provide 

care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s answer is cold 

comfort to those men and women who have lived in this 

province all their life, worked in this province all their life, 

sacrificed to build this great province, and now find their next 

residence a sidewalk in Kamsack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past the members opposite have been very 

vocal in ensuring that seniors should spend their golden years in 

their communities. They have soundly criticized decisions that 

resulted in seniors having to move from their communities, 

from their friends, and from their families to receive care. 

 

My question to the Minister of Health: is he still concerned 

about this now that he is government and what is he doing 

about it? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a new problem. 

This problem has been raised for a number of years. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I have a headline of a Kamsack Times dated 

October 27, ‟05, and it says, “Premier Calvert asks Minister of 

Health to look into Eaglestone Lodge concerns.” Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s October 27, ‟05. 

 

On May 15, 2005 in estimates recorded in Hansard, I asked the 

minister of Health the following question. I said to the minister: 

 

. . . the first question that I‟m asking, Mr. Minister, is are 

there any dollars that could be provided through health 

departments for funding of a personal care lodge that is 

owned by a municipality and other municipal 

shareholders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this question is to the Justice 

minister in his current capacity as Minister of Justice of the 

province of Saskatchewan. We know that the Minister of 

Justice recently went out and got himself briefed about who is 

the suspect in the case of unlawfully obtaining police files. One 

has to wonder why the minister thinks he should have this 

information and know who the suspect is, but the people of 

Saskatchewan do not need to know. 

 

We know that the Saskatchewan Party does not have a great 

deal of respect for privacy. They have no problem putting 

people‟s personal information on their website. So why all the 

sudden concern for a suspect‟s privacy? 

 

To the Minister of Justice: why won‟t he tell the public who the 

suspect is? Why the cover-up from that government? Who is 

the minister protecting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this matter goes back to 

the NDP caucus fraud that goes back to 1992. Their MLA, Pat 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

Lorjé, said in 1994 the members over there were making a 

conscious and concerted effort to cover up this fraud that took 

place in their caucus. In 2007, we saw former MLA Glenn 

Hagel stand in this House and have to apologize for misleading 

this House. Mr. Speaker, this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please let the minister respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this matter we saw Mr. 

Hagel come into this House and have to apologize here and in 

the rotunda for not being forthright with the information that he 

was to have provided in his capacity as caucus Chair. This 

matter was referred, as these matters ordinarily and usually are 

when a matter arises affecting a member of the legislature, to an 

independent prosecutor to look at. It was referred to the Alberta 

prosecutions unit who determined nothing improper had 

happened and the members over there know it full well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, well those may be the 

conclusions of the Minister of Justice, but those were not the 

conclusions of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

and those are not the conclusions of Alberta public 

prosecutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve a very simple question for the Premier about 

the standards he sets for the staff who work for him. Does he 

think it is acceptable to employ people in his office that have 

knowingly misled the media and the public? Why did the 

Premier hire Reg Downs as the chief of staff knowing that Mr. 

Downs stood right next to the now Deputy Premier in a scrum 

and let him give the media false information and not correct the 

record for over two weeks until after a police investigation had 

begun? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was 

the attorney general of this province for the last four years. That 

member knew full well the names of people that have charged 

with an offence or under investigation, the names are not 

released until after the charges are formally read in court. And 

that member knows it full well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to Mr. Downs, I can tell the House 

this. When there was an error made or a misstatement, we came 

back and we corrected it immediately and promptly with full 

candour and we have done it on every occasion where it was 

appropriate to do so, Mr. Speaker. It is not the intention of the 

members on this side of the House to conceal anything — not 

now, not ever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Infrastructure Framework Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

inform members of the House that on April 11, 2008, 

Saskatchewan communities received a major boost for their 

priority public infrastructure projects when the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada signed the 

Infrastructure Framework Agreement for the Building Canada 

plan. This agreement provides approximately $635 million for 

new long-term infrastructure for the province of Saskatchewan 

and Saskatchewan‟s municipalities. This funding is in addition 

to funding from the Gas Tax Fund and Municipal Rural 

Infrastructure Fund already being provided to Saskatchewan. 

The Government of Canada will provide more than $755 

million in funding between 2007 and 2014 for infrastructure 

projects in Saskatchewan. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The framework agreement commits Canada to provide funding 

of $635 million to Saskatchewan over seven years through three 

different programs. The Building Canada fund, 236 million 

over seven years; the provincial-territorial base fund, 175 

million over seven years; and the Gas Tax Fund top-up, $224 

million over four fiscal years beginning in 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Building Canada fund will provide $236 

million over seven years, consisting of 94 and a half million 

dollars, communities component, for communities of less than 

100,000 people. And this will be matched by the province, 

bringing funding for municipal infrastructure projects to $189 

million over seven years; 141 and a half million dollars through 

the major projects component for projects of provincial, 

regional, or national significance to be matched on a 

project-by-project basis by private partners or local or 

provincial governments. 

 

Of the $635 million, federal funding has been committed to 

Regina IPSCO Place project, up to $20 million with the 

province committing 17 million; Lewvan-Highway No. 1 

interchange, up to $16 million, which will be matched by the 

province; and the first phase Highway 11 twinning between 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert, up to $10 million which will be 

matched by the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that this agreement has been signed, 

and we will be looking forward to future project announcements 

under this fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first off I‟d like to thank 

the minister for sending over a version of his minister‟s 

statement today. Speaking to the Government of Saskatchewan 

signing onto the framework agreement for the Building Canada 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

plan, Mr. Speaker, I believe this will be good news for 

municipalities. It has been spoken of quite highly for over the 

past number of months. Many projects that have been 

announced by the province of Saskatchewan have attributed 

funding that will come from this fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess there is a couple of concerns that have 

been expressed to me. First and foremost when you look at 

MRIF [Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund] and the Gas Tax 

Fund and also the Building Canada fund being rolled in under 

one program, there is concerns that these remain separate and 

be designated in the places that they currently are as separate 

funds. And I know from the municipalities that, when we look 

at one fund under the title of Building Canada, will the amount 

of money . . . and this is a very simple question that comes from 

municipalities. Their concern is that, the amount of dollars 

going directly to municipalities, will it be more or will it be less 

than what the municipalities have received previously? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s good news. It‟s good news for the 

province of Saskatchewan, and we‟re always pleased to see the 

federal government dedicate money to Saskatchewan, and this 

program was rolled out right across Canada. Other provinces 

have already signed on and seen dollars flowing to their 

communities. So we‟re pleased to see this agreement finally 

signed and being put in place in Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture, and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, The 

Active Families Benefit Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Tourism, Parks, Culture, and Sport that Bill No. 33, The Active 

Families Benefit Act be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It‟s carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to Rule 15(2) I 

wish to withdraw this item from the order paper. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to Rule 15(2), item no. 2 is 

withdrawn. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I first of all would 

like to lay on the table a report from the Office of the Provincial 

Auditor regarding the 2007 financial statements of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] Crown corporations 

and related entities, as well as the report from the Chief 

Electoral Officer regarding the election reports of the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election June 19, 2006, and the 

by-election report of the Martensville by-election March 5, 

2007. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day as well, I would like 

to comment . . . Order. I would like to comment about the point 

of order raised by the Government House Leader regarding 

certain statements made during the 75-minute debate last 

Thursday, and I thank both House Leaders for their comments 

and interventions. 

 

The first session of every legislature is the time for newly 

elected members and returning veterans to familiarize 

themselves with the rules and traditions of the Assembly. 

Determining how best to phrase one‟s views and positions in a 

forceful yet respectful manner requires skill and a sound 

understanding of the factors involved. 

 

The issue of unparliamentary language has been dealt with by 

my predecessors on numerous occasions, including April 17, 

2000; May 12, 2000; and April 11, 2007. A ruling made on 

June 13, 2003, clearly summarizes the guidelines used by 

presiding officers in determining the acceptability of language. 

These include balancing the right of every member to speak 

freely while respecting those limitations imposed by the 

Assembly itself. The context that the language was spoken in 

and its impact on the decorum in the House are also important 

considerations. Applying these guidelines to the comments 

made during last Thursday‟s debate, I find that the comments in 

question, while pointed and directed, do not exceed the 

boundaries that this Assembly has set for acceptable and 

spirited debate. 

 

Ministerial Statements 

 

The Speaker: — I would also like to comment, yesterday in 

ministerial statements I listened very closely to the ministerial 

statement, and then asked the Clerk as well to do a bit of 

research, thinking back to former guidelines in regards to 

ministerial statements. And I refer to April 20, 1998, where the 

former Speaker mentioned “. . . ministerial statements are 

intended to be an opportunity for members of Executive 

Council to advise the Assembly of new directions or policies of 

the provincial government.” 

 

And it has been a longstanding tradition that when we give 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

recognition to the achievements of individuals that that is done 

by leave, with the request for an extended congratulatory 

message, and that ministerial statements reflect government 

policy and priorities. I ask members to keep that in mind at 

future date. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the 

Assembly to issue an order for return on question 555. 

 

The Speaker: — A notice for issue on return for question 555 

is given. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

government it‟s my pleasure to table the answers to questions 

556 to 577. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 556 to 577 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 5 — The Public 

Service Essential Services Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s good to get 

back into the debate. As I started with my remarks yesterday, 

there were a number of questions that I felt needed to be 

answered and in fact needed to be asked about the Bill 5, the 

essential services Act, and it‟s there I‟d like to start today. 

 

And again just to summarize those questions. We were asking 

questions about who drafted this legislation. There have been 

some indications that this was drafted outside the ministry. It 

was drafted by perhaps Kevin Wilson. 

 

There were questions about, why is the government proposing a 

designation model with the employer, Mr. Speaker, holding all 

the cards? Why are the unions and why are workers and union 

members left out of the model, when we continually hear that it 

is with the workers and the manager on site that they are best to 

determine essential services, who is needed, and what is the 

best operation for the department? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the issues that we have heard a lot about in 

the Assembly regarding the controversies over the Labour 

Relations Board and after all that we have heard with the firings 

and the process of hiring, the lack of confidence becomes a 

great concern for practitioners in this area. 

And, Mr. Speaker, something that we haven‟t really spoken 

about, but what will the effect on our health care system be, a 

health care system that we hear is under stress? Is this the best 

thing to be doing at this time, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, when 

there is a lack of, a lack of employees in a system — what? — 

is that the best time to bring in an Act and then will we be 

looking at it in subjective terms? 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, what does section 21 mean, the ability of the 

employers to expand, the ability that the government has 

allowed for expansion of the inclusion of employers into this. 

And in terms of the regulations, Mr. Speaker, that are made by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, where section 21 says: 

 

[in] defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or expression used in the Act but not defined in this 

Act; 

 

[And] (b) prescribing, for the purposes this Act, as 

essential services any services or any class of services 

provided by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not leave a lot of confidence for many 

people in this field or in terms of the employers or the unions as 

to who this might include. 

 

And finally we have problems regarding Bill 24 where this 

government has again leapt first before thinking and perhaps 

doing appropriate research, to now having to come back with 

another Bill to start fixing things that they‟ve missed. 

 

And we wonder because of the lack of the consultations, 

because of the lack . . . And we hear many times in this 

Assembly, before Bills are proposed, that there was 

consultations held, that the stakeholders all were contacted, that 

there was discussions and then the legislation moves forward. 

And one of the reasons that perhaps we don‟t have that here is 

there was none of that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is of concern to me when the people of 

Saskatchewan, prior to the last election, were told that in fact 

there would not be any legislated essential services or any 

legislation for essential services legislation. And then 

immediately after the election, Mr. Speaker, the present 

government now is saying that, announced that they would be 

proposing essential services legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said many things before the election, and 

now we find perhaps a minister that is in the situation of having 

to — for lack of better words — mumble and fumble his way 

through this on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. Many times we have 

maybe, Mr. Speaker . . . And I see the Minister of Labour is 

listening and thank him very much for that, finally to get his 

attention. But, Mr. Speaker, every day it has been this minister 

who has come out, made statements, retracted these statements, 

backtracked, re-explaining, only to return the next day with 

some other issue he doesn‟t know about and to misspeak again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many times the officials have had to explain and 

have also then indicated that they did not know what was 

happening with this legislation. Many officials who have been 

with the department a long time have indicated that this was the 

broadest essential services legislation that they have seen. The 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

minister said he didn‟t know. He talks about moderate. He talks 

about middle-of-the-road. But, Mr. Speaker, I think this, all of 

this, all of this points to lack of consultations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and I again . . . and on his own website he 

now has put out video clips — 15-second video clips — using a 

teleprompter to try and explain, explain what it is that is 

happening, Mr. Speaker. This is not an advertisement for soap, 

Mr. Speaker. These are serious matters that impact the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And yesterday, yesterday in this House he finally, finally 

decided to answer a question. And, Mr. Speaker, and he 

answered the question, and he said, “every province . . . has it in 

place or has it tabled,” referring to essential services legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first time again that he answered yesterday, 

and I would like to put in for the record, because “every 

province . . . [he said] has it in place or has it tabled.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, not every province has it in place or has 

tabled essential services legislation. I just want to, for the 

record, and perhaps the Labour minister will read Hansard, and 

I want to put in Hansard so that he can read it, is that in 

Alberta, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, they have no-strike 

legislation. In Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia, they have the 

ability to strike. It is only Newfoundland, New Brunswick, 

Quebec, Manitoba, and BC [British Columbia] that they have 

designations in essential services legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again even yesterday when there was no need 

to come forward with some information, the Labour minister 

did, and again he was wrong, Mr. Speaker — wrong again. 

 

And in terms of the video clips, and so far everything that‟s 

been put out before us here, every day the minister coming out 

and explaining things going back and having to explain it again 

— Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that the people, the 

practitioners in this area are really shaking their heads in 

disbelief as to what is happening here. We are creating 

somewhat of a circus around an issue that is very important to 

the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have from our side taken a more serious 

approach and have been asking for public consultations and 

public hearings. Mr. Speaker, this minister tried to hold 

consultations. He called them consultations. They were more 

like backroom meetings. And after those meetings, a good 

number of those stakeholders that came out — I‟ve had an 

opportunity to speak to a number of them on the employer side 

and on the union side — and they all came out with questions, 

Mr. Speaker. They all came out with questions, and in fact a 

good portion came out calling for public consultations because 

they were saying here are what real public consultations, they 

are. 

 

Now the minister in his reply has said, well he has huge 

support. He has huge support. And my question then to the 

minister would be, if he has the huge support that he has, then 

what is the fear? What is he really afraid of? Why not take the 

legislation out to people, put it up for public scrutiny? And 

would he not have better legislation? In fact there have been 

arguments made that the voting in terms of Bill 6, that when 

you vote you have better, you know, stronger unions. So here it 

is again, democracy — or the lack of as it comes to Bill 5 — 

why is he afraid of democracy? And maybe he should strike out 

on his own because we know those members across seem to all 

have some difficulties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also talked a bit about last Friday, and I, 

along with a number of other ministers and MLAs, attended a 

panel discussion on Bills 5 and 6 with the NSBA [North 

Saskatoon Business Association]. Here were members holding 

a discussion, probably because at the request of their members, 

to try and give them more information on Bills 5 and 6. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the NSBA because what occurred 

were presentations, good questions, and one could see where 

this could lead to excellent debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even if the NSBA feels it is necessary for the 

government to provide more information, why is this 

government, why is this minister holding back and not, and not 

having public consultations? He has the time, Mr. Speaker, just 

so that the House knows, he has the time to meet with the 

NSBA, but the Saskatoon & District Labour Council is holding 

a forum on April 17, and the minister was unable to attend. 

Granted he is sending the deputy minister, but this sends all the 

wrong signals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It send all the wrong 

signals in terms of that. It sends the signals that he feels this is 

not important, that perhaps he is afraid to meet or that he is 

hiding something here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the hiding, as I mentioned in 21, 

the Act, we have had nothing, nothing about explanations about 

the Act. We have had nothing in terms of the regulations which 

seem to be very wide ranging. Now returning to the NSBA and 

the panel and the presentation of the members and the 

association, what was particularly instructive to me were the 

questions from the floor. And the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview was there, and prior to her present occupation she was 

a nurse, Mr. Speaker, and she asked a very interesting question. 

And that was, her question was what essential services would 

mean to nurses and what extent of coverage would be required. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this question is central and at the very core 

of what we would be talking about and what in fact, if the 

minister could, perhaps this would be one of the key items that 

he could answer. But this panel was able to answer that 

question, and the panel said this, and I found this to be 

something new that had been put forward in the debate, and I 

would like to make that known to the House. And that was the 

medical person on the panel answered that the health care 

system at present, as he saw it, was in crisis, and that all nurses 

would be deemed essential. 

 

In addition he talked about concerns about the doctors. And he 

went on to speak about the 1962 doctor strike, doctors 

withholding their services. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask and 

further then, in addition, before I go on, in addition he said that 

he saw all health care providers as on a continuum, that they all 

worked together as a team, that they provided this, and he could 

see everybody being essential. 

 

But I think the key thing that we gather from this is that at 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

present the health care system is in stress. And as the 

government tries to work through it, why are they putting — 

my question would be — why are they putting more stress on 

this system? Why put more stress on the system and particularly 

with legislation that they have not consulted on, have not talked 

to the stakeholders? In fact are they making this worse, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And that question, that question, I think, is in terms if you 

would be looking at stakeholders. There‟s an April 11 article in 

The StarPhoenix, and the headline is: 

 

Sun, province relationship sours 

Union describes essential services bill as “worst in the 

country.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know about you, but when I would 

hear these sort of statements, I would think that this is not, not 

good for our health care system. Mr. Speaker, they also in that 

same article, the Government House Leader is quoted and is 

quoted as: “Government house leader Rod Gantefoer denied 

this week the government‟s desire to get essential services 

legislation passed this spring had anything to do with the four 

major health-care contracts — SUN, CUPE, SEIU, and SGEU 

. . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is hardly a recipe, Mr. Speaker, for getting a 

health care system if we truly believe that all stakeholders who 

are working in . . . must co-operate to make our health care 

system the best or workable for the people of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, what we instead get, we get a ramming of legislation. 

We get a lack of co-operation, people asking for public forums. 

People asking questions. And we get, as yesterday, 

misinformation. We get, I‟ll get back to you; I don‟t know. We 

get again officials coming out and discussing things. This is 

hardly a recipe. This is hardly something that gives us, would 

instill any confidence in people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now is it then, Mr. Speaker, one of the things, is it then the time 

to bring in . . . The question we should first ask, whether or not 

we would need essential services legislation, is it time to bring 

in essential services when up to 37,000 health care workers in 

this system are saying we need public consultations? Are we 

sure this is the right thing? Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to say 

dysfunction, but is this helping our health care system when we 

are not dealing with any of the problems, when we see a 

minister who in fact at best is having backroom consultations? 

 

Now if the minister determines to forge blindly ahead . . . And 

in terms of what he has provided us, the most arguments that he 

has provided, he‟s talking something about middle of the pack. 

He‟s talking about something that this legislation is moderate. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s hard to, it‟s hard to know what that means, 

what that means when you‟re trying to solve a problem, to 

simply say well we‟ll just kind of find the middle of the road in 

terms of what‟s happening across Canada. 

 

And I question how he could say that when he did not appear to 

know, in terms of essential services legislation, where he talked 

about where it was tabled. If he does not even know where it is 

tabled, how can we have some confidence here to determine 

that this minister . . . after saying something like that, something 

so basic, something so basic, to then say oh well I know, across 

Canada, where the middle of the road is. He doesn‟t even know 

where essential services is, Mr. Speaker, and that is sad. That is 

really sad. And, Mr. Speaker, maybe that is why he‟s hiding 

behind video clips. I‟m not certain, in terms of what he is doing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this and in terms of one more on 

the health care system, SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 

had another . . . in that same article, in the April 11 

StarPhoenix, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses had one other 

thing to say. And this is what they said about consultations to 

date, they said, and this is Rosalee Longmoore, the union 

president: 

 

While SUN was one union that met with the government, 

she said public hearings should be held on the bill. 

 

“Our facts were presented. I would not characterize it as 

consultation. To me, consultation would have happened 

way before legislation was ever introduced,” said 

Longmore [sic]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when even people who the minister calls 

consultations come to see him and would not characterize that 

— and I know I certainly wasn‟t at the consultations that the 

minister calls — perhaps we shouldn‟t even call them 

consultations. Or is he denying or is he saying that what the 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has said is in 

fact incorrect? And that would be interesting to hear from him 

on that and to see what he would have to say about that. 

 

So in terms of . . . also just going back, just for the minister 

perhaps, I know he was at the North Saskatoon Business 

Association meeting. But the president of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, in there, is quoted, on Saturday, April 

12, he is quoted as saying, “„Most importantly, [he said] let‟s 

empower our people, our staff, the workers, and give them the 

tools and assets and support to become world leaders, and let‟s 

recruit and retain them,‟” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what our province, what we talk 

about . . . we talk about training workers. We talk about 

recruiting workers. We talk about a good workplace. 

 

The president, President Dutchak of the Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce went on to say, talked about MB Ambulance 

because he is the owner of MB Ambulance and how he works 

with his union workers to make that place a workable place. He 

talked about a company that‟s moving forward. He talked about 

a province that‟s moving forward. He made no statements about 

animosity, animosity. He talked about instead of working with 

union members of MB Ambulance and his company and how 

Saskatchewan could move forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of arguments for the legislation . . . 

and Statistics Canada has indicated that Saskatchewan has a 

unionization rate of over 35 per cent. The Saskatchewan Labour 

policy and planning branch has published a statement that states 

over 96 per cent of collective agreements are solved. 

 

Where are the arguments? Where — before we jump into this to 

think that there are excessive labour disputes — where are the 

reasons and what problem are we solving? Mr. Speaker, if we 

talk about . . . then we also hear from the members opposite . . . 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

that we talk about that nobody‟s coming to Saskatchewan, this 

province isn‟t going to grow because we have to send a signal 

in labour legislation. And if that‟s what this is about, then it is a 

sad, sad day because what is being impacted is the health care 

system. What is being impacted is the health care system. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The growth that we hear about and the members opposite 

standing up and repeating numbers of growth and us being 

number one in Canada, this has not happened overnight, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This happened over a period of time. And the 

labour legislation that was there was there long before. This 

growth happened with the labour legislation that was there. 

 

So that argument, the argument that sometimes we hear that we 

are being held back by labour legislation is a bit suspect. And 

again I asked, if you are going to introduce legislation and if 

you are prepared to enter into a confrontational relationship 

with a good portion of the people of this province, what does 

that do? And what does it do specifically for health care? 

 

What message does it send to people when we talk about 

recruiting and retaining people? What message does it send out 

to people over and above what the now Premier when he was 

opposition leader, when he was opposition leader and he talked 

about going to war with labour? He said it. He said it. We‟re 

going to go to war with labour. 

 

Now is that the kind of messaging that we want on billboards 

across the country? It is a fact that we need people in the trades. 

We need people in the trades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need 

them to come here. We need to fill our jobs. We need to get this 

province working. And what are we doing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? What are we doing? We are sending out a signal that 

says we‟re going to war with labour, and we have, what some 

people have said, the worst labour legislation in the country. 

 

How is this good? How is this good for us to become an engine 

of growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker? How is this good? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the now Premier to appear on a local 

talk radio show and say we are going to go to war with unions, 

this is, Mr. Speaker, this is perhaps, as the member has said 

here, this is low. This is very low. And I can‟t imagine, I can‟t 

imagine people who are in unions across this country — the 

trades and that — hearing that and saying, well now I wonder if 

I should pick up my family and move to Saskatchewan. Now 

here‟s the welcome mat for me. 

 

And it‟s kind of a broad brush stroke that they like to paint of 

union members. And I find that really at times disturbing 

because I‟m sure there are union members in their 

constituencies, and I‟m not certain what it is that they are 

saying when they say that. 

 

Now in terms of that, I think I have mentioned the minister not 

wanting to meet with the Saskatoon & District Labour Council 

forum, that he is just, you know . . . What message does that 

send? What message does it send to a good part of our residents 

of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps what we should then . . . what I‟d 

like to just talk about briefly — and I started to talk about it — 

is the entire issue, the entire issue of unions because at times 

we‟ve heard over the past few days, across the way, people 

saying different things about the money that everybody has 

been given. But there‟s a kind of . . . you get a feeling, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that somehow unions and union members and 

union leaders . . . and then it accelerates to union bosses, 

somehow this generalization that everybody is the same. 

 

And so I think I will say a bit more about that in a minute, but I 

just thought perhaps I would like to put into the record just 

something Beth Bilson has written, former Chair of the Labour 

Relations Board. And she writes about The Trade Union Act 

and I just thought it was kind of informative. 

 

From the earliest days of European settlement in the west, 

some workers chose to be represented by trade unions in 

settling their wages and working conditions with their 

employers, a process which came to be known as 

collective bargaining. Till the end of the 19th century . . . 

unions were regarded as illegal organizations [Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, illegal organizations] because they interfered 

with the commercial activities of employers; by the time 

Saskatchewan became a province, however, Canadian 

legislation had been passed declaring trade unions to be 

legitimate organizations. In the first decades after 1905, 

the legal status of trade unions and of their collective 

bargaining activities was somewhat unclear, though a 

number of employers engaged in bargaining with trade 

unions representing their employees. [Now] in 1938, the 

Saskatchewan legislature enacted the Freedom of Trade 

Union Association Act, which recognized the right of 

employees to form and join trade unions for the purpose of 

bargaining collectively with their employers. It did not, 

however, place a legal obligation on the employer to 

recognize or bargain with the trade union. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s interesting because you see 

there isn‟t a long history that you would think. And perhaps 

that‟s why the members across the way are a bit confused. 

Perhaps they‟re living in the past, and I would just like to bring 

them up to the future because where we are going, in not only 

this explanation but in terms of the Supreme Court 

explanations, we are moving forward. We are moving forward 

because people have become enlightened and have accepted 

what even, even the president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce is saying that employees and employers should 

work together to make the workplace a better place. 

 

And I really don‟t hear that, and it‟s very disappointing from 

the other side when we don‟t. Because even in 1938 in that first 

Act, people were thinking that you can join a union, but the 

employer doesn‟t have to bargain with you. Now that‟s a simple 

concept. 

 

But it wasn‟t until the Douglas government came in, Bilson 

goes on, in 1944 that this changed because: 

 

The Trade Union Act not only included a renewed 

statement of the right of employees to be represented by 

trade unions, but also gave the trade unions selected by 

groups of employees the exclusive legal right to represent 

those employees in matters concerning their terms and 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

conditions of employment, [and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

more importantly] and placed an obligation on employers 

in organized workplaces to bargain in good faith. [Now] 

the statute also defined certain conducts by employers or 

trade unions as unacceptable and constituting an unfair 

labour practice. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the members across, perhaps I 

could put this simply, based in this, one of the central tenets of 

The Trade Union Act is the right for people to bargain 

collectively. That means that union members have a right to 

discuss their concerns with the employer. 

 

Now it is unfortunate that something like this, that is so clear 

and simple — that should be so clear and simple — has to be 

legislated, but in fact, it is. So it is a fact of life, and it has now 

been enshrined in fact in the Charter, not only association but 

the right of collective bargaining. 

 

Now further on The Trade Union Act, which as I mentioned 

was brought in by the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation], this was based on the Wagner Act in 1935 in the 

United States. And even the United States under Roosevelt 

were moving far ahead of what we are doing. So we‟re not by 

any means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, breaking ground here. 

 

Now some of the more common ways . . . Perhaps today people 

see unions or perhaps because of the . . . that we get unions 

because of unfair treatment. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I 

mentioned to you, I think one of the other things that unions are 

involved in are making the workplace a better place — better 

place to work, a better place for the jobs, and a better place for 

if it‟s a public service they provide. 

 

Now this concept is important because the same concept would 

apply, as I have mentioned, to the essential services legislation 

and the impact that it would have if put in without consultation 

of the workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It appears that the 

residents of Saskatchewan understand democracy, and they are 

asking for public hearings on this because they‟re asking, 

because probably — and for the same reasons that there was a 

need for a trade union Act — because probably there is an 

understanding that at the very basis of democracy is discussion, 

is consultation, and then there are solutions. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just one other point on this, just to 

maybe bring home the point — and perhaps it is the attitude 

that we see coming from there — is there have been many 

people, trade union members who have come to the Legislative 

Assembly. I‟ve have had the opportunity to introduce them. 

And they came here, they came here to listen to their elected 

representatives debate issues around Bill 5 and 6. They came to 

hear that. 

 

And these people came, and one particular day these people 

came from Paddockwood, Birch Hills. They came from 

Shellbrook, Meadow Lake, Lloydminster, North Battleford, 

Prince Albert; and I introduced these people in the legislature. 

Now some of these, some of these people were elected leaders 

of unions. Some were members at large. 

 

And it was very disheartening to me personally because I had to 

go and speak to them later, when the Premier got up and — to 

quote from March 17 Hansard, and I quote — and this was the 

Premier saying: 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the essential services 

legislation, I know the Leader of the Opposition is very 

aware that over a year ago, reported in The Globe & Mail 

newspaper, the article reported that the then Leader of the 

Opposition — myself — indicated that essential services 

legislation may well be needed in the province. The 

intervening CUPE strike at the University of 

Saskatchewan and University of Regina where health care, 

where health care, the smooth delivery of health care was 

being threatened for Saskatchewan people underscored the 

need for this. 

 

And so now the most important question . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the key or this is the main part: 

 

And so now the most important question before this 

Assembly on essential services — and I welcome this 

debate with the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker — 

the most important question . . . 

 

And here is the most important question for the leader of our 

province: 

 

Will they vote in favour of public safety? Will they vote in 

favour of the continuance of health care for Saskatchewan 

people? Or . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is what he had to say to the people, of 

the people who happen to be a trade unionist: 

 

Or will they vote, Mr. Speaker for the agenda of union 

bosses and union leadership? What will be the choice? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no wonder that attitude permeates that 

other side. No wonder there is that sort of generalization that 

permeates that other side — the generalization that everything 

can be swept away because of union bosses or union leaders. 

 

And I wanted to and I had to go out later, but I really wanted to 

remind the Premier that these were, the people in the gallery, 

were democratically elected officials, democratically elected 

like many others for whether it be SARM, SUMA, chamber of 

commerce. And I wonder what these people thought. I wonder 

what the people from Paddockwood, Birch Hills, Shellbrook, 

Lloydminster, Prince Albert, Regina who travelled a good 

distance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they travelled a good distance, 

and I wonder what they thought. And I thought the government 

failed that day. I thought the government showed a very poor 

side that day. 

 

This government should be — and we all are — for the people. 

The government has made other things that make us wonder. 

They‟ve made cuts to the poor, Aboriginal, disabled. And the 

Premier‟s . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s Station 20. They‟ve 

cut funding for literacy programs. We‟ve heard today they cut 

the dental sealant program. And I wonder what signal that does 

send, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder what signal. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just back to the essential services 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

legislation. The minister is fond of the legislation, saying that it 

is moderate; it is not broad; it is middle of the road. And again 

as I mentioned previously many even within his own ministry 

have indicated that perhaps this is not the case. But like his lack 

of understanding of the crisis in health care, and perhaps now 

. . . and the stress that he is putting on for health care, he has 

obviously missed the point. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 

different ways of looking at this. And there are ways not only 

of, are we in the middle? Are we in the middle of the pack? Or 

whether this is broad or not? 

 

There are different ways of looking at this, and the question 

perhaps we should be asking is what works. And we have a 

model in Saskatchewan, within which collective bargaining 

works, an environment that I would say does work. 

 

And as we have heard many times that even the then opposition 

leader, the health critic, the former leader, and now the Premier 

have said, referred to this legislation and said, what did they 

say? They referred to the nurses, and they said that is the way 

essential services should work. They said this is the way it 

should work. They said we don‟t need legislated essential 

services. We don‟t need this at all. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Now all we hear about is middle of the pack. Just the other day, 

as I mentioned already, the minister went out on a limb again, 

and it was cut off behind him. And then he said, it‟s on the table 

everywhere. It‟s on the table everywhere. And it‟s not. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps . . . I would just like to 

mention that in fact the truth of the matter is when we look at 

this . . . And for those people who understand what the impact 

of this would be, to those people perhaps what we should be 

talking about is not only what works — but if we truly want to 

study, if we truly want to study what is happening — perhaps 

the way we should do this is look at the models that are in 

existence across the country. 

 

Now a good summary of this is in a book, Strikes in Essential 

Services. Authors Bernard Adell, Michel Grant and Allen 

Ponak outline three models for essential services dispute 

because that is in fact what we are talking about. How do you 

resolve, and in what environment should this proceed? And 

they put out the three models. Three basic models are identified. 

 

And so number one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the no-strike model 

prohibits strikes entirely and usually provides for some form of 

compulsory arbitration as the dispute resolution mechanism of 

last resort, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

This model can be said to be based on the principle, if the 

strike prohibition is clearly set out in advance in 

legislation, if an arbitration process is also set out in 

advance, and if the arbitrator is truly independent. 

However [and this is in talking about the independence of 

the arbitrator] elements of a power-based model often 

creep into the no-strike system in the form of restrictions 

on the arbitrator‟s independence in furtherance of the 

interest of one side. In addition and more fundamentally, if 

arbitrators merely attempt to replicate the settlement terms 

that the parties might have negotiated if they had the right 

to strike and walk out, the no-strike model acquires a 

power-based dimension. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, number two, number two is the unfettered 

strike model. The first model is the kind that we see — and I 

just talked about Alberta — where we would see the no-strike 

model. What they call the unfettered strike model or the strike 

model is what we would have in Saskatchewan. And this is the 

second model. The no-strike model prohibits strikes entirely . . . 

or I‟m sorry: 

 

The unfettered strike model in its pure form is a 

power-based system of dispute resolution because it leaves 

the parties free to use their economic power not only to 

resolve the underlying collective bargaining dispute, but to 

also to decide what services, if any, will be maintained 

during a work stoppage. There are no restrictions on 

strikes and lockouts other than the standard procedural 

constraints set out in the applicable labour relations 

statutes. Nor there are specific legal requirements with 

respect to essential services. 

 

And that is what the Saskatchewan model‟s about. Now the 

third model that they talk about is what we are engaged in here 

in Bill 5, and that is the designation model. And they say that: 

 

It stands between the other two and relies on the elements 

of both power and principle. It seeks to leave the 

underlying collective bargaining dispute to be resolved 

through the interplay of power, but it puts a separate 

process in place, a process culminating in independent 

adjudication in an attempt to ensure that as many 

employees will remain at work during strikes and lockouts 

as needed to maintain essential services. 

 

In other words the designation model endeavours to treat 

the provision of essential services as an enclave to be 

sheltered from the inner play of economic power, one 

where reason and principle will prevail instead. A third 

party, either a specialized essential services tribunal or a 

Labour Relations Board, is made responsible for deciding 

on the nature and extent of essential services should the 

union and employer be unable to agree, but in some cases 

the determination is made directly by legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two other 

things that would come into play in, perhaps, in the second 

model, and that is to make things work the parties have 

determined that there could be back-to-work legislation in the 

second model and in the first, and perhaps as things that come 

into play, wage restraints which would hamper what the 

collective bargaining agents could ask for. 

 

Now the explanation, and I read that in because I think we 

would want that, want that in, but the explanations around that 

are this — and perhaps to the minister or somebody could do 

him some bedtime reading — but what, what we are talking 

about in different models? We are talking about creating an 

environment in which problems are solved. 

 

Now we talked about — and I explained, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to the members opposite — why it is important to have 

legislation that has the parties sit down and talk to each other. 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

There‟s legislation. Now we come to the part of, if you can‟t 

resolve problems, then what do you do? 

 

So in the first, in the Alberta model where people have looked 

at that and said, well let us not do anything, let‟s just ban strikes 

. . . Let‟s just ban strikes and be done with it, and what we will 

do is send everybody to binding arbitration. We‟ll make some 

rules around it. I don‟t want to complicate the issue, but in the 

simplest form that‟s that is what occurs. 

 

Now has it prevented strikes? It has not. In fact Alberta has had 

more days lost to strikes than Saskatchewan with our system. 

As the authors have said, binding arbitration is not necessarily 

— depending on the independence of the arbitrators, depending 

on what approach the arbitrator takes — is not a cure-all. And is 

it a cure-all to have somebody from outside, somebody from 

outside impose on the parties a solution, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Now we move to the strike model which is the Saskatchewan 

model. The model is based on that the parties will be able to 

craft the best agreement. They will be able to craft the best 

agreement and not only the best agreement around essential 

services legislation but a best agreement. 

 

Now what does this say in terms of the issue of designation, 

because I raise that as an issue. If you apply and if, as in our 

legislation, the employer would have the final say and say who 

is designated without input, without input from the employees, 

how is that system better than a system where . . . at the very 

basis, we‟ve heard everybody call for consultations. We‟ve 

made the arguments for why people should sit down together 

and determine that. The best, I would say, the best system 

would be a system where people would look at and allow the 

people, the employees, allow the managers on-site to make 

those determinations. That has also been argued and agreed to, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as one of the better ways. 

 

Now the final way which the minister talked about, the Minister 

of Labour talked about, was the designation system, and I‟ve 

gone over where that has been. There have been concerns. 

There have been concerns in terms of that. In New Brunswick 

where there were designations and particularly in terms of 

where health care systems are under stress, there were strikes 

and where there is that they resorted to back-to-work 

legislation. So what we had was a return to a strike model 

which exists in our province. 

 

So I think before we would move, before we would move on 

this issue, I think a good discussion of what model we are trying 

to build is the discussion that we should have. To simply say, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and I am just baffled by how you can 

say that you can look at the middle or put ourselves somewhere 

in the middle of the pack when these are simply models that are 

used in negotiations between parties. 

 

Now we have in terms . . . And I would like to at this time as 

well quote Dan Cameron who‟s a lecturer of industrial relations 

at the Hill school of business in the University of Regina. It 

talks about our system, and he had this to say in terms of this 

legislation: “A difficulty with the proposed legislation is [that] 

it requires every public service union and management subject 

to the Act to engage in a designation process [at the outset of 

negotiations] that is time consuming, complex, and costly.” 

Now what he‟s saying there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that, 

whether or not there is a threat of strike or not, parties will have 

to sit down and do these negotiations. This is complex. It‟s 

costly. In most cases, as I‟ve mentioned before, with the policy 

branch saying that 96 per cent of all disputes are resolved, what 

are we doing here? What are we doing? And putting an 

enormous cost perhaps on our health care system. So: 

 

It treats every negotiation as if a strike or lockout is 

inevitable in spite of the . . . overwhelming [evidence] . . . 

of agreements are arrived at peaceably [and without a 

strike]. The early designation of essential services in every 

public sector bargaining unit reduces the negotiating 

powers of unions in those units at the very beginning of 

negotiations. Thus the focus of the legislation appears to 

be limiting union bargaining power and the impact of 

strikes and lockout action generally as opposed to ensuring 

the continued provision of essential services in those 

specific instances where . . . [it is] threatened. 

 

Now he goes on to explain: 

 

Currently, when strike or lockout action occurs in the 

Saskatchewan public sector, it is quite common for union 

and management to have an informal understanding to 

ensure the provision of essential services. Neither 

management, union nor employees want to be held 

responsible for a serious adverse event. It is not 

uncommon for striking workers to drop their picket signs 

to attend to emergent situations and return to the picket 

line later. This response is grounded in the social ethic of 

the province. If we must have essential services 

legislation, this same ethic should serve as its foundation. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he goes on to suggest a 

solution: 

 

Union and management in public sector negotiations could 

be required in law to establish a joint committee to 

identify essential services. This body would only function 

once an impasse is reached in negotiations. It would 

identify essential services and the employees required to 

provide those services within a specified [period of] time, 

i.e., 30 days. No strike/lockout notice would be permitted 

during this period. It would continue to function dealing 

with emergent situations until a collective agreement was 

achieved. In such situations there is always the risk that a 

party will engage in delaying tactics or propose or oppose 

a . . . essential [service], given the number of essential 

employees can strengthen or weaken the bargaining power 

of a party. To avoid this, a Labour Relations Officer of the 

Saskatchewan Department of Labour would be an ad hoc 

member of the committee. 

 

Now Mr. Cameron felt that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at this 

time that also to resolve disputes that perhaps he foresees 

bringing in a labour relations officer. He then goes on to 

explain: 

 

That person could act . . . [in a mediating role in] 

facilitating negotiations, resolving differences, and 

confirming that essential services were in fact essential 

and emergencies were true emergencies. If there is no 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

resolution, that officer could recommend a solution to the 

parties and to the Minister of Labour. Failing resolution, 

the latter could take a range of actions, i.e., release the 

Department of Labour report to the public in order to 

pressure the parties, offer third party mediation, [arbitrate 

directly in this dispute] or order the provision of disputed 

services. 

 

This approach deals with actual as apposed to theoretical 

threats to the provision of essential services. 

 

It builds on the practises that already exist. As well, the 

primary focus of the parties in negotiations will be on 

concluding an agreement given the uncertainty as to which 

services and employees will be determined essential. This 

process involves a neutral party in quote, “fostering a 

resolution between the parties and ensuring the essential 

services are in fact essential . . . 

 

It places primary responsibility for providing essential 

services where property resides, with the management, 

union and employees who provide those services. It 

preserves Government‟s flexibility in responding to 

protect the public interest when the bargaining parties do 

not exercise their responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an excellent analysis, an excellent 

analysis. And I would just like to take you through that much, 

much the way so that the members opposite could understand 

this, much in the same way as the rights that unions have gotten 

in terms of meeting with the employers, between employers and 

unions. 

 

And what do we have here? What do we have with the tools if 

the parties properly understood? We have, we have in Mr. 

Cameron‟s proposed solution, the tools or all the factors that 

come into negotiations, all the factors that come into 

negotiations. 

 

We have one. We have . . . leave it to the parties. Who are the 

best parties to resolve this? The parties — the employers, the 

managers, the employees on the work sites. What do you do if 

the parties do not agree? You mediate. You send in a 

conciliation officer, a mediation officer. You try and get the 

parties moving. These are the things that have worked, have 

worked for years, that have worked for years in labour. We 

don‟t, we don‟t need to reinvent the wheel here. We don‟t need 

to talk about moving forward. We need to talk about solutions. 

And then he talks about putting in and sending reports to the 

minister and going through all the necessary steps that would 

have to happen in terms of getting a deal. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So the questions, I think the questions then become, what is 

wrong with our present system? And this goes to the very heart. 

Had there been consultations prior to the Bill as we hear daily, 

as we hear daily on other Bills that after . . . Even in today‟s 

question period we heard, after consultations in the education 

sector, we brought in this Bill. That was said by the Deputy 

Premier. And yet, there was no consultations. Nobody heard 

about anything. And we wonder why we‟re getting into a 

problem. 

So what I ask . . . And it makes me wonder about the attitudes 

and that from that side. What was it that was going on here? 

Who drafted the legislation? Why was this happening? Where is 

the analysis for change? Where is the analysis for change that 

people can reply to? All we have is video clips. We have 

10-second video clips that people can reply to and a website. 

Now that, in contrast to changes in other Acts, is shameful. It is 

absolutely shameful that . . . 

 

And I heard members talk about, well how many members are 

in unions and that. But it sends a message. It sends a message 

outside this province. It sends a message to all workers. It sends 

a message that are they concerned and what is this government 

concerned about. 

 

So lack of consultations and more importantly . . . And I think 

the members are missing, they‟re missing a huge point here. 

More important, our health care system, our health care system 

is at risk if we simply ram this through. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

am very concerned that if we ram this through that this is 

what‟s going to happen. 

 

And those members, they smile. The previous Health critic and 

now the Health minister, they smile when they said, well this 

was not necessary. What does this do to the stakeholders when 

they met with them and they said, well don‟t worry about it, 

don‟t worry about this, this legislation isn‟t needed, we don‟t 

need to go there? 

 

This has been repeated countless times in here, and the 

members opposite wonder why we would say that if in fact any 

person was told on an ongoing basis that legislated essential 

services were not necessary and a day later or weeks later or 

months later are told that oh well yes, we‟re going to do that 

because we have to get in the middle of the pack. There is no 

middle of the pack. There are models in which people try to 

address issues of collective bargaining. And that is the real issue 

that we would be going. 

 

So we‟ve had the now Health minister, the now Premier, the 

former leader all saying that this wasn‟t necessary, and 

somehow people are to forget all this, somehow people of 

Saskatchewan are to forget all of this and then just say, we will 

just embrace this and we‟re going to move forward and we‟re 

going to work forward. So there‟s a lot of talk about moving 

this province forward. There‟s a lot of talk about population 

growth. 

 

But really for a large portion . . . And if you look at the health 

care sector, that is the most highly organized. I don‟t have the 

exact number, but I would venture to guess that it‟s in the high 

90s in terms of the organization in the health care sector. 

 

And not only, not only, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are they 

moving, moving in one direction, and I would suggest that it‟s 

not forward. The Supreme Court of Canada — just to show how 

out of step these folks are — the Supreme Court of Canada just 

simply is moving in the other direction. They‟re moving in the 

other direction. In British Columbia when the Campbell 

government came in and tore up collective agreements when 

they stripped workers, what the Supreme Court . . . And I would 

just sort of give a brief overview. The Supreme Court just 

simply said this was unacceptable, that you had to consult, that 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

you had to negotiate. 

 

And this seemed to somehow just miss the understanding, or 

somehow there was such a lack of understanding that people 

could do this, such a lack of respect for contracts, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — a lack of respect for contracts, a lack of respect for 

people. Something that permeates from that side in terms of, as 

I tried to mention, right down to the simple thing of the union 

bosses and who are you . . . who‟s calling the shots. And I think 

that that might be fine as we exchange barbs here. But to the 

people when they attend this Assembly, to the people outside 

when they hear that, what does this do to foster — what the 

president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce said — 

working together with workers? What does it do? I mean he 

himself understood. But he does not do in MD Ambulance what 

this government is doing here. 

 

Now in terms of . . . I would just like to, for the record, read in 

from the Supreme Court decision of the one I just spoke of, of 

Health Services and Support — Facilities Subsector Bargaining 

Association v. British Columbia, a decision of June 8, 2007. 

Somewhat in here, the reason I read it is twofold, is a bit of a 

history on how we got here. And I feel that this is probably 

necessary from everything that I‟m certainly hearing here in the 

Assembly. And I quote from there: 

 

Workers‟ associations have a long history. In England, as 

early as the end of the middle ages, workers were getting 

together to improve their conditions of employment. They 

were addressing petitions to Parliament, asking for laws to 

secure better wages or other more favourable working 

conditions. Soon thereafter, strike activity began. 

 

In Canada, workers‟ organizations can be traced back to 

the end of the 18th century . . . However, it was not until 

the industrial revolution that workers‟ organizations took 

on more than a marginal role, and that a real labour 

movement was born. 

 

From the beginning, the law was used as a tool to limit 

workers‟ rights to unionize . . . After the French 

Revolution, the British Parliament, convinced that labour 

organizations were the nesting ground of potential 

revolutions, adopted the Combination Acts of 1799 and 

1800, making it unlawful for two or more workers to 

combine in an attempt to increase their wages, lessen their 

hours of work or persuade anyone to leave or refuse work 

. . . Combinations of workers were already illegal at 

common law. 

 

. . . The question of whether the repressive common law 

doctrines and the Combination Acts of 1799 and 1800 

were introduced into Canada is subject to controversy. 

 

. . . By the beginning of the 1900s, the main criminal 

barriers to unionism in Canada had been brought down. 

 

. . . At the time the Charter was enacted in 1982, 

collective bargaining had a long tradition in Canada and 

was recognized as part of the freedom of association in the 

labour context. 

 

. . . The protection enshrined in s. 2(d) of the Charter may 

properly be seen as the culmination of a historical 

movement towards the recognition of a procedural right to 

collective bargaining. 

 

Now I don‟t want to say or tell the members opposite to get out 

of the Dark Ages. If you want to move forward, if you want to 

truly move forward . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . As the 

member says, get out of the Dark Ages because you are doing 

no one any favours, yourselves first. And it‟s simply a 

suggestion. 

 

Show some respect and move this province forward so that we 

do not have to look and explain that Saskatchewan, that 

Saskatchewan is not a leader, that Saskatchewan has no respect 

for workers, that Saskatchewan has no respect for workers‟ 

rights. 

 

We speak of that, and they wonder why we speak of that so 

long and why we ask so many questions of that — because they 

don‟t get it. They don‟t get it. Maybe one day the Supreme 

Court will have to tell them. Here‟s where it is. But here in our 

Assembly, I feel that it is my role to attempt to enlighten that 

government on these issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Okay. Finally in respect to bringing in this, 

one of the things they talked about was the snowplow operators 

and what a danger they posed. And even on that . . . how 

suspect is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when in fact everything 

pointed to, all the news reports pointed to that the snowplow 

workers, the workers in this province, because they did not also 

. . . They also have a respect for their jobs. They also look 

towards the province and its residents in providing the service. 

They went back to work. 

 

We‟ve had many other instances in terms of the ways . . . we 

heard the way the Labour Relations Board — and I don‟t think I 

need to go to the details in terms of the firing — the way that 

the new Chair has been brought in. And one of the important 

tenets, one of the other important things of this is that this 

quasi-judicial board should be seen as independent. And what 

signal does it send, and what trust can people have, the 

practitioners? 

 

The Canadian labour lawyers have put out a statement in terms 

of where they talk about: 

 

“For tribunals to be able to interpret laws impartially and 

without fear of reprisals, security of tenure must be 

respected. The recent actions [in speaking] of the 

government have not only called into question the 

independence and integrity of the Labour Relations Board, 

but have raised the spectre of political interference in the 

workings of the tribunal essential to maintaining legal 

rights in the workplace . . . ” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been many other analyses, 

analyses that say that workers will strike or workers will leave 

because that is what a strike is. Worker will leave their place of 

employment if things get so bad that that is the only thing that 

they could do. It‟s a form of quitting. But that‟s what will 

happen. So can you, can you truly . . . Where is the discussion 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

and the debate — which is obviously sorely lacking — to even 

deal with the issue of strikes? 

 

Again then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask that perhaps — if 

the government members are listening — that perhaps those 

questions that I began with, the questions that I began with on 

the designation that we need to have some discussion about, we 

need to have some discussion about the resolution of strikes. 

We have to discuss essential services. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that people have 

mentioned to me is the issue, the issue of . . . there is no end 

here, where you have in Alberta, you can go to binding 

arbitration. There is no end here; there‟s perpetual negotiation 

— the potential for perpetual negotiation, the potential for more 

strife, the potential for more stress in workplaces. 

 

We have excessive fines. The government won‟t tell us about 

their amendments. And with the Labour Board and everything 

else that we have, it is a wonder that workers will have any 

feeling of comfort or any confidence in their workplaces. 

 

I would like to end just by a quote from the brief submitted by 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, and the brief says: 

 

If these Bills pass, Saskatchewan will move from having 

legislation that is internationally acknowledged, 

recognized and respected as “fair and balanced” — to 

legislation that will occupy a position at the bottom. Is this 

the sort of labour relations climate you wish to foster, 

given that keeping workers in Saskatchewan and attracting 

new workers to the province is a goal shared by all of us 

across the policy community? 

 

The relationship between employers and workers will also 

suffer if Bills 5 and 6 are enacted. Workers will see 

employers having more control over their working 

conditions than ever, including their ability to function as 

independent trade unions. Such an environment can only 

lead to disharmony and discord. Regarding Bill 5, 

evidence cited above suggests that essential services 

legislation may in fact prolong and provoke strikes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have many questions. We have heard 

from this side many excellent speeches. And contrary what the 

members opposite are saying, that there has been an inordinate 

amount of time spent on this, we believe that these issues, that 

these issues should have been raised for the people of this 

province. This goes to the very heart as we have had many 

countless debates here about democracy and our ability to do 

that. 

 

We have not been told about the regulations. We have not been 

told about the excessiveness of section 21 in the essential 

services Bill 5. And it is very difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

talk about some of the sections when we see that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council has such wide-ranging powers to change 

these things. 

 

So with that, I would end my comments and recommend that 

we move this Bill to committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

[12:00] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member is 

moving second reading of the Bill. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be committed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Human Services Committee. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 6 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise this morning to 

continue my comments on Bill 6. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to repeat a couple of the comments I made last evening 

before we adjourned debate. 

 

And I think most importantly is that we have to realize first and 

foremost that The Trade Union Act, we need to understand why 

it was initially implemented and its initial intent. And quite 

simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that The Trade Union Act is 

put in place to empower workers and unions. 

 

And I‟d again like to repeat a quote that comes from Dr. Elaine 

Bernard. She‟s the executive director of the Harvard trade union 

program at the Harvard Law School. And this quote comes 

from an article that‟s entitled “Collective Bargaining as a 

Constitutional Right.” And just to read this quote into the 

record: 

 

“The right to bargain collectively with an employer 

enhances the human dignity, liberty and autonomy of 

workers by giving them the opportunity to influence the 

establishment of workplace rules and thereby gain some 

control over a major aspect of their lives, namely their 

work.” 

 

And this comes from the Supreme Court of Canada. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to repeat again. In the quote it says “. . . 

thereby gain some control over a major aspect of their lives . . .” 

It doesn‟t say, have more control than the employer. It does not 

give them an overpowering control. It gives them some control 

into a major aspect of their lives — all of our lives — which is 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

our work life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we‟re looking at any changes 

that are being put forward to The Trade Union Act, we really 

need to look at how do we interpret these and how do we look 

at them overall. So when we think of the Act as put in place to 

empower workers and unions, and when we look at changes we 

look at them from a perspective of whether the changes weaken 

or strengthen workers and their unions. 

 

And in other words, quite simply, we look at who benefits from 

a change in the law. And that‟s a great guide to understanding 

the meaning when changes are proposed. Who benefits from the 

changes that are being proposed? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important also to remember that the 

implications of a change to an Act or a piece of legislation, a 

change to even one word, must be read in a context of the 

whole Act, all of the regulations, and in this case, in the case 

law history. And, Mr. Speaker, that hasn‟t been done with this 

Bill. 

 

And I will again repeat that that‟s obvious because when a Bill 

is developed in-house, meaning within the Government of 

Saskatchewan, you will have the departments and the 

Department of Justice, whichever ministry or department is 

affected, work with the Department of Justice to look at, in the 

context of the whole Act, how the changes will affect the whole 

Act, also the regulations, and case law history. 

 

And we‟re seeing that there has been amendments tabled. The 

minister has talked about other amendments that will be put 

forward for Bill 5. But he‟s also tabled a separate Bill, Bill 22 

— which is The Trade Union Act amendment two — in this 

session which obviously points to not a thorough job being 

done with this piece of legislation and the changes that were 

initially put forward. 

 

And that just, I think, substantiates the claims that these Bills 

were in fact drawn up by a third party and delivered to the 

Department of Labour and the Department of Justice to actually 

do some background work on, and really try and move these 

pieces of legislation forward. So that has raised a number of 

questions for many people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of my colleagues have gone into 

quite a fair bit of detail and in the amendments and the changes 

that are proposed for Bill 6. But what I would like to do this 

morning is really just touch on a couple of them. 

 

And when we have talked about labour legislation over the past 

eight, nine years that I‟ve been involved and probably . . . well I 

remember quite clearly the five years that I served as minister 

of Labour. We always heard the discussion from the 

Saskatchewan Party about freedom of speech and a democratic 

vote. And they‟ve repeated this over and over and over again, 

with the support of many of the business organizations that they 

seem to collaborate quite closely with. 

 

And when we look at the changes that are proposed to The 

Trade Union Act, in section 6 of the Bill that replaces section 

11(1)(a) of The Trade Union Act, the new words are, and I 

quote: “. . . but nothing in this Act precludes an employer from 

communicating facts and . . . opinions to its employees” — and 

opinions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite simply when you look at this change, what it 

will do . . . And I‟m sure once we get into committee we will go 

into many examples of what kind of problems and issues this 

can cause. I know it raises many concerns amongst many 

working people across the province. But quite simply, this 

amendment may make legal more than 90 per cent of employer 

conduct that is presently illegal in almost every part of Canada 

and much of the United States — illegal in every part of Canada 

and much of the United States. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the minister has stood and said 

that what we‟re looking at doing is meeting national norms and 

that this is in place in other parts of the country and why don‟t 

we have it here, well what I would say . . . I was trying to think 

of a good analogy. And the one thing that comes to mind is that 

when you go to a restaurant and they say, would you like your 

wings mild, medium, or hot. Well wings are wings, but what 

degree you have those wings — whether they are hot or 

whether they are mild or whether they are plain. 

 

And while people will stand and say quite clearly we have 

essential services, we have these things in other provinces, it‟s 

the degree to which we have them. It‟s the degree and the depth 

that these amendments will change the legislation in 

Saskatchewan. That‟s the concern. 

 

And that‟s why over and over again we have stood in this 

House. We have stood in our constituencies and stood in 

whatever venues are open to us to say there needs to be real 

public consultations on the recommended or the proposed 

changes to The Trade Union Act put forward by the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is also a number of conflicting 

statements that have been made by the minister and by the 

government in general as to their depth of understanding and 

what they perceive as the intent of this legislation. That also just 

causes many more questions to arise and a number of doubts to 

be brought forward as to what the actual intent is in bringing 

this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a couple of things that I would really like to 

touch on is the whole issue of the democratic vote. 

 

And I talked yesterday, or last evening, about a number of 

papers that have been put out that do an analysis on the 

proposed changes. And one of those is from the Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives. And Mr. Jim Warren, who is a 

Regina-based researcher and a labour historian, says in his 

study . . . and the title is even a little bit surprising, “Joining the 

Race to the Bottom: An Assessment of Bill 6, Amendments to 

The Trade Union Act, 2008.” And a quote from his report is, 

“As it stands the proposed legislation constitutes an effort to 

enhance employer power and reduce the capacity of employees 

to achieve union recognition and the ability to bargain 

collectively with their employers.” 

 

So then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to my initial question: 

who benefits from this legislation? Who benefits from the 

changes proposed to The Trade Union Act, The Trade Union 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

Act which is put in place to empower working people and 

unions in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Warren goes on to say that his study discusses, that this 

study discusses the evolution of the Saskatchewan Trade Union 

Act from 1944 to the present day and argues that the current 

government‟s Bill 6 amendments are unduly punitive, unduly 

punitive to working people across Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very good analysis of the 

amendments, and it goes through the amendments clause by . . . 

or amendment by amendment, and gives a number of examples 

and analysis of what the long-term effects of this will be and 

short-term effects. 

 

It talks about the Labour Relations Board, and it also talks 

about . . . when we talk about the signed membership 

application cards, and this is one of the areas where I really 

want to have a bit of discussion. We‟ve heard over and over 

from the business community and from the Saskatchewan Party 

about a democratic vote. So what we‟ll see from the current 

legislation is, that under the existing legislation, after a union 

succeeds in obtaining signed membership application cards 

from the 25 per cent of the employees in the workplace and 

applies to the board, the Labour Relations Board can authorize a 

certification vote by employees in the proposed bargaining unit. 

 

Now I have to say, Mr. Speaker, no union goes to the Labour 

Relations Board with 25 per cent of any signed cards of the 

membership for any workplace that they may be looking to 

apply for certification. They wouldn‟t do it. It‟s always much 

higher. 

 

A vast majority of certifications are granted on the basis of card 

evidence presented in conjunction with the application. And in 

practice, the evidence required by the Labour Relations Board 

involves the presentation of sign-up cards from over 50 per cent 

of those people to be included in the bargaining unit the day the 

application for certification is filed. 

 

The amendment proposed will require a vote in all cases. 

Currently in the rare instances when a vote is held, a majority of 

50 per cent plus one of those voting decides the issue, provided 

that a majority of those eligible to vote actually vote. Now this 

is referred to as a double quorum system. It is interesting that 

the double quorum requires a higher level of participation than 

we require when electing members to the legislature or to 

parliament. And since votes are only rarely held, the double 

quorum has not been a significant bone of contention here in 

Saskatchewan. Now if this amendment passes and votes 

become mandatory, it will become an area of concern. It is 

noteworthy that Alberta, a province the current Saskatchewan 

government is accused by critics of attempting to emulate, does 

not have a double quorum requirement. 

 

So from labour‟s perspective, a significant advantage of the 

card sign-up certification process is that it can be conducted in 

relative secrecy without employers being able to determine who 

is and who is not a union supporter. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

important. It‟s very important. If a successful certification vote 

requires a majority of all employees to vote, the employer can 

interpret an abstention as a no vote. 

 

Now this has caused some confusion also in the statements that 

have been made and in the proposals that are sitting now before 

this legislature. This is because if enough employees abstain a 

pro-certification vote will fail. The secret is out, if those who 

choose to vote can be automatically considered union 

supporters. An anti-union employer will be able to deduce 

which employees do and which don‟t see unionization the 

employer‟s way. And this leaves those employees who vote 

vulnerable to employer‟s sanction. A truly secret ballot is not 

possible under the double quorum system. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had a number of examples that have 

been given, but I have to point to one where observers, 

including Professor Muthu, argue that given the challenges 

unions face in organizing any workplace, the card certification 

system which we currently have constitutes a valid method of 

measuring employee preference. If a union gets 51 per cent of 

the employees to sign union cards, it is for that union akin to 

winning a plebiscite under a dictatorship. Granting union 

recognition and certification after a card check by a labour 

relations board in such cases is perceived to be the most 

legitimate, and justifiably so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can make many, many arguments about 

why the card system works, why the system of certification that 

we currently have is in place, and why it‟s been successful for 

so long. And I‟m not saying that every certification attempt 

works. Employees and workers in those locations will decide. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s their decision. It‟s not a decision 

of the employer. So then we look at what the requirements are 

to achieve a minimum of 25 per cent sign-up rate, well the 

current 25 per cent sign-up rate required to apply for 

certification . . . however in practice and as I said before, which 

union organizers will ensure that they have achieved sign-up 

rates of well over 50 per cent before filing an application. 

 

Amendment 3 will require the union to obtain a 45 per cent 

minimum card sign-up rate, but they also shorten the time for 

that sign up to take place and to get the work done to in 90 

days. So unions theoretically will have to work faster and meet 

a higher threshold of sign-up success before they can apply for 

certification. And since union organizers typically sign up more 

than 50 per cent of those eligible, the 45 per cent minimum will 

not be their biggest problem. 

 

The timelines will be of concern though. And that said, it‟s 

interesting that the amendment sets the sign-up threshold higher 

than it is for Saskatchewan employees subject to federal 

legislation, which is 35 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, what clicks 

in my mind when I start reading these numbers — 35 per cent is 

federal legislation, Alberta and Manitoba which have a 40 per 

cent threshold — what happened to national norms? What 

happened to the minister‟s contention that we were only looking 

to reach national norms? 

 

So anyway we can look at, even under with this proposed 

legislation, if you were at 100 per cent of the employees sign 

up, signed cards to join the union, it would be unacceptable 

without a vote. So that in itself causes a number of questions, 

causes a number of issues to come up. 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

But what I have to do is look at a paper that was put together by 

Dr. Muthu, and it‟s called “Proposed Amendments to the Trade 

Union Act: A Critique.” And Dr. Muthu is at the Faculty of 

Business Administration at the University of Regina. And his 

field of specialization is industrial relations, business ethics, and 

administrative law. And Dr. Muthu does a very nice analysis in 

his paper on the cards versus the vote. And where this 

government and their business supporters and the supporters 

who have followed along quite closely with them or led along 

— I‟m not quite sure whether they followed or led, but they‟re 

one and the same, Mr. Speaker — about a democratic vote for 

unions and unionization in a workplace, well Dr. Muthu makes 

some very good points. And I‟d like to put this on the record, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I quote from his report: 

 

The use of a political analogy by employers to describe the 

union representation election, their emphasis on 

certification only by mandatory voting, and their 

preference for a lengthy American-style election campaign 

based on the employers‟ freedom of speech, their civil . . . 

[libertarian] rhetoric in defence of the rights of individual 

employees against the imminent union dictatorship after 

certification, and their conviction that the vigorous 

employer campaign against unionization has almost no 

bearing on the election results are based on faulty 

assumptions and are empirically unsound. 

 

Corporate governance is presumed to be a purely private 

matter, and hence the political analogy is never extended 

to the authority structure of the company itself or to its 

decision making processes. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, if it should be put to a vote of 

the employees, that the company with free speech involved as 

to what decisions the company should make or what 

organizations the employer wished to join? I mean we would 

hear about it for a long, long time. But yet they feel quite right 

within their right to have that impact and that influence on the 

employees: 

 

But when a union knocks at the door, the employers prefer 

a full-fledged election process similar to that of a national 

election. They argue that because employees must be able 

to make “informed choice,” the employers should have an 

equal opportunity to make the case against unionization 

and to persuade the employees that they would fare better 

under the existing regime of individual employment 

relations. 

 

The assumption behind the regulatory approach of the 

Canadian system of industrial relations, with its 

preventative and reparative purposes, differs from the U.S. 

model which superimposes a broad political analogy on 

union “election and representation.” Paul C. Weiler, 

foremost scholar in labour law and industrial relations 

system of North America, Europe as well as Pacific Rim 

systems, and currently at the Harvard Law School, objects 

to the misuse of the political analogy for the following 

reasons: [And Mr. Wheeler states] 

 

There is an inherent fallacy in the political analogy. The 

employees are not making a momentous choice, one which 

should be carefully hedged about with ceremonial 

trappings, ultimately allowing the employees to make up 

their minds in the solemnity of the voting booth in the 

same ways that citizens do about their governmental 

representatives. The fact is that the trade union does not 

have the governmental authority over the unit of 

employees. 

 

So why do we expect the elections to be compared to and run 

the same? Now those are my comments, Mr. Speaker. And I go 

back to the paper: 

 

The trade union gets a piece of paper — a license to 

bargain on their behalf — which is by no means the key to 

the vault. The union must do something in the real world 

with that license. True, the employer has to sit down at the 

table and negotiate with the union. But it does not have to 

agree to any of the demands of the union. How does the 

trade union extract concessions and ultimately a contract 

with a recalcitrant employer? Only with the lever of 

employee pressure, through the threat or the use of a 

strike. In the final analysis a trade union must be able to 

get a strike mandate from the employees. In practice there 

must be not just a bare majority, but a solid one to be 

credible at the bargaining table. This is the crucible in 

which the durability of the union‟s majority will be tested. 

Unions do themselves by flimflamming a group of 

employees into “instant unionism” which they will shortly 

regret. The trade union has to maintain — indeed it has to 

build up — its initial support during the months of the 

certification proceedings and first contract negotiations. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this really lays out nicely the 

argument for the card system itself. And then we go on. There 

are some very clear differences and other differences between a 

political election and a union election, identified by Professor 

Gordon Lafer in his report entitled “Neither Free Nor Fair.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this directly speaks to the calls from the 

CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business], the 

North Saskatoon Business Association, the Saskatchewan Party, 

who year after year after year have stood and said, we want a 

democratic vote. We need a democratic vote. Who could argue 

with this? 

 

Well many people can argue with it, Mr. Speaker. And there are 

many good reasons that the union card system for certification 

works and it‟s the appropriate method to use and to continue 

using. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to Professor Lafer 

and his report entitled “Neither Free Nor Fair.” And I quote 

from his report: 

 

In a regular political election, the boundaries of electoral 

districts and lists of eligible voters are established long 

before the campaign begins, in a process that is 

independent of either candidate. By contrast, the scope of 

workers who are eligible to vote in . . . [labour relations 

board] election is subject to debate during the campaign 

process itself. 

 

In bargaining unit determinations, the employer does have 

greater scope for manipulating the electorate in its favour and 

against union organizers, in election for public office, borders 

of election districts — predetermined by a statutory body which 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

cannot be manipulated by candidates. 

 

In . . . [the labour relations board] elections, however, 

every single vote is open to such manipulation, and it is 

standard practice for employers to exploit this opportunity. 

“The effective use of the bargaining unit” . . . is “the most 

potent . . . instrument of preventive labour relations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, and I know that there are a 

number of examples that we can use. We can get into the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms when we speak to employees 

and unions and the appropriateness of bargaining units. 

 

And one of the points I do want to make before I wrap up, 

because I know many of my colleagues also have comments to 

make is that one of the issues, is that when we talk about 

whether we have a democratic vote or whether the card system 

is appropriate, if employers insist on mandatory balloting as the 

only means for unions to exercise their statutory and 

constitutional rights to the freedom of association which is 

guaranteed under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, then they 

should give up their impenetrable fortress mentality and 

enhance unions‟ accessibility to the workplaces. The free 

enterprise system is not a moral free zone. Unions‟ accessibility 

to workplace is a fair quid pro quo for mandatory elections. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is one of the areas that needs to be 

delved into farther and especially during committee. And I 

know my colleagues will state and more comments and more 

issues in their comments that they‟re going to make this 

morning. 

 

But I do just want to repeat we‟re not reaching national norms. 

We are going far beyond what is national norms. We can look 

at the other provinces have card certification or the federal 

government which has card certification. We have the freedom 

of speech is restricted to employers, not to the normal duties of 

business but to provide opinions. These are very contentious, 

and we need to understand the basis with which this labour 

legislation has grown and changed and evolved in our province 

to understand the issues that arise from these proposed 

amendments that have not been offered for public consultation. 

 

You know and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go back to, on many of 

these issues, a former colleague of mine who loved the 

parliamentary debate, loved the whole parliamentary process. 

We had a fairly long discussion one evening about putting in 

place laws and making amendments to current legislation. 

 

And this person said to me, you know as government you can 

put in any change you want. If you have the numbers, you can 

ram it through. But the art in this and the need in this is to make 

sure that the citizenry of Saskatchewan understand why you‟re 

making the change and feel that they have had opportunity to 

make comment and to give input to any changes that are 

proposed. We will follow a law that we understand why you did 

it. But when a law is jammed down the throats of citizens by a 

government that has the numbers to do so — and fair enough, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that can be done — people will not be, not 

be inclined to follow it. And it will cause problems. And there 

is a huge value in having actual, real public consultations on 

any of these issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will save the rest of my comments for 

committee. But I really want to make the point again: we need 

to move these Bills to public consultations. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to add a 

few remarks to the debate before the Bill goes off to committee. 

 

I was a nurse before the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses was 

founded in 1974. I know that dates myself, but I want to talk 

about my experiences in nursing before the union. Before, when 

I worked, we worked 10 shifts in a row, 10 eight-hour shifts in a 

row. That was the norm. Weekends off were at the whim of 

management. And particularly if you got married, you came 

back to work permanent nights for quite a while. There was no 

occupational health and safety regulations. There was no ability 

to influence unsafe working conditions. 

 

I took some time off from nursing and came back to an 

organized workplace under SUN contract language. It was a 

much different workplace. Order and safety were the focus. 

 

My colleague, the member from Walsh Acres, says these 

amendments are a step back for women and workplace 

improvements gained over the years. And I can certainly 

identify with her eloquent and well-researched comments. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ve worked in a workplace where the senior manager 

was a bully. I served as SUN local president during the time 

when merger transfer language was being written to address 

issues not ever dealt with before. 

 

In 1991 downsizing and mergers were the norm of the day and 

a very stressful time for nurses in the workplace. And as the 

local union rep, I took it as my job to keep all my colleagues as 

informed as possible about events that were going to have a 

major effect on their lives and on their working lives. Because 

of my vocal and visible contact with the employees, I was taken 

aside alone in a side room of a hospital cafeteria and told, and I 

quote, “My best advice to you, my girl, is to keep your mouth 

shut.” 

 

I learned several things from that encounter: never go alone to a 

meeting; never wear your nurse‟s uniform as it invites 

condescension and bullying and a general lack of respect; and 

the union, SUN, protected me in the workplace to continue to 

do the job as a union rep for my nursing colleagues. 

 

I also had a second incident that stands out in my mind over 

much the same issue and during the same time frame. 

Management was telling the staff what they wanted us to hear 

about the mergers and the transfers. The media were outside the 

door waiting for the results of the meeting. I was approached, as 

I sat asking questions, and intimidated to the point that I 

thought I was going to be struck. I knew the media outside 

would welcome the drama, and I was ready to take the hit. The 

manager backed away. I again learned several things. 

Management is not going to tell employees anything that 

doesn‟t move the employer‟s agenda forward, and intimidation 

is often the first line of attack. 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

This amendment to The Trade Union Act which my colleague 

from Walsh Acres has so carefully and thoroughly and 

thoughtfully criticized is very repressive. I won‟t repeat all her 

excellent points and arguments, but if anyone in the Assembly 

or the public thinks this is a positive step to improve the 

workplace for many, many people, experience has shown me 

that they would be wrong. Freedom of association is hard won, 

and any erosion can seriously damage workplaces. Intimidation 

is always possible, and the broad article talking about the 

employer‟s right to speak to the employees and offer their 

opinion is very troublesome. 

 

Here‟s the rub. What opinion? Informed by what information? 

And what recourse does a worker or union have when 

poisonous information is spread in the workplace? That 

information cannot be recalled. Employees feel real threats to 

their livelihood if the employers can gather employees and give 

opinions. Red flags are raised in many quarters, and my own 

personal experience has reinforced my skepticism that the 

employer will support a union drive and not try to undermine 

the organization for a certified bargaining unit. 

 

This package of essential service legislation, trade union Act 

amendments, and the gutting of the LRB [Labour Relations 

Board] and replacing it with Sask Party-minded folks sends a 

crystal clear message to labour from the Sask Party: we don‟t 

respect you; we don‟t like you; we don‟t trust you; and we will 

use all our powers to break you. This is not the workplace that 

says to working people looking to come to Saskatchewan or 

stay here to work, that we value you and come. On the contrary 

this is an insult to trade unionists and a regressive piece of 

legislation for all working people. 

 

The reason working people look to unionize is to improve their 

workplace and working life. If the employer is a good, fair 

manager, workers are unlikely to look to a union to fix their 

problems. When we look around Saskatchewan, many, many 

workforces are unionized. Workplaces are unionized. It does 

not speak highly of management practices here. I have little 

confidence that this amendment will improve any worker‟s life 

or work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my last point I want to talk about is public 

consultation. What is the Sask Party afraid of? If they can‟t 

defend their legislation, say so. The north Sask business 

association in Saskatoon had a luncheon last week talking about 

essential services. They had a panel. They had no such fear of 

public debate. They are playing more of a leadership role than 

the minister. There‟s no hurry for this legislation, no reason to 

deny public scrutiny and debate. My question again is what is 

the Sask Party government afraid of? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an opportunity 

for me to rise in this House again on behalf of the fine people of 

Regina Northeast. And as yesterday, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also a bit 

of a sad event that we find ourselves in, the need of discussing 

this type of legislation that‟s been brought forward by the 

government opposite — Bill 6, which is the Act to amend The 

Trade Union Act — which is just one further step by this 

government in its already declared war on labour and its 

attempt to strip away the rights of working men and women, 

these rights having been secured over years through hard work 

and negotiations. And it‟s sad to have to enter into this debate. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this 

particular piece of legislation, Bill No. 6, the sixth Bill put 

forward by this new government, a government who is about 

five months into its mandate only . . . Certainly its 

top-of-the-agenda issue has been to carry out an attack on the 

working men and women of Saskatchewan, and this Bill is sort 

of some of the ammunition they‟re using to do that. 

 

And it‟s disappointing in a lot of ways, Mr. Speaker, because 

you would think that the role of government would be to make 

life and circumstances better for the people they govern. That‟s 

always been my belief in government. Unfortunately, that‟s not 

the case opposite. But you‟d also think, Mr. Speaker, that 

governments would learn from past experiences. They would 

learn from the situations and experiences and mistakes of other 

jurisdictions. 

 

This type of legislation is really not new to the Canadian scene. 

If we hearken back a few years to about, I think it was about 

1995 in Ontario, a then newly elected Conservative government 

of Mike Harris went down much the same path. In fact this Bill 

No. 6 is really a blueprint of what Mike Harris brought forward 

in their very first term and their very first sitting of their 

government back in I believe it was 1995. 

 

We all remember Mike Harris who became the Premier of 

Ontario in a campaign that his party — the Conservative Party 

of Ontario — used as a theme, and I believe it was called, the 

theme was something like the Common Sense Revolution. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it soon became apparent to working men 

and women in Ontario that common sense had nothing to do 

with the Conservative government of Mike Harris. 

 

So what we see here is simply Bill 6 is a blueprint of what the 

initiatives and the attempts of Mike Harris to, to weaken unions 

and to create a situation where unions would find it very 

difficult to organize and they were, I would say, probably quite 

successful of that. Beginning in 1995, the Conservative 

government of Premier Mike Harris dramatically changed 

labour legislation and regulations in Ontario. Within months, 

within months of taking office, Mike Harris Tories introduced 

Bill 7. Well how about that, Mr. Speaker? The Bill to devastate 

labour, the rights of labour, particularly as far as the rights to 

unionize, to join forces together in a common voice in Ontario 

was Bill 7 brought in by the Mike Harris Conservative 

government. 

 

And what do we see here in Saskatchewan under this Sask Party 

government? Well the Act to amend The Trade Union Act, 

essentially for the same purposes as Bill 7 in Ontario, we see it 

as Bill 6 in Saskatchewan. Well how about that, one mirrors the 

other. So you can tell, Mr. Speaker, that the fundamental beliefs 

of the conservative right wing agenda that the Sask Party shares 

with the Conservatives across the piece here in Canada reflects 

one, reflects the other. So we have Mike Harris who had in 

1995 introduced a piece of legislation in Ontario called Bill 7, 

and it was the most regressive, anti-union, anti-worker, labour 

legislation in Ontario‟s history. Bill 7 was a complete re-writing 

of the Ontario Labour Relations Act. 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

Of particular importance were the changes made to the 

certification process through which employees were able to 

select and join a trade union. Well, Mr. Speaker, if history, if 

history is any teacher of ours — and it should be — we should 

always be looking at history and learning from history, and 

learning from the mistakes of history, so we don‟t repeat those 

same mistakes again. Well that‟s not been happening here in 

this government because this government has introduced in Bill 

6, a labour legislation that is going to strip away, strip away the 

rights of men and women to find a solid form of being able to 

join together, join their forces, join their thoughts, join their 

processes, join their opinions, and join their wants and their 

needs in a unified way under an umbrella of a union that will be 

able to represent them in negotiations with the employers to 

ensure that they get fair and reasonable compensations for their 

labours, for the services that they provide, be sure that they‟re 

treated fairly as far as other jurisdictions is concerned and 

workers in the same occupation or the same industry in other 

jurisdictions, as well as ensuring that they have the ability to 

enjoy a safe workplace, a safe, secure and a productive 

workplace. 

 

And that‟s all working people ever ask. That‟s the reason 

working people unite, so that they have the strength of voice to 

be able to sit down and negotiate with their employer. 

 

Back in Ontario, Ontario‟s experience at this type of legislation 

. . . . this most significant change to the Act introduced by Bill 7 

assisted of the advent of the first time in decades of a 

mandatory certification votes, even where the majority of 

employees in the workplace had already indicated majority 

support for a union through a provision of signing membership 

evidence. Usually this was a form of a union membership card. 

The Harris government asserted that these reforms, the reforms 

in Bill 7 made the certification process more democratic. 

 

Well have we heard that before, Mr. Speaker? Yes we have. 

We‟ve heard from the members opposite. We heard that from 

the minister when he introduced this Bill under the disguise of 

attempting to suggest to people of Saskatchewan that this Bill 

was more democratic than the previous processes used to 

determine certification. Well let‟s just see what the reality here 

is. 

 

Decades of labour relations experienced since the 1950s 

demonstrate that representation votes are inherently and 

profoundly undemocratic. Mandatory representation votes 

ignore the realities of the workplace. In order to be democratic, 

a vote must take place in a setting that is free from intimidation. 

The workplace is no such place. Indeed it cannot be such a 

place. 

 

The suggestion that mandatory certification votes are 

democratic reveals a wilful blindness and overwhelming power 

and control that exists in the employer‟s workplace. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, for anyone, anyone to ever suggest that this type 

of legislation is more democratic than the process, the card 

signing process that is in place now, is totally false. What we‟re 

seeing, Mr. Speaker, is an attempt by this government to further 

weaken the trade union movement in this province, to go after 

trade union people, to go after working people, to deny them the 

vehicle to be able to protect themselves, to be able to ensure 

that they receive fair and quality compensation for their efforts. 

That is the goal of this government through this Bill. 

 

And I find it passingly strange, Mr. Speaker, and I will quote 

from an article here from a critique of the proposed 

amendments to The Trade Union Act and it was done — and I 

will attempt to pronounce his name. It‟s — as soon as I find it 

here — it‟s Muthuchidambaram who is a Faculty of Business 

Administration of the University of Regina. And I‟d like to 

quote from here: 

 

In the 1960s, 35 % of the labour force was unionized in 

the United States. This declined by 12% in 2007, and in 

private sector only 7.4% were unionized at present. A 

recent survey shows that 58% of non-unionized workers 

want to join union if they can. Why can‟t they have the 

freedom of choice? 

 

Why can‟t they have the freedom of choice? And that‟s a good 

question, Mr. Speaker. Why is this government denying that 

freedom, denying the freedom of choice, not forcing one person 

into accepting something that they may or may not want but 

providing workers with the right of choice? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d be very happy to table this critique so 

that the members opposite will have the opportunity to read it, 

and perhaps the minister might have the opportunity to read this 

particular document and I‟m sure that he would find a lot of 

information and a lot of wisdom in these writings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not without verification that it has been 

determined in more than one circumstance that the present card 

check system is by far more fair and it provides the opportunity 

of choice to the worker. They can make a choice of whether 

they want to be unionized or not unionized. That‟s their choice 

and they could so in an atmosphere of free from intimidation. 

 

And after the 1995 experience of the Harris government, a 

professor from Queen‟s University — and I believe she‟s 

assistant law professor at Osgoode Hall — and the Queen‟s 

University in Ontario did a review of the 1995 experience of the 

Harris government in Ontario. And the professor was Sara Sinn. 

And she published an article after doing the review, and there 

was many articles that she pointed to in her report. But one that 

really comes to mind is: 

 

In recent years there has been a shift away from the card 

check certification process towards a requirement of 

unions will win a representation election vote in every 

case. This legislative change has been a subject of 

vigorous debate within the labour relations community. 

And it has been described as further Americanizing our 

certification process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great sadness that I see that we have a 

government here that‟s fresh into their mandates, less than six 

months into their mandate. And rather than being a progressive 

government and looking at ways and means that they can make 

life better for the people they govern, for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the working people of this province, they 

have decided to go the other way. They have decided to take 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

away the right of choice. They‟ve decided to strip away the 

rights that many workers have earned in this province over the 

years. They have decided to go backwards rather than going 

ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is one of the reasons why I‟ll certainly not be 

supporting this particular piece of legislation when it comes 

forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a privilege to 

be entering in debate of Bill 6, the amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. As I spoke earlier on Bill 5, some of the . . . I will 

not be repeating most of those comments, but I would like to at 

least for the record to perhaps do a slight review. And I would 

just like to start by saying the central question to this would be 

is the need for these changes, and why we are doing these 

changes. I guess questions as to . . . has the economy been 

damaged somehow by labour laws? And I think that all who 

look around can see that there is nothing wrong with the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

I guess questions about why do we want to — perhaps by the 

types of Bills that we‟re putting in here — put a dampening 

effect on wages, because that is definitely some of the things 

that this will be doing, particularly in terms of the way that all 

governments these days are competing for a labour force, a 

labour force that is there and that all provinces, especially in the 

West need. And the kind of negative signals that we are sending 

out to the rest of the country in terms of putting these labour 

views . . . some of the messages around the Premier when he 

was in opposition leader talking about war with labour. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I still haven‟t been 

able to understand is if there is so much support for these, for 

Bill 6, as the government has said or indicated, then why, I 

would ask, would they not take it out to public consultation? It 

should be a done deal. You know, it should be a done deal . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Members ask how many times 

should we ask that. I guess the issue is, is it‟s a question that 

should be answered, and we haven‟t received an answer and it‟s 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just ask 

members that if you have private conversation or debate, please 

meet behind the bar. But let‟s allow the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview the opportunity of being heard while he‟s 

speaking. The member . . . Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, originally The Trade Union 

Act had been brought in to balance, to balance labour laws. And 

now we see the same response in terms of saying we have to 

rebalance because somehow our labour laws are not balanced. 

 

In terms of we‟ve been calling for public consultations, really in 

my understanding, letters didn‟t go out to stakeholders, select 

groups of stakeholders, not until sometime in January of this 

year requesting for input. And I‟m not sure, but as we have 

stated before, how many times that this is a definition of 

consultation that is being used by the present government is far 

short of what usually happens in terms of new Bills. 

 

And I think we can talk about the impacts of this and the 

healthy workplaces and what will be. So, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of, in terms of some of the things, I think, when we look at and 

how you promote healthy workplaces, this Bill definitely does 

not add to that. 

 

I would simply go directly to the amendments and, just for the 

record, to read in some comments on there on 6(1) which talks 

about determining what trade union represents the majority of 

employees. It seems here the main change is that, no matter 

what level of support you sign up in cards in an organizing 

drive — even 100 per cent — the board will not certify you 

anymore. And they must hold a board-supervised vote. And 

also currently we were asking for the 25 per cent of employees. 

With this Bill, we see that there‟s a minimum of 45. Changes 

also have gone from where there were six months before on the 

sign up to 90, and the board will only order a vote if there is a 

45 per cent. And this is not again required. 

 

Now the kind of support also in this Bill is under question. And 

each of the unions presently use their own cards. There‟s never 

been a problem with that, but now somehow, this is also a 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I think, as some of the members have spoken 

about the idea of what actually constitutes a majority and 

whether 50 plus one now or . . . And it seems to be we have sort 

of the situation now of what they are calling double quorum, 

where you would in fact have to have more, the majority of 

employees voting. Some people have said that this leads to 

people . . . By simply people not voting, the employer will be 

able to identify people who are voting against the union. And 

this is not, definitely not, something that we would want if we 

are talking about a secret ballot. And that is most certainly a 

problem. 

 

The next, 11(1) unfair labour practice. The main part about the 

opinion piece where people have spoken about the rights of, I 

guess freedom, right to freedom of expression, where the 

employers and the degree that the employer can discuss, openly 

expressing their opinions. These opinions do not appear to be in 

any way confined to fact or anything. At least it does not appear 

this way at this time. 

 

And I guess that leads to all sorts of possibilities. I‟m not going 

to stand here and talk about all the different things that this 

might mean, Mr. Speaker. But definitely when you open up the 

ability to communicate, what will those communications be? 

How will they be interpreted, and interpreted by the Labour 

Relations Board? And again here, I will come back to that with 

just a few brief comments on that as to what that might mean. 

 

So in terms of the communication piece, put together with the 

majority piece, and in the way that this is structured, there are 

definitely some concerns here, Mr. Speaker, in terms of whether 

this will in fact make it more democratic — and when I say 

democratic, more of what we understand in our parliamentary 

system of majorities. 

 

The other question that is raised by this piece — and it‟s 

unclear as to what will be happening here — is whether the 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

opinion piece and the communication piece will apply to 

collective bargaining. During collective bargaining, will it apply 

to meetings? Will it apply to any other things in the workplace 

that perhaps go on? 

 

Now also back, just the cards, if I understand this correctly, 

cabinet . . . I know we‟ve heard before from the minister that he 

wasn‟t sure who would be determining these cards. He said that 

the Chair of the LRB would determine the cards. But if I read 

the legislation correctly, it is cabinet that‟ll be determining the 

cards. To have such an intrusive . . . I wasn‟t too clear or too 

sure why they would want to take over this role, but again they 

have, I guess, taken that role upon themselves. 

 

Section 33(3) was repealed, Mr. Speaker. I think the comments, 

I would restrict my comments to these pieces. There are other 

pieces there regarding the Labour Relations Board, but I think 

just a few comments on what the effects of these would be. I 

think many people have spoken, and many people have written 

comments saying that this will definitely be an anti — if I could 

phrase it in that way — anti-union piece of legislation and by 

that, making it harder to organize. 

 

[13:00] 

 

I think the big concern, obviously the big concern would be in 

the way that that department and that ministry has handled the 

Labour Relations Board because I think in quoting from the 

document from the labour lawyers association of Canada where 

they are definitely very concerned about the message that this 

sends to the practitioners who have to deal with this . . . You 

have to have confidence. There has to be impartiality. The 

tribunal has to be seen that way. 

 

I know the comments such as the Deputy Premier made that 

they have to be in line with the philosophy of the Premier, those 

things have all been said. I won‟t go on about those, but I think 

the rollout of this piece was not well thought out. And I‟m not 

sure where the blame should rest, but obviously the ministry at 

some point in time has to accept that. 

 

With those comments, Mr. Speaker, and then all the questions 

that remain here, I would look forward . . . I know there‟s been 

some talk about amendments in this, and I‟m uncertain as to 

whether they will be coming or not. But we look forward taking 

this Bill to committee, so I move that we move this Bill to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the . . . Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Question. The question before the Assembly 

is a motion by the minister that Bill No. 6, The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Human Services 

Committee, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has designated that Bill No. 6, 

The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 2 — The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So to bring my 

remarks on the Bill, Bill No. 2, The Enterprise Saskatchewan 

Act to a close within the second reading debate, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a piece of legislation that essentially serves two 

purposes. 

 

One is to provide for an advisory, the creation of an advisory 

council and advisory committee with a great marketing plan, 

Mr. Speaker. Enterprise Saskatchewan has been a term used by 

the Saskatchewan Party since 2003. It‟s meant different things 

over a period of time, but there‟s almost a brand name for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, whatever it happens to mean in any 

particular time period. So the Enterprise Saskatchewan would 

be one of the best known advisory councils. It may not one of 

the most effective advisory councils, Mr. Speaker, because 

essentially the matters that it was asked to be advised upon, the 

government is proceeding to make decisions, and decisions well 

into the future, Mr. Speaker, without seeking their advice. 

 

The second part of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is contained in 

section 23 and really has nothing to do with the earlier sections 

creating the advisory council that is called Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s the section that permits all Crown 

property, land, and equipment, and all Crown personnel that the 

government wants to move into the agency out of the Crown 

and into the agency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how this is intended to be used, Mr. Speaker, the 

government has not spoken to. The deputy minister has said, 

well it‟s just for the transfer of equipment and furniture during 

the transition period from a Crown corporation to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, now which doesn‟t explain why land and real 

property can be transferred into Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

doesn‟t explain why employees would be transferred into 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, doesn‟t explain really why the 

government would want to get a used desk from SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] or a file cabinet from 

SaskTel instead of from the usual source, from Saskatchewan 

Property Management. 

 

It‟s not really an answer, Mr. Speaker, and there will have to be 

an answer to that question. It looks like an advisory council, 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

Mr. Speaker, that no longer has any advice to give as a cover 

for, as I‟ve said before, Mr. Speaker, privatization by stealth. 

 

That‟s a summary of the remarks I made yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will have some questions about this when the 

matter does move on to committee, Mr. Speaker, but for the 

time being, those are the conclusion of my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will play a very important — in fact a 

critical — role in creating and ensuring that we have 

long-lasting economic growth in our province. The board has 

been challenged with some very important responsibilities — 

responsibilities like identifying and removing barriers to growth 

in our province, defining the different opportunities and 

challenges for the future of Saskatchewan‟s economy, and 

building stronger relationships between government and 

business in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan is new. It‟s different, 

and it‟s a better way of dealing with the economic development 

potential in our province. It will remove politics from economic 

development. It will allow the new government to avoid such 

things as SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], the fiasco which was a highlight of the previous 

NDP government. And let‟s keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

just one of the many examples of mismanagement by the NDP 

government when they meddled in the economic development 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan has some very important 

tasks at hand, and that‟s why it was important and necessary to 

appoint some of the very best from a very long list of nominees 

to represent their respective fields on this board and head up 

various sector teams. I am very pleased with strong 

representation from the individuals that have been appointed to 

the Enterprise Saskatchewan board. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, considering the importance of this board, I 

find it just a little concerning and shocking that the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin referred to its members as people 

who could be treated as trained chimps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me run through a list of a few of the 

representatives the members opposite consider to be treated as 

trained chimps. Gavin Semple, the deputy chair of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, a very successful businessman involved in many 

community organizations, Mr. Semple is the owner and the 

president of the Brandt Group of Companies, the largest 

privately held company in Saskatchewan. Do the members 

opposite believe Mr. Semple could be treated as a trained 

chimp? 

 

How about Hugh Wagner, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Wagner is the 

general secretary of the Grain Services Union and a past 

vice-president of the Federation of Labour. Mr. Wagner has 

been very highly involved in the labour movement and is a 

well-respected leader in the labour community. Does the 

opposition really believe Mr. Wagner would allow himself to be 

treated as a trained chimp? 

Mr. Speaker, how about Gary Merasty? Mr. Merasty served as 

the grand chief at the P.A. [Prince Albert] Grand Council. He 

sat as a Member of Parliament for 

Desnethé-Missinippi-Churchill River, and now he‟s the 

vice-president of the Cameco Corporation. Would the NDP 

truly believe this highly qualified First Nation leader with his 

long list of accomplishments would allow himself to be treated 

as a trained chimp? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard the position of the members opposite. 

It appears the NDP believe these people could be treated as 

trained chimps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the opposition feels that these highly respected 

and highly qualified people are simply pawns, it shows how 

truly out of touch they are with reality. These dedicated 

Saskatchewan leaders were chosen on their merits for 

leadership in their own fields and willing to give of their time 

for the province at financial losses to themselves. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you. This government does not 

share the views of the tired, old, completely-out-of-touch NDP. 

This government has the utmost respect for the individuals 

chosen to represent each of their fields on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. This government recognizes the great 

achievements that all of these board members have 

accomplished in their lives. And this government also realizes 

how all of Saskatchewan will benefit from the experience and 

the professionalism of these individuals. This government can 

recognize a trained chimp when they see one, Mr. Speaker, and 

there is not one on the board of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to end my comments by 

stating that this government looks forward to working with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. And I, along with the majority of 

Saskatchewan people, believe that the members of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will serve this province very well, and we thank 

all of them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with great 

pleasure to enter into the debate concerning Bill 2, An Act 

respecting Enterprise Saskatchewan. During a business dinner 

in 2005 the Premier, who at that time was the leader of the 

opposition, opened up a discussion about the Sask Party‟s ideas 

with a quote from Mark Twain. The quote is worth repeating 

here today, quote, “No man‟s life, liberty, or property is safe 

while the legislature is in session.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am mindful of this quote today as I enter into the 

debate concerning The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. While this 

legislature sits, now into the wee hours of the morning, the Sask 

Party government is attempting to pass a legislative package 

that will undoubtedly rob the people of Saskatchewan of their 

once-bright future. 

 

It is as this legislature sits that Saskatchewan‟s people‟s life, 

liberty, and property are at risk of being exchanged all together 

to secure the future for the Sask Party‟s large corporate donors 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

and select friends. This, we are reassured, is necessary to 

achieve a warmer business climate. 

 

Saskatchewan people are ever vigilant over the agenda of this 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. Throughout the short time 

this Sask Party government has been in office, Saskatchewan 

people have seen consistent attacks on the quality of their lives 

with the vengeful cancellation of Station 20 West in Saskatoon, 

their liberties with Bills 5 and 6, the cancellation of the dental 

sealant program, the cancellation of benefits for vulnerable 

workers, the shutdown of the Climate Change Secretariat, and 

on. 

 

And now they are waiting to see if the Sask Party government 

will sell their property — their Crowns — as well. 

Saskatchewan people want to know what is behind the gloss of 

the Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme and what the 

consequences will be to their lives, their liberties, and their 

property. What exactly does the Sask Party mean when their 

leader claims that Enterprise Saskatchewan is needed to, quote, 

“provide enterprise friendly leadership to our economy, to 

change our brand, and to warm up the business climate”? 

 

The Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme has had an interesting 

history since its invention under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. In 

2003 it was advertised in their glossy pamphlets as a new 

agency that would work in partnership with Saskatchewan 

business leaders. 

 

In that same glossy 2003 pamphlet, Saskatchewan voters were 

reassured that the four major Crowns — SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, and SGI — would not be privatized, while other 

Crowns such as Saskatchewan Transportation Company would 

be. To quote the pamphlet, quote “. . . only divested if and when 

a private sector business is prepared to continue providing the 

service.” 

 

To be clear, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has kept this promise. 

In The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act it reads in the preamble, 

quote “that The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act be 

respected.” Yet despite this reassurance in the legislation, 

Saskatchewan people know from the comments made in the 

2003 Sask Party pamphlet that the Sask Party has identified the 

Crowns and their policies as barriers to growth. The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan scheme is designed to unilaterally, without any 

input from the elected Assembly, remove barriers to growth. 

 

In 2004 we were told by the member from Swift Current that, 

quote, Enterprise Saskatchewan “. . . will develop a systematic 

and ongoing process to identify and remove barriers to growth 

in each of our key economic sectors.” We were told by this 

member to also keep in mind that, quote, “These initiatives are 

non-negotiable and hard wired right into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan.” Moreover we were also told as recently as last 

year quote, “. . . the attention and diligence of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan [also] include direct competition to business 

from various government agencies and Crowns attempting to 

diversify from core functions, as well as policies of the Crowns 

themselves.” 

 

It therefore stands to reason, Mr. Speaker, as past comments 

indicate, that Enterprise Saskatchewan could find Crowns a 

barrier to growth. 

[13:15] 

 

I hope the Sask Party government has every intention to ensure 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan honours the spirit of its own 

legislation — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. Nonetheless I 

would like to remind the Sask Party government that The 

Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act applies to more than 

just the four major Crowns that the Sask Party says it will 

protect. 

 

It also applies in part to Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, the Liquor and Gaming Authority, 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation, Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 

SGC [Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation] Holdings Inc., and 

TransGas Limited. 

 

How can this government and this Premier fully assure the 

people of this province that their assets will be safe from this 

group given its prior comments about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan‟s scheme and — more concerning Mr. Speaker 

— the lack of accountability of this group. The only 

accountability measure contained in Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s 

scheme is the annual report that is to be tabled before the 

Legislative Assembly detailing its financial decisions, financial 

decisions, Mr. Speaker, like the sale of Crown assets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess the larger question is this, if the Sask Party 

government, through the Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme, 

wants to respect The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Act, then why does Enterprise Saskatchewan have the power to 

transfer Crown or public assets to Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

Concurrently why does Enterprise Saskatchewan have the 

authority to divest these assets? Is it privatization by stealth, as 

the member for Meewasin just mentioned? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we delve into the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

scheme, we are left with the glaring question of, what is a 

barrier to growth? But before we go into the extent of these 

barriers — which I submit include the Crowns, Mr. Speaker — 

it is important to identify how exactly these barriers are 

determined and the scope of the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

scheme. 

 

One of the most important aspects of the scheme is the creation 

of sector teams that will identify barriers to growth in 14 sectors 

of the province‟s economy. This notion of sector teams, Mr. 

Speaker, is a dubious one, borrowed from the unelected and 

unaccountable CEO [chief executive officer] working groups, 

shaping the security and prosperity partnership of North 

America, otherwise known as the SPP. 

 

There are initiatives in the SPP that are aimed at harmonizing 

policies on food, drugs, security, immigration, refugees, 

manufacturing, the environment, and public health. Obviously 

these policies would ensure the lowest common denominator, 

ensuring barriers are not too big for big corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In keeping with the principles set out in the preamble of The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, among the stated core purposes 

of this scheme, according to section 4(a) of the Act: “to 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

establish sector teams to survey and identify barriers to growth 

in the following sectors of the Saskatchewan economy.” 

 

So this is right from The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, Mr. 

Speaker. They identified these sectors: (i) energy production; 

(ii) agriculture; tourism; forestry; advanced education, research 

and development; life sciences, synchrotron science and 

information technology; environment, Mr. Speaker; 

construction; trucking and transportation; financial services; 

manufacturing; mining; co-operatives; arts and culture; and any 

other prescribed sector. 

 

Beyond this mention, included in the last prescribed item, 

referring to regulations that are yet to be presented to the 

House, Mr. Speaker, there exists no other information in the Act 

regarding the sector teams. 

 

Not known, for instance, is the election process and 

qualification of these teams, Mr. Speaker. Not known is which 

individuals will be sitting on these teams, Mr. Speaker. Not 

known is if any conflict of interest regulations will be set in 

place to prevent the direct benefit of any team‟s member, Mr. 

Speaker. Also not known is if the members of these teams will 

be paid. 

 

Not known is the basic knowledge of whether the names will be 

made public. Further not known is if the sector meetings will be 

open to the public. Will any reports or correspondence 

considered by these teams be available to the public, Mr. 

Speaker? Moreover not known is what powers and terms of 

reference, if any, will these sector teams be granted. Will they 

too be a permanent fixture in the esoteric Enterprise 

Saskatchewan group, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It‟s bad enough that the members of the board for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan are unelected and unaccountable. Now the sector 

teams, making the recommendations, will be behind closed 

doors, meeting with the corporate interests who will 

undoubtedly be the team‟s beneficiaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing is for sure, Enterprise Saskatchewan is a great return 

on investment for corporations and donors of the Sask Party. 

Unfortunately Saskatchewan people will not receive the same 

benefits, Mr. Speaker. Some details are clear upon reviewing 

this alarming transcript. First, BC business told Premier Wall, 

Premier, which sectors needed an inventory of barriers. Second, 

that the influence of sector teams within the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan scheme will be long term. The Sask Party 

tourism plan of September 2007 also offers a bit more 

information about sector teams, Mr. Speaker, quote, “Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will establish sector teams in fourteen key 

sectors of the economy, including tourism, to identify barriers 

to economic growth and propose strategies to realize the full 

economic potential of Saskatchewan‟s economy.” 

 

Interestingly section 4(b) of the Act says only that the agency 

itself will, quote, “provide recommendations and advice for the 

removal and the reduction of barriers to economic growth in the 

sectors of the economy mentioned in clause (a) and report 

publicly on the Government of Saskatchewan‟s progress in 

these activities.” Section 4(d) notes that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will, quote, “establish, measure, monitor and 

report on goals and targets for Saskatchewan‟s economy.” 

If these actions, Mr. Speaker, are to be based principally on the 

barrier inventory identified and strategies proposed to remedy 

these barriers submitted by sector teams, then it seems the 

influence of these bodies could be quite substantial. Moreover 

the existence of such sector teams moves Enterprise 

Saskatchewan away from a body providing advice to a 

privatized version of a government department, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So far I‟ve identified the Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme as 

one that seriously lacks accountability. It is unaccountable in 

terms of its decision making and advice seeking. The people of 

Saskatchewan already elect decision makers through the 

democratic process, Mr. Speaker. These decision makers are in 

turn held accountable by the citizens of this province through 

elections, and in between elections through the formal 

legislative process. In this context it is clear that the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan scheme violates the very logic of our democratic 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so far I have identified that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan scheme is likely to accomplish privatization of 

this province‟s cherished Crowns by stealth, Mr. Speaker. 

Accordingly the legislative ability of the cabinet to transfer 

public assets and authority to Enterprise Saskatchewan is far too 

sweeping. New Democrats are fair and reasonable to describe 

this as a method to divest Saskatchewan of our Crown 

corporations outside of the legislature. Further, New Democrats 

continue to seek assurances from the Sask Party government 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan would, as consistent with the 

preamble of The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, fully respect 

The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have also addressed the significant influence of the secretive 

sector team structure that lacks any clear assurances that these 

team members don‟t just take whatever they want for 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. This is the most glaring and faulty 

party of the enterprise scheme thus far. 

 

I would like to now go back to a question I posed earlier. What 

is meant by the terminology barrier, and concurrently to what 

extent will the Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme negatively 

affect our environment and therefore our citizens‟ quality of 

life, Mr. Speaker? 

 

To see through the gloss of the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

scheme and understand its workings, we need to unmask what 

is meant by the term barrier. As I‟ve already demonstrated thus 

far, the term Enterprise Saskatchewan is nothing but poor 

public relations gloss — pure public relations gloss. Actually 

both words would work. The purpose of the gloss is to mask the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme as some kind of benign 

process that is beyond politics and meant to simply warm our 

business environment. 

 

What could be wrong with that? Mr. Speaker, what is wrong is 

the government‟s blatant attempt to reward large corporate 

donors and concurrently to elude any scrutiny or ethical 

responsibilities, be it to protect our environment, ensure our 

most vulnerable citizens are cared for with dignity and respect, 

or upholding our legal right to have a voice in our workplaces? 

Why can‟t the government simply tell us what they believe the 

barriers to our society ultimately potential to be? Why do they 

need a secretive, undemocratic group to hide behind? 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

As proven by the actions of this Sask Party government thus 

far, the environment isn‟t a concern at all, Mr. Speaker. They 

finally recognize they have adopted the NDP greenhouse gas 

targets. They finally are aware that the Alberta tar sands are 

“the most destructive project on earth” according to 

Environmental Defence, Mr. Speaker. Now they are also finally 

aware that acid rain comes our way from Alberta as a result of 

their race to just say yes to anything with dollar signs attached, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is unreasonable then to assume that they also know that the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme promotes a race to the bottom 

with respect to the environment, Mr. Speaker. Remember the 

SPP that I mentioned earlier, the idea of the sector teams that I 

asserted was likely borrowed by the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

scheme? Well, Mr. Speaker, it appears that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan has also adopted the idea that any real 

environmental standards may just be a little too redundant. It 

may constitute one of those so-called but not yet defined 

barriers to Saskatchewan‟s growth. The SPP is already showing 

a regulation agenda that shifts regulatory philosophy from 

precautionary to simply risk management. This means a serious 

erosion of environmental and health standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The cabinet directive on streamlining regulation advanced by 

the federal Conservative cousins of the Sask Party in 2007 

already places increased hurdles for a government department 

to perform its job and protect Canadians. It mandates that 

regulations should first have the least possible costs on business 

and should not restrict trade any more than absolutely 

necessary. 

 

Further the SPP business community report, similar to those 

sector teams, proposed to work under the legal umbrella of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has recommended that 

industrial chemicals contained in the Canadian domestic control 

Act and the US [United States] Toxic Substances Act should be 

harmonized so they no longer prevent some US goods from 

being sold in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It is safe to assume that 

given past practice, the chemical industry is not carrying the 

flag for stricter regulations, Mr. Speaker. In other words, 

business trumps environmental and health standards. I am sure 

that this will be the same philosophy under the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan scheme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us just briefly look at the Sask Party‟s position 

on the issue of regulation. In its Sask Party policy book of 2007, 

page 15, it reads under the title, “Reviewing Regulations to 

Remove Barriers to Sustainable Growth” that, quote. “Be it 

resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will mandate 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to review all government regulations 

every five years to eliminate barriers to environmentally 

sustainable growth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, not so nuanced or disguised in the Sask Party 

policy is the similarities to the philosophy of the regulation 

shared by their federal Conservative cousins. More striking 

however is the mistaken use of the term sustainable 

development. Apparently by removing regulations designed to 

protect the environment and our ecological health, we can 

actually achieve sustainable development, Mr. Speaker. This 

wording is so blatantly faulty, it is only worth mentioning to 

have a laugh. What is no laughing matter however, Mr. 

Speaker, is Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s potential negative impact 

on environmental standards. 

 

Looking at the legislative mandate, it is clear that any regulation 

that could possibly restrict the ability of a private firm to make 

a dollar constitutes a barrier and barriers. I remind this House 

that removing the so-called barriers is the raison d‟être of this 

select group in order to create a warmer business climate. 

 

[13:30] 

 

It will be warmer, Mr. Speaker, all right, as it only perpetuates 

and promotes the exasperation of climate change for instance. 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is diametrically opposed to the 

environmental protection and any sincere notion of sustainable 

development. 

 

But let not one of us in this House and across the province 

forget the enthusiasm the Sask Party had for — and for my 

knowledge still has according to Premier Stelmach — for the 

trade and labour mobility agreement, otherwise known as 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

— an agreement that would have certainly have been 

tantamount to a straitjacket when dealing with such issues as 

pesticide regulation, protecting our water from bulk water 

exports, or ensuring that resource extraction such as the tar 

sands occur only in the most environmentally sound manner 

possible and at the same time not occur too quickly. 

 

Under the Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme however, TILMA 

or a TILMA-like agreement might be deemed necessary. Just 

read the sweeping powers of the agency including 5(1)(b) 

which states that, quote: 

 

5(1) The agency may: 

 

. . . (b) enter into agreements that it considers 

expedient or desirable in the exercise of its powers or 

the performance of its responsibilities. 

 

Remembering that its responsibilities are to remove barriers and 

facilitate, enthusiastically and without hesitation or without any 

notion of proper public consideration, private sector growth. 

 

I further submit that the cabinet may direct Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to enter into a TILMA-like agreement and 

obviously blame the decision on the illogically labelled 

non-political-party body of Enterprise Saskatchewan. This 

scenario can be played out in section 4(g) and (h) and (i) as they 

read, quote: 

 

(g) to provide recommendations and advice to the 

Government of Saskatchewan respecting research and 

commercialization of innovation in Saskatchewan, 

including reviewing and making . . . [decisions] regarding 

programs and policies that may better co-ordinate, support, 

develop and promote and facilitate research and the 

commercialization of innovation; 

 

(h) on the request of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 

to undertake any program or activity for the purposes of 

achieving the objectives described in clause (g);[and] 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

(i) to undertake any other prescribed activities and 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the logic used to justify (a) the prerequisite need 

for Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme and (b) the esoteric 

operation of such a heartless operation is so faulty, so dubious, 

and so incredulous that it is truly beyond comprehension. 

 

Saskatchewan people expect more from their government, Mr. 

Speaker. They expect a government actually be concerned with 

securing the future, would seek to ensure the benefits of 

economic growth were more equally shared. 

 

The values enshrined in Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s theme are 

opposed to the ethics of democratic citizenship and 

environmental sustainability. The most important aspect of 

people‟s lives is not the dollars made by corporate friends and 

the insane belief in government regulations designed to protect 

and enhance our citizens‟ quality of life are barriers. Rather, the 

most important aspect of citizen lives are the quantity and 

quality of jobs, the extent of pollution, the nature and generosity 

of the social programs that care for us and our neighbours, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party government should devote more energy and 

time to meeting the genuine needs of Saskatchewan people and 

not give a rubber stamp to an esoteric route to adopt — without 

allowing for any true notion of public debate — an agenda to 

grow at whatever cost to our environment, our health, and our 

legal rights. It is difficult to believe that, in a legislature that 

offers its citizens a capacity to deliver on the needs to protect 

our environment and help those who are struggling, that this 

Sask Party government instead decides to deprive citizens of 

their ability to have a voice in their future. I guess that is too 

political, whereas backroom meetings with undisclosed players 

is simply a way to grow enterprise and make Saskatchewan a 

better place. 

 

Today with The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, we see an 

intensive effort to undermine the significant gains that have 

been won through decades of work and struggle. The Sask Party 

has shown through Enterprise Saskatchewan Act that it is the 

antiquated 19th century notion of economics — greed before 

people. Besides the esoteric, Enterprise Saskatchewan has as its 

goal to increase competitiveness that will ultimately make 

government less democratic, create a back door for decision 

making, and — not to put too fine a point on it, Mr. Speaker — 

easier to pollute and easier for the government to shrug their 

responsibilities when it comes to the environment and 

ultimately our health, Mr. Speaker. 

 

New Democrats know that a healthy market economy is one 

that delivers for its citizens, one that is human, and one that is 

equally shared with everyday working people. Saskatchewan 

people want to build. They don‟t want to hand over their 

dreams, their ambitions, and their hard work to an 

unaccountable, unelected group of friends of the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. As a StarPhoenix article dated December 17, 

2007, puts it, quote, “Enterprise Sask. idea sends chills up 

spine,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the article the author expresses that, quote: 

 

. . . references to such horrors as “competitive challenges” 

and “obstacles to economic development” . . . is not about 

ordinary people reaping the fruits of this province‟s 

prosperity. It is all about the rich (read friends of 

government) getting richer and the rest of us dealing with 

the fallout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I concur with these sentiments and join fellow 

New Democrats in opposing The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. 

Saskatchewan people deserve much more than what this 

legislation offers. They deserve an economy that treats people 

fairly, where there is a concern about our planet, where there‟s a 

genuine version to addressing inequality. They deserve a 

government that is willing to work and have a vision. 

 

Unfortunately all Enterprise Saskatchewan offers is the 19th 

century economics that is blind to climate change and 

environmental destruction, blind to poverty, and blind to human 

well-being. And to allow this Bill to be further scrutinized, Mr. 

Speaker, I now ask to have this moved to committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 2, The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would refer this Bill to 

the Economy Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 1 — The 

Growth and Financial Security Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

see at least one of the members looking at his watch, and I want 

to set his mind at ease that I‟m not going to belabour some 

points that had been made on this particular Bill. I might refer 

to a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] report on the 

CBC News from December 14 of last year which encapsulates 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

the issues that we have expressed concerns about with respect 

to this particular Bill. 

 

And this particular report was made available to the public after 

the government introduced or said that it was going to introduce 

The Growth and Financial Security Act to replace The Balanced 

Budget Act. And that report indicates in part, not in full: 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has flip-flopped on the need for a 

“rainy day” fund to avoid falling into deficit. 

 

Before the Nov. 7 election, the party criticized the former 

[NDP] government for dipping into it‟s Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund to balance its books. 

 

On Thursday, the new Saskatchewan Party government 

said it will wind down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund as 

well as a second rainy-day account — the infrastructure 

fund. 

 

It said it will also set up a new contingency fund, called 

the Growth and Financial Security Fund, that will be used 

to balance the budget. 

 

And further on in the report it indicates: 

 

Before the election the Saskatchewan Party said it would 

draw down the NDP‟s fund and once it was gone, it would 

return to “transparent” bookkeeping. 

 

Instead, the new legislation will make this fund a 

permanent fixture in the new government. 

 

So there were lots of comments, Mr. Speaker, about how it is 

that this political party could be making these comments before 

the election about the then called Fiscal Stabilization Fund and 

now replace it with a very similar fund after the election. So I 

don‟t want to go on to that. 

 

I did leave off last night explaining that one of the reasons that 

the legislation does in fact need to be amended, the balanced 

budget legislation that currently governs budgets needs to be 

amended, is that The Balanced Budget Act provides or has in 

place prohibitions and restrictions on the extent to which the 

government can transfer funds from the Crown Investments 

Corporation to the General Revenue Fund which this 

government has done with this budget. And unless the 

legislation is changed, the government‟s budget would in fact 

be illegal given the legislation that currently governs budgets. 

 

And that is a good reason, Mr. Speaker, for us to move forward 

in a timely fashion to examine that issue and to look at 

changing the legislation. We also need, I think at all times, a 

good legislative framework that governs budgets in 

Saskatchewan. The reason that we do this is that the 

Saskatchewan government in the 1980s went down a road of 

undisciplined budgets and frankly financial dealings. . . You 

might say dealing with budgets in way that were, well it 

resulted in massive debt increase for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so the government in the 1990s in response 

set up balanced budget legislation. 

 

When we examine this new Act, The Growth and Financial 

Security Act, we see that in the main it continues to ensure that 

there will in fact be balanced budgets as we go forward. 

 

It also deals with the fact that Saskatchewan has extremely 

volatile revenues — and people will know this — in the oil 

sector where now oil prices are very high. But oil prices have 

also been very low, and oil prices could fall again and therefore 

having a major impact on government revenues, and therefore 

there needs to be some mechanism, whether it‟s called a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund as the present legislation does or whether it‟s 

called a Growth and Financial Security Fund, essentially the 

same thing. 

 

We recognize that legislation should provide for that so that as 

we go forward that we can assure the people of Saskatchewan 

that they can continue to have confidence in the budgets that are 

placed before them . . . may not necessarily agree with all 

aspects of the budget, but that when it comes to the fiscal policy 

that underlines those budgets, they can have some confidence in 

those budgets as we go forward. 

 

And of course also to . . . [inaudible] . . . confidence of the 

financial community outside of Saskatchewan so that when they 

review our budgets, that they can continue to provide us with 

their support when we go into the bond markets to borrow 

money, as we will need to continue to do. 

 

So those are good reasons for moving forward with this 

legislation. We do have a number of specific questions on this 

Bill, but I think those questions are best addressed in committee 

when we come to it. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 1, The Growth and 

Financial Security Act be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

refer this Bill to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 4 — The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 

(élections à date fixe) be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to resume debate on Bill No. 4. When we‟d had the 

introductory comments from the members opposite in terms of 

this debate, and again this has sort of caused some laughing on 

this side of the House in terms of the speech that was given by 

the Minister of Justice, talks repeatedly about fixed election 

legislation. And of course on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to make very clear, we‟re definitely not in 

favour of fixed election legislation. I‟ll leave it to the members 

opposite to explain their position with regards to fixed 

elections. 

 

[13:45] 

 

But as to the substance of the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, there is 

much to recommend this measure. We think it‟s worthy of 

consideration. We‟ll have more to say in the committee, Mr. 

Speaker. But I guess I‟m glad to participate in this debate 

because of course I was sent by the good folks from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre to speak out on their behalf. 

 

The very constituency of Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker, came 

into existence . . . Regina in the ‟60s used to be represented on a 

city-wide basis. There was a Regina West multi-member seat. 

There was a Regina East multi-member seat. And the first 

election where there was actually a distinct Regina Centre seat 

was the ‟71 election. 

 

And in that election, Mr. Speaker, the total electors in Regina 

Centre — again, the forerunner of the constituency I have the 

honour of representing — the total electors in that constituency 

were numbered 17,599. And of course the winner of that 

election in the 1971 general was Allan Blakeney. And it was the 

year before I was born, I might add, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why I remark on that is that one of the things that that election 

was notable for was the distinct efforts that had been made on 

the part of the then Ross Thatcher Liberal government to 

gerrymander the system and to interfere with the democratic 

rights of the citizens of Saskatchewan, and particularly as it 

played out in Regina. 

 

So whereas in Regina Centre you had 17,599 electors, in 

Regina Albert Park which was carved out as a little boutique, 

Thatcher-friendly riding, the number of electors were 4,573. 

Now it‟s quite the difference, Mr. Speaker — 17,599 on the one 

hand, 4,573 on the other. And I guess in terms of the offence 

that the people of Regina Centre took to the way that their 

democratic right, their franchise was being so messed around 

with by the then Thatcher government, and the way that, you 

know, the almost 4:1 difference in terms of electors between 

Regina Centre to Regina Albert Park. They took great offence 

to that, Mr. Speaker. And in fact my father who had grown up 

in a CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party] family got active in that election, took, you 

know, took pains to get out there and knock on doors because 

such, you know, he had the general sort of philosophical 

agreement with the CCF-NDP and that sort of upbringing. But 

the thing that tipped him over the edge into becoming an active 

partisan on the part of the NDP was just this thing, this 

anti-democratic behaviour on the part of the Thatcher Liberal 

government. 

 

So I guess in terms of the teachings I was brought up with, in 

terms of the political teachings that I‟ve been brought up with, 

democracy is something that was always held up for me as 

being central to the work that you want to do in the legislature 

on behalf of the people and so it‟s, again, it‟s a pleasure to 

participate in this debate on a fixed election . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure today to introduce guests of our governments 

from the Pacific NorthWest Economic Region. The PNWER is 

an important regional organization that allows members to 

address transboundary issues in the spirit of co-operation with 

the goal of enhancing the region‟s competitiveness. Today with 

us, to my left, Matt Morrison, executive director; Lisa 

Wilkinson, ministerial assistant to the Hon. John van Dongen 

from British Columbia; Joan McIntyre, MLA for West 

Vancouver-Garibaldi; and second last but not second least, the 

PNWER president, representative George Eskridge from the 

state of Idaho. 

 

I‟d also, Mr. Speaker, like to take the opportunity to introduce 

Lara Zaluski our researcher and super hostess for the last couple 

of days. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative 

et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and 

certainly we join with the members opposite in making 

greetings to the guests today. 

 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

The set election dates is but one sort of tool in the democratic 

reform toolbox that I think is worthy of consideration. And 

again, I‟m glad that we‟re having this debate. I think this is a 

worthwhile debate to have. 

 

On the CCF-NDP sides of political dealings in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, you can look through history and the CCF-NDP 

has always had their elections on or about four years, 

sometimes a little more, sometimes a little less. And I guess 

we‟ve always believed in using that roughly, the four-year 

period. 

 

And I guess it‟s interesting that this is brought forward as hard 

and fast legislation by the members opposite. In terms of the 

last party, the last government party to go, you know, so far 

beyond the four years was of course the Grant Devine 

Progressive Conservatives. And a number of individuals on that 

side certainly sought election in that 1991 election which was 

five years plus a day. 

 

So in terms of the parties in the political history of 

Saskatchewan that have made, you know, rather egregious 

affronts to that four-year convention, it being a five-year limit 

under law, but that four-year convention I think, you know, in 

terms of comparing our side and our history to the history and 

the tradition on other sides I think we‟re quite happy to do that. 

 

And so again, we, you know, four years . . . fixed election, I 

don‟t know that substantially we‟ve got a lot of problem with 

moving to a legislated approach to that. But again that had been 

certainly the practice on the part of the CCF-NDP for the great 

majority of elections that we had anything to do with calling. 

 

Now I guess the thing that is interesting is that across Canada as 

you survey what‟s been going on in the front of democratic 

reform the last decade has been a time of great activity, and it‟s 

interesting to look at what‟s happened in places like British 

Columbia, Ontario, New Brunswick, perhaps even what‟s been 

undertaken in Ottawa. And the thing that is interesting, the 

measures that have been taken around things like, you know, 

certainly in the ‟90s in Saskatchewan we moved to legislation 

that tightened up the boundary, the electoral redistribution 

aspect of our democratic functions. 

 

We moved to a six-month limit on by-elections. And certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, I came into this House via a by-election, and so 

I‟m very cognizant of the history that had gone before in terms 

of places where they‟ve sat for, you know, upwards of a year 

and a half without democratic representation because the 

government of the day — for whatever reason, be it fear of the 

electors or what have you — did not want to call an election. 

 

There‟ve been changes made in terms of the moving to the very 

machinery of our democratic process in terms of tightening up 

some of the procedures there to make it more about fairness and 

more about ensuring that when citizens engage in the 

democratic process that the basic rules of engagement are fair 

and open and accountable. But I guess, you know, I see this, 

this measure is one more step in that direction and as such I‟m 

glad to see it. 

 

But I think that a place where there‟s more room for activity, 

Mr. Speaker, I think of things like electoral finance reform. 

Certainly the provinces of Manitoba and Quebec, federally 

we‟ve seen great strides taken there in terms of electoral finance 

reform, and I realize it‟s a contentious topic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And just this very day, we had members of the opposition 

making assertions about individuals or groups that donate to 

one side or the other and how that impacts the democratic 

system. And I guess I‟d say, you know, if it‟s such a concern 

then perhaps what they should do is, you know, reach into that 

democratic reform tool box and perhaps move to a regime 

something like that which we see in the federal situation or in 

the provinces like Manitoba or Quebec. 

 

I also find it interesting that there is no consideration made of 

things like the Australian approach to mandatory voting. I‟ve 

got sort of mixed opinions on mandatory voting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, I think it‟s good that our elections will be taking 

place in November because, something I find, you know, no 

end of frustrating and quite frankly depressing, Mr. Speaker, is 

when you talk to people that, you know, they‟re not going to 

vote. They‟ve completely given up on the democratic system — 

and not just that, you know, there are reasons, arguments to be 

had on that front — but they won‟t even take the trouble to get 

down to the polling station. They won‟t get up off the couch to 

go and cast that ballot. And again I guess I‟m glad that the fixed 

elections are taking place in November because it gets us close 

to that Remembrance Day, November 11. And you know, if 

ever there was an argument for people to get down to the 

polling station and at least making the effort, if you don‟t agree 

with any of the candidates, you know, mark none of the above. 

Fair enough. But especially around Remembrance Day, people 

should be, you know, exercise that democratic franchise and 

realize that it‟s been hard-won and hard fought for and that to 

take it so much for granted is, I find, quite alarming, Mr. 

Speaker. So there‟s no consideration of this. 

 

There‟s no consideration of the voting age. And again there‟s 

been a conversation at different places in the country around the 

voting age being 18 in some jurisdictions or in, pardon me, in 

most jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. And there has been some 

question from time to time about whether or not that‟s an 

appropriate voting age and whether or not 16 would be a better 

voting age. 

 

And certainly there‟s an argument to be made that if you can 

have a good civics course and a way to engage students when 

they‟re in high school to get them excited about democracy, to 

get them fully aware of what their democratic rights are, and if 

they have the chance to engage in the democratic process, you 

know, in a good transition from what they‟re learning in school 

into real life, there‟s I think a lot to be worthwhile to be 

considered there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly I think of Peter Adams federally who‟s done a lot 

of work for that for the Liberal Party. 

 

And I guess, you know, there are a number of these topics that 

other jurisdictions have considered under the general heading of 

democratic reform, be it through citizens‟ assemblies or 

legislative reform commissions. And again there‟s an argument 

to be made there that in terms of the basic rules of how we 

conduct ourselves in a democracy, be it the very rules of play 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

that govern us as political actors in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s a good argument to be made that that should be left to 

the citizens themselves, that it should be taken out of the hands 

of the politicians and put in the hands of the citizens to make 

recommendation and to make known their counsel on what they 

see as the best way to safeguard and promote our democracy. 

 

And I guess that‟s something that we had proposed in the 

campaign, Mr. Speaker, in terms of moving to a citizens‟ 

assembly to consider some of these broader questions around 

how we‟re being served by our democratic process. 

 

You know, one thing in particular, Mr. Speaker, is the whole 

question of what is the electoral system generally. Other 

jurisdictions have considered things such as the single 

transferable ballot, mixed member proportional arrangements, 

where there‟s reckoning made in terms of the actual vote that is 

cast for people, and also that important connection between 

electors and their elected representative and the legislature. 

Some consideration has been given over the years to things like 

a democratic top-up. 

 

[14:00] 

 

I know that both sides of the House, we‟ve confronted 

circumstances. For the NDP, in 1986 we had a greater 

percentage of the popular vote than the then Grant Devine 

Progressive Conservatives. In 1999 the Sask Party had a greater 

percentage of the popular vote than the New Democratic Party. 

 

And again with each electoral system, Mr. Speaker, each has its 

own sort of benefits and problems, but there has been that 

consideration arising from the fact that, you know, how is it that 

you cast these votes and then the party that gets the most votes 

does not form the government. And again there are arguments 

for and against. 

 

There are different arguments to be made in terms of federally 

versus provincially, but I think it bears consideration by. . . And 

this is where I do support something like a citizens‟ assembly 

where you put that consideration and that deliberation in the 

hands of the very citizens who are the basic building block of 

our democracy, you know, and again taking it out of the hands 

of the political actors. 

 

So in terms of the fixed election dates itself, you know, again, 

fair enough, Mr. Speaker, but we thought it could have been 

part of something more, could have been part of a greater 

renovation and consideration of how well the people of 

Saskatchewan are being served by their democratic institutions, 

and we‟d still, you know, be interested to see if there‟s 

something that can be done to again better engage, better serve 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the Bill itself, one thing I‟d be interested to inquire after, and 

perhaps in committee, is in earlier renditions of Sask Party Bills 

around fixed election dates there was an allowance made for 

whether or not with the approval of two-thirds or more of the 

House, that the life of the Legislative Assembly could be 

extended. The life of the legislature could be extended in the 

case of war or insurrection or what have you. 

 

And certainly the last time that something like this was 

experienced in Saskatchewan was after the ‟38 election. The 

election was supposed to be called for 1942-43. The then 

William Patterson Liberals extended the life of the legislature to 

1944, and in June ‟44 of course were defeated by Tommy 

Douglas and the CCF. So there‟s no such provision in that 

regard contained in this legislation. I‟d be interested to find out 

why that is. 

 

In comparing this legislation to legislation in place in Ontario 

and federally, those two pieces of legislation contain measures 

that enable the Chief Electoral Officer to call a date that is more 

appropriate should there be a conflict with a major religious 

holiday for example, Mr. Speaker. And again the intricacies of 

the solar calendar versus the lunar calendar and all of that, I‟d 

have to see a bit more in terms of projections. But certainly I 

know in the case of Ontario, they ran into a conflict with Yom 

Kippur which is, you know, one of the most holy holidays in 

the Judaic calendar. And certainly, you know, there‟s no 

remedy in that regard under the legislation as it‟s proposed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So barring that, we think this is worthy of consideration. We 

think there are things to recommend this legislation. We don‟t 

think it goes far enough of course in terms of other measures or 

other tools that could have been seized upon out of the 

democratic reform toolbox. But I guess, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

happy to be entering into the debate. We‟re happy to be 

knowing when the next election comes. 

 

One of the criticisms of fixed election dates is that it extends 

that electoral campaign, and I‟m sure our friends across the way 

will find out about the way that the campaign seems to extend 

as they get closer to the election date. And of course they 

wouldn‟t say that up front, I‟m sure, but we‟ll be interested to 

see how that fact of political life in Saskatchewan is played out 

the closer we get to November 2011. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, that‟s about all I‟d like to say on the Bill 

at this time. Again I‟m quite happy to be participating in this 

debate. We‟ll be following this Bill in committee with great 

interest. And with that I‟ll cede the floor to my colleague from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy today to 

be on my feet to speak to this Bill. I think there are many 

outstanding questions that should be answered regarding this 

Bill. The principles regarding the Bill are fundamentally sound, 

but there are some questions that have been raised. When I 

travel throughout my constituency, I hear a few different things, 

and they‟re questions related to predictability — which they 

find helpful — accessibility, tradition, symbolism, and the 

Americanization of our electoral system. 

 

It‟s been an interesting experience for me, and once again I‟m 

humbled to have been elected in our democracy and to be able 

to take a Bill out to the people to have them scrutinize it. 

 

I would characterize the reviews as being mixed with people 

expressing a wide range of opinion; some being appreciative of 

predictability, others being categorically outraged at the 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

American-style system that this helps to ensure. By extension it 

ensures the lengthening of the campaign period. 

 

In regards to Americanization, for those that don‟t know, 

American federal campaigns have dates that are static, and this 

causes what we‟ve seen in the last year in the US with 

Huckabee and McCain and Clinton and Obama campaigning 

for months and months on end. 

 

Campaigns are incredibly costly. As an example, Obama raised 

55 million in February alone to aid in the continuation of his 

campaign efforts. Now granted we see nothing of this 

magnitude in the Saskatchewan provincial election, but I think 

the principle and the means by which funds can be obtained 

provide a representative comparison. 

 

These funds come from two main sources, generally individuals 

and corporations. I think for the most part people in 

Saskatchewan are comfortable with fundraising originating 

from individuals dispersed throughout the community — people 

that have a particular ideology that they‟d like to support. 

 

I‟d like to quote now, if I could, Mr. Speaker, from a session 

forum I recently attended where folks were discussing this very 

issue. Here‟s the comment that was provided in the forum, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Sure, as long as we realise that the last year of every 

mandate will be an election campaign that we pay for just 

like the U.S. Personally, I think it‟s a big waste of time 

and money. 

 

Are there ways to control that? Such as no campaigning 

before a specific date. Also candidates will not be official 

until after a certain date and, under our proposal of equal 

campaign funding there would only be campaign funds 

available as of a certain date. 

 

Obviously this person raises some interesting concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. They too are fundamentally concerned with the 

massive amounts of money required for these campaigns, and 

they ask the question, are there ways to control the spending? A 

question I believe speaks to the heart of democracy. 

 

Will we accept that money becomes a major factor in one‟s 

ability to legitimately seek public office? Will we stand by and 

allow only those with ample needs to become elected in our 

democracy? Or will we stand for democracy that might have 

members from all walks of life — a truly representative 

democracy? 

 

I‟d like to speak a little further to Sask Party‟s legislation, and 

how it appears to break still another one of their promises. In a 

government media release, December 18, ‟07, the Premier‟s 

saying the following: “„Before the next election, we will also be 

keeping our promise to restrict spending on government 

advertising in the lead-up to the election.‟” 

 

In light of this recent promise regarding tertiary health care 

centre in Prince Albert, a second bridge in Prince Albert, his 

promise of having a plan to find a solution to the pulp mill 

issue, his promise to provide funding for major expansion of the 

Prince Albert airport, who would trust that this promise would 

be carried out? Nobody in Prince Albert. 

 

Why doesn‟t this Bill contain one clause to limit campaign 

spending? Why doesn‟t it contain a clause that will not allow a 

candidate to be officially named until a specified period before 

an election? Why does this legislation appear to favour the 

interests of the corporate instead of the interest of the people? 

What does unrestricted spending mean to our democracy? Is it 

an intentional omission? What is to be gained by not having 

done thorough work in the preparation of this Bill? Should we 

take the Premier at his word, that he will keep his promise and I 

quote, “. . . to restrict spending on government advertising . . . 

[leading up] to the election.” 

 

I note with interest that this promise says absolutely nothing of 

an individual candidate‟s ability to spend. The people I have 

spoken to have valid concerns regarding the possibility of 

opening up our democracy to the highest bidder. Will we indeed 

end up with a government that is the best government money 

can buy, as they have in the US? Is this going to be a Bill about 

graft and privilege? Why does this Bill contain not one clause 

that might serve to address the possibility of abuse in our 

electoral system? There are a great number of these questions 

that remain unanswered, and I‟m concerned at this point that 

answers might not be forthcoming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party‟s put out enough 

discussion papers in the last 10 years to fill a garbage can; well 

at least in my house they fill a garbage can. How is it that every 

one of these papers contains discussion on many kinds of 

democratic reform, and yet this is the only item that makes it 

into this government‟s legislation? Please allow me the 

indulgence of providing you with a few examples. 

 

The Sask Party guiding principles include and I quote, 

“Democratic reform to make government more responsive to 

the people it serves.” In their ‟99 election platform entitled The 

Way Up, they promised to implement MLA recall which is what 

they referred to as quote, “the ultimate tool of accountability” 

to, and again I quote, “to give voters the power to fire their 

MLA mid-term.” 

 

It also promises to use binding provincial referenda where 

appropriate to settle major issues. But it didn‟t end there, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2002 their handbook entitled Our Vision of a New 

Saskatchewan promised to, and again I‟ll quote, “explore the 

preferential balloting and proportional representation systems as 

alternatives to the current system.” 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t end there. Believe it or 

not, there‟s more. I think you begin to understand why my own 

refuse container can no longer stand reform. In June 2004 the 

current Minister of Government Services said, and I quote, “I 

think we will need to be seriously looking at if you‟re going to 

open up the electoral debate, on what kind of electoral system 

we have then we should be taking a very serious look at the 

single, transferable vote.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the current Sask Party policy book contains 

an entire section dedicated to democratic reform which, while 

mentioning set election dates, also includes the greater use of 

free votes and the promise that, quote, “. . . a Saskatchewan 

Party government will study Saskatchewan‟s electoral system 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

and make recommendations . . . [that will change] 

representation and encourage voter participation.” 

 

How is it, Mr. Speaker, that with all this overture toward 

massive reform that we get a Bill that contains only fixed 

election dates? No reform on any elements alluded to in their 

can full of policy papers, a prime example of say one thing and 

do another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the members opposite are well familiar 

with a gentleman named Karl Rove. Rove is the former deputy 

chief of staff to George Bush. I‟m sure they‟ll be surprised to 

learn of Rove‟s comments offered recently at the Fraser 

Institute in Vancouver. In his address to the institute he 

preaches of his experience gleaned in his time as a Republican 

election strategist. And he states unequivocally that this 

proposed American method of campaigning, quote, “is an 

exhausting undertaking that lasts far too long and wears 

candidates down.” He further suggests that the campaign 

process leaves candidates with very little time to formulate their 

campaign ideas and offer solid plans to the electorate, which 

results in very few specific details on their proposed policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was again looking for information on the subject 

of fixed election dates and stumbled upon some information in 

a forum, and noted with interest the comment provided by an 

attendee. The person raised two more interesting points. They 

mentioned how they too are concerned that, I quote, “fixed 

election dates are a template for abuse, just like they are in 

America.” I think again that this speaks to a fundamental 

concern that people have about this legislation. They have 

concerns that this will open up our process to abuse. Another 

point raised by the same person is that they are quite happy 

having things, a distinctly Canadian way of doing things. 

They‟re proud of the system we‟ve got here as it helps define 

our Canadian identity. 

 

I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that this person raises a number of 

very valid concerns regarding this legislation. I‟m not 

convinced that answers are forthcoming. With that, at this time 

I would like to move this Bill to committee for scrutiny in that 

forum. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

that Bill No. 4, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to agree to the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 4, The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election 

Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 be referred to the Committee for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies . . . The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election 

Dates) . . . this Bill stands referred to the Crown and Central 

Agency . . . Oh sorry, sorry, intergovernmental. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice is 

correct. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Okay. The Bill stands referred to the 

intergovernmental committee. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 3 —The Potash 

Development Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today it‟s 

my pleasure to resume debate on the Bill No. 3, An Act to 

repeal The Potash Development Act. When I last spoke on this 

Act, I had spoken about some historical fact, that potash was 

discovered in Saskatchewan in 1942 and that potash was 

subsequently proven up, subsequently proven up by extensive 

drilling that was sponsored by the then government of the day, 

the then Tommy Douglas CCF government of the day which 

proved up vast, vast resource in potash that belonged of course 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That was our natural resource, and the government of the day, 

Mr. Speaker, wanted very much to enhance job opportunities 

for people, to bring in revenue. The situation for the provincial 

government was such that revenue was not in abundance like it 

is today. There was a shortage of money available to do things 

like build roads and maintain hospitals and schools and those 

sorts of things that were very necessary with a relatively young, 

vibrant, growing province. So that‟s part of the history. 

 

What I had missed was not an insignificant part of the potash 

history in Saskatchewan. I‟m going to fast forward . . . Well let 

me, before I get too far fast forwarded, let me say that three 

companies, Mr. Speaker, were granted very, very significant 

royalty concessions because the Douglas socialist government 

of the day had entered into agreements with the private sector. 

And these three private sector companies faced very significant 

challenge in getting through down to roughly 3,000 feet below 

the surface so that they could mine Saskatchewan‟s potash. 

 

The part of the history proves that the Blairmore Formation of 

water proved to be the biggest technical challenge that faced 

that entire industry. But the response of the government of the 

day had been to grant huge, huge royalty concessions to those 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

companies that were first in and said that they would do what 

they could to get to the marketable potash. And I mean there 

was no question that we had a pretty good idea what the volume 

of potash was. We had a very good idea what the concentration 

of potash was. We knew that it was a very high-grade potash 

deposit that we‟re blessed with below Saskatchewan. And we 

knew of course that it varied in height a little bit and some, 

making it more economic in some places than in others to try 

and mine. 

 

Now I‟m going to fast forward to the Ross Thatcher Liberal 

1960s and in the free enterprise haste to have more potash, to 

have even more potash developed, the Thatcher Liberal 

government of the day, Mr. Speaker, granted potash 

corporations royalty freedoms as well, brief cessions on the 

royalties in their encouragement to have the potash industry 

expand, and it‟s a laudable goal. There‟s no question that it‟s a 

good thing to have an expansion of that industry. 

 

The problem — with the benefit of hindsight — the problem 

that developed was that the mines were brought on stream faster 

than the world market could handle that additional potash, that 

additional high-grade Saskatchewan potash, and it had a 

number of very chilling effects. One was that potash wound up 

being stockpiled in pretty significant quantities, discounted on 

world markets. It drove the prices down. Corporations found it 

increasingly difficult to turn a profit, and you know you cannot, 

you cannot run a corporation on a loss ongoing and expect that 

corporation to continue running in perpetuity. That has to turn 

around at some point. 

 

So we wound up with significant problems by the late ‟60s and 

into the ‟70s where corporations had come to a conclusion that 

they had to rationalize down their potash production. The 

Government of Saskatchewan got involved in making it happen 

as well, and there was pressures because one corporation would 

think that they were getting the shorter end of the stick than the 

next corporation. And the hard truth is, I believe history shows 

that there just wasn‟t much stick to pass around. There was only 

short sticks all around because of the very, very serious 

over-productive capacity. 

 

Well that ultimately worked its way through, and ultimately the 

world demand for potash came closer to Saskatchewan‟s 

productive capacity. 

 

And then, then enter the Blakeney government of the ‟70s, a 

government that wanted to extract a resource rent and taxation 

that was fair for Saskatchewan people. We didn‟t have any 

desire to cause undue grief for the corporations that had opened 

the mines, but we really wanted in those days to extract a 

reasonable rent from the Saskatchewan potash that was being 

mined and sold worldwide. We wanted to make sure that the 

potash industry maintained its vibrancy and its preferred place 

in the world of potash where we produce over a third of the 

potash produced in the world. And Saskatchewan potash is of 

course known to be very high quality. 

 

So there was an attempt to raise the royalty rates. Not 

surprisingly, the potash industry balked. They said no, you can‟t 

put in a usurious rate of royalties without there being some push 

back. Well push back did happen. Push came to shove and the 

Blakeney government of the ‟70s introduced the very Act that 

we‟re discussing today, which is The Potash Development Act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well The Potash Development Act, after much discussion and 

an election being held around it, the people of Saskatchewan 

agreed that the Blakeney government was looking out for their 

best interests, re-elected the Blakeney government, this Act was 

passed. But interestingly, The Potash Development Act was 

never proclaimed. It was passed in the ‟70s and never 

proclaimed. 

 

So now the question is, well what‟s all of the urgency in 

repealing The Potash Development Act? Why is it, Mr. 

Speaker? Why would it possibly be? The member for 

Kindersley says it sends a signal to business. 

 

Well how does he explain that, in the last five years, there‟s 

been $1.7 billion in capital cost expansion in the potash industry 

— $1.7 billion in the last five years alone? That does not speak 

to a crisis in confidence in the potash industry. 

 

When New Democrats had formed the government, we had a 

$1.7 billion investment, capital cost investment in the potash 

industry over the past five years. It increased the production by 

5 million tonnes a year. It increased the production of capacity 

by over 25 per cent . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟m starting to have 

trouble hearing the member that has the floor. I recognize the 

member. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The simple fact — and 

I know the hon. member for Kindersley doesn‟t want to hear — 

the simple facts are the potash industry‟s in great shape in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — It enjoys absolutely fabulous resource. We‟ve 

got several hundred years of potash available for us to extract 

and to sell worldwide, on the worldwide market because potash 

is sold mostly, mostly outside of — even not just outside of 

Saskatchewan — mostly outside of Canada. 

 

So here we are. Now we‟ve got extended hours in the 

Saskatchewan legislature. We can sit now until 1:00 every 

morning. Only four days a week, Monday through Thursday we 

can sit from 10 a.m. to 1 a.m. so that we can do really important 

business for the people of Saskatchewan. We can do incredibly 

important things like repeal The Potash Development Act that 

was passed in the ‟70s and never utilized, never proclaimed. 

But it‟ll send some magic signal to the potash industry. So says 

the incoming government. 

 

Notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that the facts 

belie that statement, notwithstanding that the facts are a 5 

million tonne increase in productive capacity and a $1.7 billion 

expansion, capital cost expansion in the potash industry. The 

proof is in the pudding. The proof is in the eating. The proof is 

in the literally hundreds of people that are involved in 

expansion of jobs in the potash industry as we speak, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

The need for this Bill to be repealed, the logic for this is 

somewhat missing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have covered, I have covered most of the points 

that I feel we really, really needed to make, the fact that this 

repeal of The Potash Development Act is largely a meaningless 

gesture. I don‟t think it‟s going to increase the productive 

capacity by 1 tonne a year. I don‟t think it‟s going to increase 

investment by the potash industry or anyone else by $1 a year. I 

know the government will have this other view, but there is no 

mad rush for the repeal of this. But I have some other concerns, 

some other questions, and I very much at this point, Mr. 

Speaker, I think they‟d probably be better dealt with in 

committee. So I‟ll take my place and refer this Bill to 

committee. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

that Bill No. 3, The Potash Development Repeal Act be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

That this Bill be referred to the Economy Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Economy. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

23, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

As many members will know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act provides the authority for a key 

element of the provincial financial assistance for urban and 

rural municipalities. The Bill establishes the amount of funds 

available this year to both the urban revenue-sharing pool and 

the rural revenue-sharing pool. It also determines the split in 

funding within the urban pool between cities and towns, 

villages and resort villages. These amendments will give legal 

effect to decisions announced in the 2008 and 2009 budget. 

 

This Bill and the budget decisions it enacts demonstrates our 

government‟s commitment to keeping our promises. In the 2007 

provincial election campaign, we promised to raise the 

revenue-sharing amount by 7 per cent as an interim measure 

while we take the time to develop a new revenue-sharing deal 

that includes a portion of the province‟s own source revenue. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is exactly what we have done. While 

even I agree that 7 per cent increase may not be enough, it does 

provide a predictable source of funding for municipalities while 

a new deal is being developed. 

 

In total the budget and the subsequent legislative amendments 

will increase the amount available for urban revenue sharing by 

$4.721 million, for a combined total of $72.168 million and will 

increase rural revenue sharing by $3.125 million for a total of 

$47.756 million. In addition to the urban and rural 

revenue-sharing amounts set by this Bill, northern 

municipalities also receive a 7 per cent increase to their 

allocation of revenue sharing for a total of $10.22 million. This 

is provided for by regulations under The Northern 

Municipalities Act, so it does not appear in this Bill. 

 

Once this Bill has been passed and has received the assent of 

the Lieutenant Governor, this will come into force retroactively 

on April 1, 2008, the first day of the province‟s 2008-2009 

fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, this funding is important to the 

prosperity and well-being of all communities and municipalities 

in Saskatchewan. I hope all members of the legislature will 

support this increased funding for municipalities. Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of Bill No. 23, The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

that Bill No. 23, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act is to be read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well it‟s a pleasure to rise and add some comments to The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. And the minister made a 

comment about a 7 per cent increase that was a Saskatchewan 

Party election commitment, and he recognized in his comments 

that it wasn‟t adequate. And I think we‟ve all seen throughout 

the province in the media and in our local media the concerns 

with municipalities and cities having to raise mill rates and 

taxes in our communities, because of the shortfall in municipal 

funding. 

 

So it‟s a bit of a circle here where we see the economy in the 

province of Saskatchewan growing. We see the revenues of the 

provincial government growing daily, especially with the high 

resource prices and commodity prices that are evident in 

markets right around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but here we have the municipalities that have the 

responsibility for providing the on-the-ground service for that 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

growth and development that‟s happening first-hand in 

communities right across this province. There‟s a strain in 

municipalities, not only on infrastructure but the services that 

are provided. So when the minister acknowledges that 7 per 

cent is not enough, I would agree, and I would say that most of 

the associations around the province, municipalities, both urban 

and rural and northern, would agree with the minister that 7 per 

cent is not enough. 

 

Now today out in the rotunda, we heard the Premier musing 

about there may be an opportunity to make some changes, and 

he would have to go into having some discussions. And I would 

say that really this government with the types of revenues that it 

has coming in, the types of revenues that are sitting in surplus in 

the provincial General Revenue Fund, that they should look at 

doubling this to at least 14 per cent for this year until a 

permanent solution is put in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a great deal of discussion that needs to 

be had, but this Bill needs to move ahead. But I would remind 

the minister that there is time to make amendments. The House 

is sitting for another four to five weeks, so if there is a desire 

from this government to increase revenue sharing to the 

municipalities to help them through a difficult time, we would 

be more than happy to support that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d be pleased to move this Bill into 

committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

that Bill No. 23, the municipal revenue sharing agreement be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I designate that 

Bill No. 23 be moved to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Municipal Affairs. 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 15, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008. The proposed 

amendments will allow the boundary area of the city of Flin 

Flon, Manitoba, to qualify as a Saskatchewan northern 

municipality eligible for our provincial infrastructure funding. 

 

For those who may not know, the boundary area is actually a 

small part of Saskatchewan that was made subject to joint 

municipal jurisdiction with the city of Flin Flon, Manitoba, in 

provincial legislation passed over 50 years ago. The 242 people 

living in the boundary area are Saskatchewan residents who pay 

provincial taxes here and vote in our provincial elections. Our 

government believes that they should be able to access services 

and funding like other northern Saskatchewan communities. 

 

The current section 291 of the Act, however, only allows grant 

payments to be made to settlements specifically designated as 

northern municipalities and does not mention the Saskatchewan 

portion of the city of Flin Flon. By way of comparison, the 

Saskatchewan portion of Lloydminster qualifies for funding the 

same as any other community in our province. 

 

In order to ensure fair and equitable treatment, the amendments 

contained in this Bill will at long last designate the Flin Flon 

boundary area as a Saskatchewan northern municipality, 

thereby making it eligible for infrastructure funding and 

establishing a permanent infrastructure funding scheme that is 

consistent with other Saskatchewan northern municipalities. 

 

It allows the boundary area to apply for funding programs such 

as the northern water and sewer program. It does not guarantee 

that any particular projects will be selected, but for the first time 

will allow the boundary area to compete with neighbouring 

communities. It should also be noted that infrastructure funds 

will only be used for projects benefitting the Saskatchewan 

side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not earmark new funding. It simply 

provides access to funds already available through the northern 

revenue sharing trust account program drawn from the General 

Revenue Fund. The boundary area and the people living there 

deserve access to services and funding like other northern 

communities in our province. And all Saskatchewan residents in 

the North should receive equivalent treatment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill shows that our new government 

accepts its responsibility to the people living in the boundary 

area. It shows that we have listened carefully to their concerns 

and have responded quickly to address them with appropriate 

legislative changes that will enhance their prosperity and 

quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 15, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 and urge all 

members to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 15, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to add a few comments to the 

amendments proposed for The Northern Municipalities Act. Mr. 

Speaker, over the last number of years I think this is the last 

piece of municipalities legislation that hasn‟t had a major 

review. The Cities Act and The Municipalities Act have both 

undergone some major renovations and renewals over the past 

number of years, so The Northern Municipalities Act is the 

third piece of municipal legislation to undergo a major renewal. 

 

This Act has been looked at by a review committee that has 

been dealing with it over the past year. They took into account 

new concepts and provisions that were developed for both The 

Cities Act and The Municipalities Act. The review committee 

also discussed other key issues unique or specific to the North 

and that‟s important in this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a discussion paper issued by Saskatchewan Ministry 

of Municipal Affairs in December of last year that made 

mention of the complexity of many of the issues of The 

Northern Municipalities Act and what needed to be addressed, 

and it also stressed that ample time be made available for public 

consultations. 

 

So I expect that this is just the first step in opening the northern 

municipalities Bill. And while this legislation, as the minister 

stated, addresses the specific case of funding arrangements for 

Flin Flon, I‟m sure in the upcoming years we will see more 

portions of this Act come before the House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there is some more detailed questions 

that my colleagues and I have for committee, but as of right 

now, I think, we‟re happy to move this Bill forward to 

committee for that process to begin. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the minister that Bill No. 15, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 

No. 15 be moved to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Brkich: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the west 

gallery, I just noticed my CA [constituency assistant] had 

popped in because he was up today for some meetings, so I 

would just like to, through you and to the House, I would like to 

introduce my constituency assistant who has provided me with 

many years of good service. I‟m probably the only. . . he‟s the 

only reason I‟m still getting elected and back here in the House 

each and every time. So I would like to introduce Mr. Clark 

Puckett and welcome him here to his legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:45] 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection  

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Consumer Protection Amendment 

Act, 2008. 

 

Gift cards have become one of the most popular products in the 

marketplace today. Nearly all major retailers sell gift cards to 

their customers and many small- and mid-sized retailers offer 

gift cards as well. Gift cards are now a multi-billion dollar 

industry. The rise in the popularity of gift cards has raised a 

number of consumer concerns. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, consumers who have purchased a 

gift card are not aware of the terms and limitations that may 

apply to the use of that gift card. Many gift cards expire one or 

two years after the date of purchase. Some gift cards have fees 

such as activation fees, transaction fees, monthly maintenance 

fees, or replacement fees for lost or stolen cards. In other cases 

a fee might be deducted from the balance of the gift card each 

month until the card value is eroded or eventually eliminated. 

 

Consumers often realize that a gift card expires or is subject to 

fees only when they attempt to redeem the card. In most cases, 

the person who buys the card is not the person who ends up 

using the card. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to update and modernize 

Saskatchewan‟s consumer protection legislation by setting out 

new rules to protect consumers who purchase and use gift cards 

and gift certificates. 

 

Consumers will receive the full value of the gift card and not 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

have it reduced by stealth or hidden charges. The proposed 

legislation prohibits expiry dates on gift cards and gift 

certificates except as set out in the regulations. It also prohibits 

suppliers from charging inactivity fees that reduce the value of 

the gift card if it is not used within a certain period of time. 

Other fees will also be prohibited unless specifically authorized 

by the regulations. 

 

The Bill allows for regulations to be established requiring 

disclosure of terms and conditions on gift cards and gift 

certificates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today‟s Bill also includes provisions that relate to 

the investigation and enforcement of the provisions of the Act 

as set out and penalties for non-compliance with the Act. The 

amendments to the Act are intended to harmonize 

Saskatchewan legislation with that of other Canadian 

jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, in developing this legislation, we 

have consulted with business and consumer groups. The 

submissions provided by these groups have greatly contributed 

to the development of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Consumer Protection Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened carefully 

to the words of the current Minister of Justice in explaining and 

promoting the legislation which was drafted by the Department 

of Justice when I was minister, under my direction. And of 

course I wouldn‟t want to disagree with anything that the 

minister said. I would have said the same thing in promotion of 

the legislation which was drafted under my direction. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, we support the principles behind the 

amendments proposed by the government, as originally to be 

proposed by the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. This 

legislation is again recognition that sometimes technology 

moves quicker than the legislature can respond. And as the 

minister said, sometimes an industry becomes, I think he 

referred to, a multi-billion-dollar industry before the legislature 

can respond to the concerns, the legitimate concerns that 

consumers have about a new product such as gift cards. 

 

Gift cards have been out there for a while. It‟s taken a while for 

us to respond. Legislation was drafted by the previous 

government, is now responsibly being brought forward by the 

current government. And again I say no . . . how could I have 

possibly, Mr. Speaker, any concern about the principles, the 

intent of the legislation, the purpose of the legislation. I have 

indeed none, as you might expect. 

 

However the work that was to be done in consulting with 

stakeholders and people involved in this industry and people 

who might be affected by this legislation as to unforeseen 

consequences — which we must always be concerned about 

when making legislative change — of course was not done by 

the previous government that had drafted the legislation. That 

work was not done. 

 

Whether that work has been done by this government over the 

winter, we don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, but there are questions 

that may very well arise in respect to details on the effect of this 

legislation and, as I said, concern about unforeseen 

consequences. 

 

I also would trust that the minister would be willing to respond 

in committee to questions about what he intends to put in 

regulations around limitations. He always asked for those when 

he was Justice critic, and I don‟t think he should have any 

reason to not provide them when he is Minister of Justice and 

able to provide them. So I expect some co-operation on that 

front and just give him a warning that those questions will be 

asked, Mr. Speaker, because the Justice critic, unlike the 

Minister of Justice, has a record on wanting those answers to be 

provided to the committee. With all those qualifications and 

provisions, those conclude my remarks on this legislation for 

the moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The current Minister 

of Justice has the benefit of having two former ministers of 

Justice to give him advice as he proceeds with all of his 

legislation. And this particular legislation is good consumer 

legislation that deals with a present problem, but it does have in 

it a number of areas where there need to be created regulations 

that will respond to issues as they arise. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it will be our intention as the loyal 

opposition to ask all the questions about the intended 

regulations. And we will have I think some very good 

questions, but we also will have strong support for the concept 

behind this particular aspect of The Consumer Protection Act. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we send this to the 

committee. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly I take it is ready for the 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 12, The Consumer 

Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 12, The 

Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be referred to the 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 

13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) 

Amendment Act. I am pleased to outline today for all members 

the background and changes to the Act that are included in this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly about what led to the 

proposed changes to this Act. As members may know, the 

teachers‟ life insurance Act is a negotiable item under the 

provincial collective bargaining agreement between boards of 

education, the Government of Saskatchewan, and the teachers 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

In August 2007, a new collective agreement between the 

boards, the government, and the teachers of Saskatchewan was 

ratified. As a result of the new collective agreement, changes to 

The Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

are required. 

 

The amendments proposed will extend the ability of teachers 

receiving pension from the teachers‟ superannuation plan or the 

Saskatchewan teachers retirement plan to continue group life 

insurance coverage from age 75 to 85. 

 

It will allow up to 100 retired teachers to continue their life 

insurance through the plan to age 85 at the member‟s expense. 

This provision will be implemented on September 1, 2008, 

because the collective agreement was not ratified in time for the 

change to be effective in 2007. Consultations regarding the 

proposed amendments took place between the parties at the 

collective bargaining table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this was an item agreed to as part of the 

collective agreement, the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation 

and the Saskatchewan School Boards Association are fully 

supportive of the amendment. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to move that Bill No. 13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance 

(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 13, the Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you for 

the opportunity to rise to speak to Bill 13, the teachers‟ life 

insurance amendment Act, 2008. As the minister identified, this 

was a result of a collective bargaining process that was in place 

while we were in government. 

 

It‟s a Bill that was worked on for some time, and absolutely we 

are supportive of a Bill that‟s arrived out of collective 

bargaining while we were in government. And we are pleased 

to see a Bill coming forward that enhances the coverage 

possible for teachers as they move forward in their late years in 

life. 

 

Enough words for now, we‟ll have more words within 

committee. I move that this Bill be referred to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly is ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is the motion by the minister that 

Bill No. 13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) 

Amendment Act, 2008 be referred to the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 18, An Act to 

amend The Public Service Act, 1998. 

 

We support a professional public service for the province of 

Saskatchewan — one that provides excellent programs, 

policies, and services for the people of our province. The Public 

Service Act is the legislation designated to maintain the 

independent, qualified, and professional public service that is so 

vital for the smooth functioning of government and building a 

more prosperous province and a better life for all people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The amendments we are considering today, Mr. Speaker, are 

minor changes to make this legislation clearer so that it 

continues to ensure effective, consistent process. Mr. Speaker, 

while the vast majority of public servants are hardworking, 

committed, and effective employees, there are rare occasions 

when there are exceptions, and ministries must consider 

discipline. On these rare occasions, we want to be sure that 

those instances are handled appropriately. 

 

The first change makes it clear the deputy minister‟s authority 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

to suspend an employee extends to all staff, not just permanent 

staff. And the second change expands the alternatives available 

to the public service commissioners in adjudicating appeals of 

layoff or suspension for out-of-scope staff. Previously the 

commissioners were limited to upholding or overturning the 

deputy minister‟s decisions in such matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public service commissioners are an 

independent body whose authority is established in The Public 

Service Act, 1998. They represent the public interest in human 

resource management in the public service. And I would like to 

thank them and congratulate them on the role they play in 

continuing to ensure that Saskatchewan has the finest public 

service in the nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to now move second reading of An 

Act to amend The Public Service Act, 1998. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minster of Highways has moved that Bill 

No. 18, The Public Services Amendment Act be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and make brief 

comments on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does essentially two things, and the 

minister has outlined what those two things are. It in essence 

establishes and allows the same treatment to be for all classes of 

employees that would be employed under the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And it in fact then allows for, in those situations 

where there may be some consideration of what alternatives that 

the commission would have in dealing with an unfortunate 

situation, Mr. Speaker, it gives them more latitude and more 

abilities to provide a more suitable solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Both of these particular changes are overdue, good changes, 

Mr. Speaker. So at this time I would move that this Bill be 

referred to committee. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 18, The Public Service 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 18, The Public Service Amendment Act, 

2008 be referred to the Crown and Central Agencies 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments to The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 

2002 introduced today will provide for special rules for 

enforcement of Canadian civil protection orders in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A Canadian civil protection order will be defined in this Bill to 

mean orders that are made in any other Canadian jurisdiction 

that prohibit a broad range of activities. These may range from 

communication to actual contact where it is being used by one 

individual to intimidate, threaten, or coerce or otherwise harass 

another individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this Bill the Canadian civil protection order 

is deemed to be an order of the Saskatchewan Court of Queen‟s 

Bench that is fully enforceable in Saskatchewan in the same 

manner as an order of that court. The Bill further provides that 

such an order can be enforced by law enforcement agencies in 

the same manner as a local court order whether or not that order 

has been registered in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, previously the concern had been identified by the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada that law enforcement 

agencies may be reluctant to enforce these types of orders 

where they are not certain that they have been properly 

registered in the new enforcement jurisdiction. With these 

changes, law enforcement agencies will have clear authority to 

proceed with enforcing a protection order regardless of where it 

originated from. 

 

To further facilitate enforcement, this Bill also provides for 

good faith liability protection for law enforcement agencies that 

take steps to enforce an order pursuant to this Act. Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill provides that a Canadian civil protection order may 

still be registered in the same manner as any other Canadian 

judgment if the enforcing party chooses to do so. Finally, it also 

provides that these amendments will apply to all Canadian civil 

protection orders that are already in effect when the Bill comes 

into force in addition to any future Canadian civil protection 

orders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is taking this step at the 

recommendation of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada in 

an effort to ensure that the Canadian civil protection orders will 

receive immediate and full effect and enforcement in the 

province of Saskatchewan regardless of where they originate 

from. Where an individual is subject to a peace bond, 

emergency intervention order under domestic violence 



April 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

legislation, or any other restraining order, it is our view that 

these orders should take immediate effect to ensure the safety of 

all our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2002. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 11, The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Act, 2002. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This legislation is 

good legislation that has been worked on for a number of years. 

As the minister has outlined, in Canada we have the advantage 

of having something called the Uniform Law Conference, a 

place where people get together and look at federal and 

provincial laws and make sure that they match and mesh so that 

the effect of, in this case, Canadian judgments can be common 

right across the country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it has long been the tradition in 

Saskatchewan that we provide leadership in this particular 

work, and we also in turn make sure that we move forward with 

the recommendations from that particular committee. And this 

legislation comes from that source, along with the good work of 

the people here in our Department of Justice, and so on that 

basis, Mr. Speaker, I move that we forward this to the 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly is ready for question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the minister that Bill No. 11, The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 

11, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2008 be transferred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School 

Business Officials Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 14, The 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Repeal 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly about the history of 

The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials 

Act and why we are introducing a Bill to repeal it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act was first enacted in the 1940s to regulate 

the chief financial officer position in Saskatchewan school 

divisions. As members recall, these positions were often 

referred to as treasurer or secretary treasurer in the past. 

Currently we may know these professionals by the title of 

superintendent of finance or by some other variation of a board 

of education‟s choosing. 

 

The current Act is unusual for professional regulatory 

legislation in that it regulates a position rather than a profession. 

And those holding the position do not share a common 

educational qualification. With the restructuring of 119 school 

divisions into 28 school divisions, the potential membership of 

SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials] was significantly reduced affecting the financial 

viability of the association. With the repeal of this Act, the 

association will be changing over to a non-profit corporation. 

This will allow them to expand their membership to include 

other financial and administrative positions in the education 

sector and grow as an advisory organization. 

 

The association supports the repealing of the legislation. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, in a survey of the association‟s executive and 

membership, 89 per cent were in favour of repealing the Act. 

This legislative change will help strengthen the role of the 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials. It will 

allow the association to better ensure the financial viability of 

the association and better reflect their role as an advisory and 

advocacy organization. It will also bring our legislation in line 

with other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

As members know, SASBO is a key stakeholder in the 

education sector. The association serves an important role in 

advising school divisions and the ministry on financial and 

administrative changes that may be contemplated. The 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association and the ministry will 

continue to rely on the association for advice on issues in the 

education sector. The ministry has been working with the 

association since 2006 on the necessary changes. They have 

developed transition plans, and we expect that the repeal of this 

Act will be enacted this fall. 

 

I would like to express my appreciation to the association‟s 

representatives for their assistance and co-operation. I am 

pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 14, the repeal of The 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials Repeal Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2008 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to speak to Bill No. 14, the Saskatchewan association 

of school board officials repeal Act. SASBO has long been 

important to education within Saskatchewan. We most 

definitely find value in their advocacy and in their voice. Their 

viability is very important to us as New Democrats and I 

believe as legislators across the board in this House. 

 

As the minister alluded to, this has been worked towards for 

some time. It serves as a structural change. It serves as a name 

change, and it is supported as I understand through SASBO 

themselves. It allows SASBO to continue to grow its 

membership, ensure their financial stability or strength, and 

continues to allow them to offer a strong and important voice to 

education within our province. 

 

A few other words on this will follow within committee, but I 

do move that this Bill be referred to committee at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association 

of School Business Officials Repeal Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

designate that Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials Repeal Act be referred to the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to facilitate hearings of the standing committees later 

on today, I move that we adjourn this House. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved this House do 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. to facilitate the work of 

standing committees. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:13.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 933 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 967 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 975 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Support for Families Dealing with Disability Issues 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 934 

 Terry Fox Award 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 934 

 Yorkton Family Sets Good Example 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 934 

 Saskatchewan Roughrider Honoured 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 934 

 Frontier Midget Flyers Win Provincial Championship 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 935 

 Walker School Participates in Mayor’s Mega-minute Reading Challenge 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 935 

 Provincial Labour Legislation 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 936 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 936 

 Potential and Process for School Closures 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 937 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 937 

 Dental Sealant Program 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 

 Eaglestone Lodge 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 

 Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 940 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Infrastructure Framework Agreement 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 941 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 941 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 942 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 942 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 942 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 942 

 Ministerial Statements 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 942 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 

 



 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 952 

 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 956 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 957 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 960 

 Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 961 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 961 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 965 

 Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 965 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 966 

 Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/ 

 Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 967 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 969 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 971 

 Bill No. 3 —The Potash Development Repeal Act 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 971 

  D’Autremont (referral to committee)...................................................................................................................................... 973 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 973 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 973 

  Hutchinson (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 974 

 Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 974 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

  Hutchinson (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 975 

 Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 975 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 976 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 976 

 Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 977 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 977 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................. 977 

 Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 977 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 

  D’Autremont (referral to committee)...................................................................................................................................... 978 

 Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 978 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 979 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 979 

 Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Repeal Act 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 979 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 980 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................. 980 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


