




















































Hansard: March 31, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 17B  MONDAY, MARCH 31, 2008, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 437 

 March 31, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order please. Debate will continue on the 

budget speech. I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before the break we were talking a little bit about the budget 

and the potential very, very good news story that it‟s been for 

the province of Saskatchewan. The amount of investment that 

there is in Saskatchewan, the opportunities that there has been 

for people all across the province are certainly very positive in 

terms of job creation, very positive in terms of investment, very 

positive in terms of people moving back to our province. 

 

And having the opportunity to speak to people outside of the 

province a few occasions, I‟m always amazed when you see 

young people coming up to you and saying they‟re from Biggar, 

Saskatchewan or they‟re from Rocanville or they‟re from 

Estevan or they‟re from Weyburn. And they‟re saying that 

there‟s opportunities back in Saskatchewan, and they want to 

explore those opportunities, and they‟re starting to move back 

in increasing numbers. So it‟s great news for the province of 

Saskatchewan to say the least. 

 

I was talking a little bit before the break about agriculture and 

the positive news stories that there are surrounding agriculture. 

In 35 years of farming in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve 

never seen prices even approaching the kind of returns that 

we‟re seeing in agriculture. There‟s an incredible optimism in 

the province in terms of agriculture. Certainly on the cattle side 

and on the hog side, there‟s some problems, and we all 

understand that. The Minister of Agriculture has taken some 

steps to deal with that. 

 

On the grains and oilseeds side though, you‟ll never see the 

kind of optimism that there is in the province right now. 

Families are looking through to transition their farms to 

younger generations, again some things that we‟ve never seen. 

We‟re seeing land values increase in some cases at fairly rapid 

rates across Saskatchewan, which is indeed a good news story 

for the province as well. 

 

So I think, to listen to the member from Coronation Park hark 

back to the days of land bank, I think that‟s a dark era that there 

are very few people in Saskatchewan ever want to return to in 

terms of agriculture policy in this province. It was an era when 

the government felt that they had to step in and buy up farm 

land from people across this province. We still see that legacy 

out there, where there‟s land bank land. This is a government 

that is looking at making some changes with respect to that, and 

I have to think that that‟s something that would be a very 

positive development. I don‟t think the government should be in 

business in terms of these kinds of things. We‟ve signalled to 

the private sector across this country that that‟s not going to be 

a part of a Saskatchewan Party government, and as a result of 

that what we are seeing, Mr. Speaker, is really quite interesting. 

 

Now what we are seeing is industry and private sector 

involvement stepping up into Saskatchewan and saying that for 

the first time now they realize what the rules are, that the 

government doesn‟t want a piece of the action of everything 

that happens in Saskatchewan any longer. And as a result of 

that, they‟re looking at opportunities they‟d never looked at 

before — hundreds of millions of dollars of investment that we 

will see in Saskatchewan in the oil and gas sector that we 

wouldn‟t have been seeing otherwise. 

 

We were seeing a tremendous amount of activity in the potash 

sector in Saskatchewan, in uranium. The potash companies are 

stepping up like they‟ve never stepped up before in 

Saskatchewan. The fact that we are repealing the potash 

expropriation Bill was seen as an extremely positive 

development for potash companies in Saskatchewan. Another 

thing where people across . . . potash companies are saying this 

was an error that we should never be involved in again, 

investments of hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers‟ 

money into an already existing industry in Saskatchewan 

simply based on a philosophy that has failed the province of 

Saskatchewan for 75 years. Mr. Speaker, a failed 

administration, a failed premier, and a failed philosophy that the 

people of Saskatchewan I daresay never want to return to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And I think that — as a result of that, that 

optimism that we see across Saskatchewan, young people 

looking at opportunities in Saskatchewan on an unprecedented 

fashion — is great news for this province to say the least. And 

we‟re seeing that in all kinds of areas across Saskatchewan. 

 

In the ministry that I represent, Mr. Speaker, we‟re doing a 

number of things to try and foster that development even more 

positively. We‟ve put additional resources into the registry in 

terms of regulation and in terms of speeding up permitting 

times for oil and gas developments and potash developments, 

uranium developments — all of those kinds of things — to 

provide a speedy opportunity for people to get into business 

here in Saskatchewan. That does not mean though that things 

like the environment won‟t be respected because it most 

certainly will be respected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re looking at, in the northwest of our province, an oil sands 

development that is a tremendous opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I had the good fortune, along with the member 

from Meadow Lake, of touring the facility up there. And I 

daresay that in terms of that, the footprint, the environmental 

footprint that it will make in the future up there, it‟ll be very 

little more than a normal horizontal drilling opportunity in 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Saskatchewan. I would invite members of the opposition to join 

with us at some point and tour that facility before you start 

talking about, as your national leader is talking about, 

moratoriums on development in the oil sands of Alberta or 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s a tremendously different story that is happening and 

unfolding in Saskatchewan than it is in other provinces. This is 

not going to be a strip mining operation. This is going to be in 

situ. It‟ll be horizontal drilling, probably steam assisted. That 

has yet to be determined. The water source that will be used for 

that steam will not be draining a river or will not be draining a 

lake or anything of that nature. It‟s a groundwater source. It‟s 

saline in nature, so it‟s useless in any other application. 

 

So what we are seeing there is a very, very responsible 

development going forward right down to the fact when you 

tour their camps, Mr. Speaker, it was amazing to see the level of 

concern that they have about environmental problems or 

environmental concerns. 

 

If you are, for example, working in the shop in the facility that 

they have up there, the mechanic‟s shop there, every time that a 

litre of oil is used, the mechanic or whomever is using it signs 

that litre of oil out. I can‟t imagine that level of accountability 

in many operations, but that‟s the level of accountability that is 

there. Walking down the walkways throughout the camp 

operation, you see those — I‟m not even sure what they‟re 

called, Mr. Speaker — little stations where people can put out 

cigarettes. They‟re all over the place in the camp. They hire 

students to come in in the summertime and pick up scraps of 

paper off the ground if there happen to be any . . . or a bottle 

cap or anything of that nature. 

 

This is an extremely responsible company that has the interests 

of the environment at heart, to say the least, and it will be a 

tremendous development for Saskatchewan, about a billion and 

a half barrels of oil that are identified at this point. I think it‟s 

going to quickly grow to about 6 billion barrels here very soon, 

and it may go beyond that in the near, near future. 

 

It will mean, it will mean hundreds of millions and in fact 

billions of dollars of royalties to the province of Saskatchewan. 

And in turn what those royalties will be used for will be not for 

buying up potato companies or dot-coms or telecoms in 

Argentina or wherever else the socialists operate, that they are 

interested in those kinds of things. What it will be used for is 

for things like the priorities of this government in the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Infrastructure, it‟ll be used for hospitals. 

It‟ll be used for schools. It‟ll be used for highways. It‟ll be used 

for the things that are the priorities of this government that have 

been identified in Saskatchewan. It‟ll be investments in people 

in Saskatchewan. It‟ll be investments in social services. It‟ll be 

investments in terms of education. It‟ll be investments in the 

young people of this province on a par that we have never seen 

before. And I dare say that the young people across 

Saskatchewan are going to look at this budget in a number of 

years into the future, and they are going to say that this is a 

government that had its priorities right . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — This is a government that had the interests 

of Saskatchewan at heart. This is a government that clearly has 

set a new path for this province, different, far different than the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] former administration here in 

Saskatchewan. And it‟s the reason why, Mr. Speaker, that on 

November 7 those people opposite are sitting right where they 

are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And I suspect in another half-a-dozen years 

they will realize how wrong they were in Saskatchewan, just as 

the people of the province have to date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that probably concludes the remarks 

that I want to make this evening, but to say, to say, Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but I‟ll be 

wholeheartedly supporting the budget that‟s presented by my 

colleague, the member from Melfort. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s truly an honour 

and a privilege for me to rise in this House and take part in this 

debate on behalf of the fine folks of Regina Northeast. They‟ve 

been so kind to return me to this House on a couple or three 

occasions now, and I‟ve appreciated their trust, and I will do my 

best to live up to it. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, although built on an NDP template, 

has come up short, has come up short in a number of areas — a 

number of areas, Mr. Speaker — that affect real people, 

mainstream people, the ordinary people, the ordinary working 

people of our province, the kind of people who live in Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be the fundamental principle of any 

government to govern in the best interests of all the people of 

Saskatchewan, all the people of the province, not just in the best 

interests of the friends and the supporters of the government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that was the measuring stick used to 

measure this budget, this budget would come up short. 

 

While this government sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of 

money, Mr. Speaker, the closer we look at this budget, the more 

we spot the shortcomings. First and the most obvious is the lack 

of real property tax relief. When that party was in opposition, 

they repeatedly called for a program that would remove the 

education portion of the property tax on the backs of 

homeowners. When in opposition the Sask Party said, on many 

occasions, that the property tax burden was hitting our seniors 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the members to 

allow the member from Regina Northeast to present his remarks 

to the Assembly. There will be ample time for other members. 

We have a long evening ahead of us, so if you want to 

participate just wait your time. It will come. 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When in opposition, 

the Sask Party said on many occasions that the property tax 

burden was hitting our seniors and those on fixed income very 

hard. When in opposition, the Sask Party said on many 

occasions that the property tax burden was a hindrance to 

business and the economic development of our province. They 

said that it was holding back investments and job creation. 

When in opposition, the Sask Party said on many occasions that 

if they were the government, they would immediately bring 

forward meaningful property tax relief. Then during last fall‟s 

election campaign they asked — the Saskatchewan Party on 

many occasions asked — for support from the voters for their 

pledge for meaningful property tax relief if they formed the 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they formed government. And today the 

Sask Party‟s meaningful property tax relief is worth a measly 

$22 per family — $22 per family, Mr. Speaker, while this 

government over there sits on, sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was reported in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on 

March 20, 2008, and I quote that: 

 

The Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce gave the 

provincial government an overall C grade on the budget, 

calling it a disappointment when Saskatchewan has 

A-grade potential. The chamber was hoping for a 

significant change to the education property tax policy . . . 

 

[19:15] 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, all this while the government over 

there sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget disappointments continues. As reported 

on March 20, 2008, issue of the Regina Leader-Post, and I 

quote, “The minimal new property tax relief, the seven per cent 

increase to municipal revenue sharing and the portion of 

infrastructure spending earmarked for municipalities . . . added 

up to disappointment . . .” And that‟s according to SUMA‟s 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] president, 

Allan Earle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the same issue of the Leader-Post carrying the 

comments of the Regina mayor, Pat Fiacco, on how this 

provincial budget affected the city of Regina, and I quote: 

 

“At the end of the day, we look at the provincial budget to 

see how it is going to offset our budget in regards to our 

own increases that are needed. [And] I can tell the citizens 

of Regina there will definitely be a property tax increase 

this year” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the March 20, 2008, Saskatoon Star Phoenix it 

was reported, as it reports on the provincial budget comments, 

of the Saskatoon mayor. And I quote: 

 

“The province was saying that [it was] . . . going to put in 

seven per cent . . . in revenue sharing, and in fact it is seven 

per cent for . . . cities — so that‟s about $1.2 to $1.4 

million. What we‟ve been asking for, though, is 

approximately $5 million from the province. So we‟re short 

about $4 million at this time” . . . 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this while that government over 

there sits on a pile, a $1.3 billion pile of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members on the other side from Saskatoon and 

from Regina have certainly failed to represent their cities and 

their constituents in that Sask Party government‟s budgeting 

process. Mr. Speaker, shame on them, shame on them for not 

standing up for the needs of this province‟s cities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the hard work of the NDP and the fiscal 

discipline of the NDP, this government was able to increase 

funding for infrastructure. And I‟m glad to see that this 

government is carrying on in the same direction that the NDP 

were going when we were the government previously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, immediately it raises a question in my mind why 

this government has failed to take advantage of a federal 

program called Building Canada. On November 6, 2007, the 

Government of Canada unveiled details of its historic $33 

billion infrastructure plan, called Building Canada. It‟s $33 

billion to be shared by the provinces over seven years for the 

infrastructure, $33 billion to be shared by the provinces of 

Canada over the next seven years to support the revitalization 

and the building of new infrastructure. 

 

Other provinces have already moved forward on this. Other 

provinces have already taken advantage of this. British 

Columbia for example on — I believe it was — November 7 

signed on to the framework agreement with the federal 

government to the tune of $2.2 billion. This money they‟re 

going to use to invest in roads and bridges and tunnels and ports 

and public transit. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. They are 

taking advantage of the federal program. This government has 

failed to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it was December 7, 2007, the 

Government of New Brunswick signed a framework agreement 

with the federal government for nearly $1 billion to support the 

infrastructure in their province, including water and sewer and 

waste water projects in a number of the communities 

throughout New Brunswick. Nova Scotia has signed on. Nova 

Scotia signed on, on November 9, 2007, for funding for their 

highway infrastructure improvements, water and sewer 

improvements, and bridge and other transportation 

improvements throughout the province of Nova Scotia. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, even Newfoundland and Labrador have signed on, 

most recently have signed on for several billions of dollars to 

support their infrastructure systems primarily in their highways 

and road building, upgrading the access roads and highways 

throughout both Newfoundland and Labrador. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is a program that‟s been there. It‟s federal 

dollars. It doesn‟t encumber the Saskatchewan taxpayer at all. 

It‟s federal dollars sitting there — a program that this 

government could be taking advantage of. They failed to do so. 

I can‟t help but wonder, Mr. Speaker, if part of the reason that 

they haven‟t been able to sign the framework agreement on the 

Building Canada program is that they want to use that money, 

which they will eventually get I‟m sure, but they want to use 

that money to disguise their shortcomings on . . . 

 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McMillan: — To request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, through you and to 

you I‟d like to introduce a person in our midst today who is well 

known to everyone here especially the Speaker. It is my 

predecessor, Milt Wakefield, who for eight years dutifully 

served the people of Lloydminster and I‟m glad to see him here 

today. So please join me in welcoming Milt Wakefield. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you and I recognize the member from 

Regina Northeast. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to join with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. 

Wakefield back to this Assembly where he has served in the 

past with great distinction and welcome, Milt. It‟s nice to see 

you again. You‟re looking as young and as bright as ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying earlier, I question the strategy that 

the government over there is using in its failure to take 

advantage of the federal program Building Canada. It‟s obvious 

to me that other provinces have seen the opportunity to use 

federal dollars to support their infrastructure improvements and 

lessening the financial burden on their taxpayers, but this 

government hasn‟t moved in that direction and I wonder why. I 

wonder perhaps if they are going to eventually get access to 

those federal dollars for Building Canada, those federal 

infrastructure dollars, but they‟re going to try to use that to 

disguise and cover up as a bit of a smoke screen to their failure 

to getting a fair share, the fair deal on equalization with the 

federal government. Or perhaps even one could consider a 

sell-off to the federal government. I suspect that, Mr. Speaker, 

that you will see the infrastructure money coming into 

Saskatchewan under this program, but they‟re going to try to 

disguise it, disguise it as equalization money. It‟s two different 

things. They‟re oranges and they‟re apples. They‟re two 

different things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look through this budget we note that the 

— and I take a little special interest in the note of the money 

being spent in this budget on highways and infrastructure — 

and we note that there is an increase of some $67 million this 

year over last. Well initially you would say that‟s a lot of 

money. It is. But if you look at the whole scheme of things that 

last year the budget was something like 446 million, this year 

it‟s 513. If you look at the fact that increased costs are factored 

in, you really don‟t see many more projects. 

 

In fact we have been led to believe that as a result of this year‟s 

budget for highways and infrastructure, we will end up in 

Saskatchewan with less than 30 kilometres more pavement than 

was done last year. Despite the hoopla, despite the presentation 

by the Minister of Finance that this was an 

infrastructure-focused budget, it is really, really nothing more 

than what was done last year, minus some twenty-seven and a 

half kilometres more pavement. That‟s the only difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 30 kilometres more of highway, despite all the 

money that‟s being spent, 30 kilometres more highway. And all 

of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this, while that government over 

there sits on a pile of . . . $1.3 billion mountain of money. My 

concern here, Mr. Speaker, is that it is fine to increase 

infrastructure projects. It‟s fine to increase the funding for them, 

but only if the industry has the capacity to meet those increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to the good management of our province 

and the provincial economy by the NDP government in the past, 

this province is enjoying the biggest boom it has enjoyed in its 

history. With our industries working at capacity, there is a huge 

need for skilled workers. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to talk to the 

business manager for the Iron Workers Local 771 here in 

Regina this morning, and he is telling me that he is short of 

workers. He has all of his members working. He has put a plea 

out to other locals for workers because he has more work than 

he has workers to fill the jobs. So, Mr. Speaker, in times like 

this — times like this — there is a real need, a real need to have 

skilled workers to meet the cry of our economy for that 

work-related support. 

 

Last year the NDP government expanded training seats by 

2,000 opportunities. Nothing less than the same was needed this 

year if we are serious about maintaining our growing economy. 

Well what did this government do, Mr. Speaker? This budget 

commits to only 1,100 new training opportunities. If this 

government is truly committed to growing our province, then it 

will add more training opportunities immediately. All of this, 

Mr. Speaker — all of this — while that government sits on a 

$1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the danger in increasing funding for infrastructure 

projects when the industry does not have the capacity to meet 

those increases is that you do not complete any more projects. 

You simply complete more expensive projects. Mr. Speaker, as 

I have said earlier, Saskatchewan is enjoying the biggest boom 

our province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — And this is good. This is good. Boom times, 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

prosperous times is good. But there is a dark side to the boom 

times, Mr. Speaker. There is a dark side. Today in 

Saskatchewan many people cannot find or finding it difficult to 

find quality, affordable housing. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget 

does nothing to meet the needs of those Saskatchewan citizen. 

Nothing. All of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this while that 

government sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

What is this government‟s position on affordable housing 

issues, Mr. Speaker? Well they‟re going to study it. They‟re 

going to study it. Mr. Speaker, I say to the government 

opposite, what‟s to study? What‟s to study? There is not the 

affordable housing to meet the needs. Now is not the time to 

study. Now is a time for action. Mr. Speaker, the first 

responsibility of any government should be to make the lives of 

all those people it governs better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was reported in the Leader-Post on March 20, 

2008, Peter Gilmer of the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry said, 

and I quote: 

 

“What we‟re really not seeing in this budget, given a . . . 

[real] good financial position for the province, is a 

significant commitment to the social agenda.” 

 

[19:30] 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this while that government over 

there sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, through this budget, has let down 

the people of Saskatchewan on several fronts. They have let 

down the property owner by not living up to their commitment 

of providing meaningful property tax relief. They have let down 

the working men and women of this province by launching an 

attack on the rights of mainstream working people of our 

province. 

 

They have turned their backs on those in the greatest needs in 

our province by their refusal to deal with the affordable housing 

issues and other negative effects of a booming economy. They 

have let down all the people in Saskatchewan by taking a lead 

from their federal cousins, Stephen Harper Conservative 

government in Ottawa, in only paying lip service to the greatest 

issue facing our province, our country, our world, and mankind 

as we know it, and that is the global warming issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no meaningful commitment to a timetable 

for this Sask Party government to meet its climate change 

targets. All of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this while that 

government sits on a $1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How much was that, Ron? How much 

was that? 

 

Mr. Harper: — A $1.3 billion mountain of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have outlined just a few, just a few of the 

reasons the majority of people in Regina Northeast have 

instructed me to vote for the amendment and against the budget 

motion. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be proud to do so. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, can you hear me? 

Okay, all right. It brings me great pleasure to rise . . . Can you 

hear me? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — All right. To rise in the House and to speak 

about the 2008-2009 budget of this new government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, leadership is about responsibility and decisive 

action. Leadership also stands for understanding, accountability, 

and empathy for people‟s needs and priorities. These are 

priorities like health care, education, and highways. And I 

believe all of this is addressed in our government‟s first budget. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s economy is thriving, and it‟s because of our 

government. Is anybody listening? Yes. Our new government 

will benefit the people of Saskatchewan by providing a health 

care system for all patients, schools to accommodate all 

children, and safe roads for all people. We have a duty to 

manage the money wisely, and we also have a duty to deliver 

our promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am happy to announce to my constituents of 

Saskatchewan Rivers that this budget looks to the future. We‟ll 

move Saskatchewan forward. A budget that gets Saskatchewan 

ready for growth and a budget that will build the province — 

this budget has the largest capital investment in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, on November 7 the people of 

Saskatchewan elected a new government and sent a clear signal 

that they wanted change. They wanted new leadership and a 

move in a new direction. They voted for a new era of hope and 

opportunity. Our new government wants to deliver with a 1 

billion ready-for-growth initiative which includes providing a 

much-needed education property tax relief to the farmers and 

cottage owners in Saskatchewan. 

 

In Saskatchewan Rivers constituency, we have beautiful lakes 

and sceneries with wonderful hard-working people living by 

them. But many are struggling with the high education property 

taxes and were contemplating selling. I‟m pleased to announce 

that this budget offers property tax rebates for home owners as 

this increase from 10 to 12 per cent will offer relief. The 

property tax rebate on farm land will have an annual tax savings 

of over $2,000 for each individual farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers constituency has many fine, 

first-rate parks that need their facilities upgraded. Our new 

government budget has provided a $5 million increase to 

Saskatchewan parks which will improve operations and 

increase tourism. 

 

The budget also provides an 8 million increase to double 

funding for tourism and improved highway signage. Many of 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

our Saskatchewan Rivers local lake businesses at Candle, 

Christopher, Big River and Tobin lakes rely on these marketing 

tools to grow. All Saskatchewan business owners will see 

benefits from this budget by increased funding thus enhancing 

our parks and attracting more events and people to our 

province. 

 

A source of irritant around our local lake communities was the 

unpopular campground permit fee, commonly known as the 

wiener roast tax, which has now been eliminated. The $3 per 

day firewood fee will save park goers about $375,000 annually, 

thus benefiting both park goers and our regional and provincial 

parks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government promised to promote the history 

and culture of our province. Through this budget our 

government is providing $700,000 to create a Capital City 

Commission. Tourism will thrive by our new government 

working to ensure that Saskatchewan is ready for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province‟s transportation system is vital in 

sustaining the province‟s economic momentum. Saskatchewan 

Rivers constituency will greatly benefit from the TMS [thin 

membrane surface] upgrades and primary weight road strategy. 

The transportation system puts public safety and efficiency as a 

priority. 

 

One of the highlights of the budget for highways and 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan Rivers constituency includes 

11.3 million to complete work on the Cyr Road near Morin 

Lake Park in Big River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Improvements to Highway No. 55 on the east 

side of the constituency is also included in the budget. The 

winter maintenance program is a strategic component to 

economic regions in the province. 

 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency experiences unexpected 

variability of weather and above average snowfall on our 

northern highways. Our government implemented the night 

rider program to patrol highway regions scouting out tough 

travel conditions, and it has proved very successful in 

improving safety and travel conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ensuring that everyone benefits in the new West 

commenced when our government announced elimination of 

provincial sales tax on used light vehicles. Our strengthening 

economy provides the opportunity for tax reduction and helps 

many of the residents in Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 

And I do believe Saskatchewan is ready for growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud to state that 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency is home to the Shore Gold 

Star Diamond project, an exploration site in the Fort a La Corne 

area. I recently toured this site and was impressed by its 

extensive kimberlite field, one of the largest in the world. Our 

government is reinstating the 10 per cent Saskatchewan mineral 

exploration tax credit for flow-through share agreements. The 

Saskatchewan tax credit will once again parallel the federal 

credit for investments made by Saskatchewan taxpayers in 

support of the Saskatchewan mineral exploration activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our budget has strengthened the partnership with 

First Nations. The 2008 budget provides a 200,000 increase for 

total funding of $470,000 to support the First Nations institute 

in developing a management program to ensure that quality 

child welfare services are delivered. The budget will increase 

the involvement of First Nations and native peoples in 

Saskatchewan‟s economy and communities, as well as funding 

economic, social, and quality of life programming. 

 

Among the constituencies, Saskatchewan Rivers has four First 

Nations communities that will benefit from the funding. This 

will help their economic, social, and quality of life 

programming. The communities of Big River, Little Red, 

Sturgeon Lake, and Wahpeton First Nations have a very young 

population. Consultations with them have indicated their 

communities have a very rapid growth. Their leaders are 

addressing First Nation needs and the role the native peoples 

will play in the province‟s economic momentum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highlights for First Nations people include 50.9 

million for gaming agreements, 11.3 million to improve First 

Nations access roads to northern reserves through highways and 

infrastructure, and 3 million for First Nations consultation, 

including support for mapping of traditional territories. Our 

government has promised a commitment of hosting a round 

table on Aboriginal consultation, as well as $125,000 to honour 

and support the bilateral protocol with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, the 2008 budget provides 20.7 

million for nurse recruitment and retention, as well as a 60 

million partnership with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 

with 120 more nursing training seats. We‟re all very proud of 

our government‟s quick action on recruiting 300 nurses from 

the Philippines . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Wilson: — To immediately alleviate the nursing shortage. 

The budget is providing 6.1 million for more physician training 

seats, recruitment, and retention. We‟re also providing a $6 

million increase for new prescription drugs. The government is 

also committed to develop a seniors‟ health care strategy and 

providing $250,000 to conduct patient exit surveys. 

 

Rural health facilities and senior centres play a very important 

role and function in the communities of Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency. This constituency houses senior centres in Big 

River, Debden, Christopher Lake, and Smeaton; and they‟re all 

very important to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget provides a huge support for school 

capital projects in Saskatchewan. Communities in the province 

will receive record funding of 117 million for kindergarten to 

grade 12 school capital projects, as part as a ready-for-growth 

initiative. This year‟s budget will also include a 3 million 

increase for intensive support for students with learning 

difficulties and disabilities, recognizing the increased number of 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

students requiring specialized supports. I joined the Adopt an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] program and was 

very honoured to be included into a wonderful family who had 

a child with autism. Both parties continue to benefit from this 

ongoing, positive learning experience. And if he‟s watching, I‟d 

like to say hello to him. Hi Ryan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, research has indicated that investment in the early 

years fosters literacy, and we need to ensure all our students 

succeed in school to benefit from the growing economy as well 

as our province benefiting from their achievements. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, on the weekend I had the opportunity to 

attend a baby shower, one of our province‟s prairie customs. 

And the grandparents who are constituents and friends of mine, 

Doug and Karen Sarabin, were very happy to receive their first 

grandchild here in Saskatchewan. Juliana Brown is her name. 

And they are very happy to have their grandchild and their 

children all living in Saskatchewan due to the fact of our 

government. And what a great time to live in the new West, in 

Saskatchewan, a province ready for growth. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I will not be supporting the 

amendment. However I would like to thank my colleagues for 

their hard work and contributions to the budget which I support. 

I would proudly like to second the Saskatchewan provincial 

budget for the 2008 and 2009 years. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a delight for me to be 

able to stand to my feet in the House tonight and address the 

budget, the first budget by the new Saskatchewan Party 

government. It‟s a pleasure to be able to say that not only has 

the ministry of Highways and Transportation been benefactor 

from a large increase in resources, but we‟re actually going to 

see some work done on the roads this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the occasion where I have to say that . . . I 

want to say actually my thanks to the constituents of Cypress 

Hills. This is the first opportunity I‟ve had to speak in the 

House since the election last fall, and there has been a lot of 

water under the bridge in the intervening short four or five 

months. But nevertheless I want to express my gratitude to the 

people of Cypress Hills because in large numbers they saw how 

important it was for this province to have a new government, 

and it was reflected in the polling results where we were able to 

achieve about 76 per cent of the voter turnout. 

 

And that‟s very significant. That‟s a very clear mandate from 

the people of Cypress Hills to move this province forward, to 

stop looking in the rear-view mirror, to stop looking at our 

history, but look to the future, look what our potential might be, 

develop a vision for the province, and move to fulfill that 

vision. And I believe that the people of Cypress Hills are quite 

excited about the direction that the new government is taking 

already in its very short mandate to date. 

 

I just can‟t say enough, Mr. Speaker, about how much I 

appreciated the opportunity to go door to door in my 

constituency during the election campaign. And I want to speak 

in particular about the experiences I had in the north part of the 

constituency, the communities that are situated along Highway 

32, the notorious Highway 32, the highway that spawned the 

nude pothole calendar Highway 32 — that‟s the one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I knocked on almost every door in the 

communities of Cree Lake, Cabri, Abbey. I guess I missed a 

few there because it was getting pretty late at night. I was also 

in the area of Lancer. We knocked on every door in Sceptre. I 

knocked on many doors in the community of Leader. And 

without exception, and I can hardly imagine how conformed the 

view was on this particular issue, but without exception, if I 

asked the people at the door what the number one issue was for 

them personally and their communities, it was the condition of 

Highway 32. 

 

You know, the consensus around that issue and how negative 

the condition of that highway was in terms of their own 

psychology, in terms of the way they viewed themselves and 

their communities, in terms of the way they viewed the impact 

this highway was having on their potential was so specific, so 

concrete, that I was really moved to say at a couple of points, if 

I ever get an opportunity to do something about that highway, I 

will make it my priority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to stand here tonight, as the 

Minister of Highways and Transportation and Infrastructure, to 

say that we‟ve delivered on that for the people of those 

communities. We have put a three-year plan in place to 

completely rebuild Highway 32 from the community of 

Shackleton right through to Cree Lake. 

 

Not only that, we‟re going to do some paving around the 

community of Cabri. And in year 2 of our rollout that we 

undertook just a couple of days ago, we‟re going to do some 

paving from the junction with No. 1 right up to the community 

of Success. So large stretches of Highway 32 will be either 

completely rebuilt or repaved. And I think that we‟re going to 

see a blossoming of those communities, the economy that those 

communities will generate as a result of this new highway. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to say that that highway 

will be built to a primary weight standard which is something 

that is absolutely crucial to the success of these many small 

rural communities. They‟ve been handcuffed for far too long by 

inadequate infrastructure, crumbling roads. And when they did 

have a highway, it often wasn‟t a primary weight highway, and 

we‟re addressing that issue in terms of Highway 32. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another highway that we decided to move on for 

very good economic reasons was Highway 37, south of 

Shaunavon coming into the community of Climax. I want to 

point out for you, Mr. Speaker, and for the benefit of our 

colleagues in the House how silly some of the previous 

decisions were made by the members opposite when they were 

in power. Highway No. 37 from Gull Lake to the river hill was 

a beautiful road, well constructed, one of the best highways in 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

the province. And in fact, I congratulated the Highways 

minister at that time for the quality of the construction. It was 

one of the best roads in the province. 

 

From south there from the river valley, Swift Current Creek 

Valley to Shaunavon, moving further south, there was a 

reasonably good road. But it was starting to see some effects of 

a lot of truck traffic, and some wear and tear had taken a bit of a 

toll there. There was some new paving to kind of address some 

of that issue, which allowed primary weights to roll from the 

community of Gull Lake down to Shaunavon. 

 

From Shaunavon south about 25 miles or 35 kilometres, there 

was a complete effort to rebuild that road over about three 

years. A lot of money was spent on the Frenchman River 

Valley. And it was a primary weight road, but primary weight 

trucks were not allowed to run on that stretch of road. You had 

13 kilometres from the Frenchman River Valley to the 

community of Climax. From Climax you had another 13 or 15 

kilometres to the US border. That entire stretch was left as a 

TMS road — a TMS road, Mr. Speaker. No primary weights 

were allowed on the new section from Shaunavon south to the 

river valley, and from there we had TMS roads to the border. 

 

Now all the investment and primary weight construction from 

Gull Lake to the Frenchman River Valley, a distance of about 

45 miles, was wasted because the corridor wasn‟t completed. 

Trucks that wanted to use that route to export product into the 

United States, into the southwest American market, couldn‟t 

use that road because they were not allowed to run primary 

weights on that particular stretch of highway. What is the 

purpose of spending a lot of money on primary weight 

construction for 45 miles and then leaving the remaining 20 

miles or 32 kilometres TMS roads? 

 

That‟s the kind of situation we‟re finding on highways 

throughout this province. And that‟s one of the things the new 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure is going to address. 

And we‟re starting to do that in the budget that we presented 

this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the largest budget in the history of this 

province going into infrastructure. We have $513 million — a 

15 per cent increase over last year‟s expenditures, a $67 million 

increase in real dollars. Now if there‟s a question about how 

much construction that will buy, let me put the minds at ease of 

the members opposite. We‟re going to see 800 kilometres of 

roads either rehabilitated or rebuilt or built new. And we‟re 

going to see 600 kilometres of road repaired and maintained 

this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear the member from Nutana asking how many 

more kilometres over last year. Mr. Speaker, what they don‟t 

understand is they had a budget, but they never performed the 

work. There‟s literally hundreds of kilometres of work that was 

in the budget last year that was never done. We must do that 

this year. It might look good on paper. The numbers might look 

pretty small on paper, but the actual effect on the road network 

in this province is going to be very significant. Fourteen 

hundred kilometres of road in this province are going to see 

some level of work this year because of this budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, not only that, we‟re going to find that the level and the 

quality of work is going to be significantly better. 

When we were talking to the people of this province about what 

they wanted in highway construction, what they said is spend 

your limited resources in the most effective way possible. Don‟t 

spread $300 million over 26,000 kilometres of road. 

 

We‟re going to make sure that the roads are well built. We‟re 

going to make sure they‟re built to a primary weight standard. 

We‟re going to make sure that there is quality in the 

construction. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re also going to start 

looking at new technology to make the construction more 

environmentally sustainable. That‟s what the people of this 

province asked for. The other thing they asked for, Mr. Speaker, 

was a plan — a very clear, concise, and readable plan. Mr. 

Speaker, that is what the Saskatchewan Party government in 

this budget is producing for the people of Saskatchewan. They 

wanted to know when the road would be fixed and to what 

level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of the rollout of our five-year plan, we 

are going to be able to provide that information with 

predictability to the communities around this province. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s impossible to overcome a 20-year deficit, a $1 

billion deficit, in 2, 3, 4, or 5 years, so we‟re going to roll out 

another five-year plan as we move through the first five-year 

plan, and people will understand clearly from the criteria we‟ve 

established where their communities sit in the reconstruction 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well I hear one of 

the former Highways ministers chirping from his seat and it‟s 

really interesting. Mr. Speaker, I have a story to tell about 

another previous Highways minister. It was just after the 

election, and the former member from Meadow Lake met me in 

the cafeteria downstairs. We were having quite a nice 

discussion. And he‟d come back for a cabinet meeting. Because 

he was unelected, he had to drive back. And he‟d met me in the 

cafeteria, and you know what his comments were to me, Mr. 

Speaker? That‟s a long drive and, boy, those roads aren‟t very 

good. 

 

You know here‟s a former Highways minister who had to admit 

the roads weren‟t very good. The last three Highways ministers, 

they didn‟t even drive the roads let alone fix them. They 

checked them out from 13,000 feet. Mr. Speaker, the roads look 

pretty good at 13,000 feet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have a very clear idea of where 

we want to go with our highways in this province. We have 

committed ourselves to a very clear set of standards to construct 

highways. We have negotiated with some communities. We‟re 

talking to others. We‟re looking for partnership opportunities. 

And we really think that the people of Saskatchewan, after long 

seeking, long desiring some clarity on this topic, will appreciate 

the approach that we‟re taking in highway construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has come to my attention as 

a minister is the need to start replacing bridges and culverts in 

this province. We had at one time a whole initiative to build 

roads with short span bridges, but those bridges, when they 

were constructed, had about a 40- to maybe 50-year life 

expectancy. Those bridges mostly were constructed in the ‟40s 

and ‟50s. So as you can tell, Mr. Speaker, we‟re really coming 

to the end of the reasonable lifespan expectation for those 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

bridges. 

 

So we need to undertake a very rigorous and strenuous effort to 

replace those bridges, in most instances with large culverts, but 

in some instances we‟re going to replace the bridge. But rather 

than the $9 million we had forecast for expenditure in bridges, 

we‟re going to more than double that to nineteen and a half 

million dollars. And that‟s just this year‟s instalment, Mr. 

Speaker. There will be considerable monies of a similar nature 

in next year‟s budget and as we go forward. 

 

It‟s very important that we deal with these decaying 

infrastructure issues as soon as we can. We don‟t want to be the 

government in power when a truck collapses a bridge. We don‟t 

want to have the same kind of devastation that occurred in 

Quebec when some of their overpass infrastructure collapsed on 

travelling vehicles. We don‟t want to have an episode, Lord 

forbid, like they had in Minnesota when that whole structure 

went down. We don‟t want to see loss of life in this province 

because we failed to take our responsibilities seriously. Mr. 

Speaker, we have a huge backlog of infrastructure that needs to 

be addressed, and this party, this budget, is starting to address 

that very problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have so much more I could say about this 

budget. I‟ve got at least 60 seconds left, I guess. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there‟s been a few people from the 

other side who said well — you know what? — your five-year 

plan is the same thing as our five-year plan. Mr. Speaker, the 

difference will be that while they talked about it in the last few 

months of their mandate — they talked about a plan; I‟ll grant 

them that — but it was a johnny-come-lately kind of plan 

because even last spring when they introduced the plan, their 

own leader, the former premier, the now Leader of the 

Opposition, said publicly and he‟s quoted in the paper. What 

was the NDP plan for highways and infrastructure? Good 

question. “„How we have been doing things in the past has been 

in many cases ad hoc without a long-term plan . . .‟” 

 

That was the admission of the then premier, the current Leader 

of the Opposition. They never had a plan. They put a plan 

together. They cobbled one together in desperation in the last 

few months of their mandate, and now they have the nerve to sit 

in their seats and say they had a plan. They didn‟t fix roads 

according to a plan. Their own leader said it was an ad hoc 

approach. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. It will be a plan built on 

transparency and clarity. The people of the province will know 

when their roads will be fixed. They‟ll know the quality. 

They‟ll know the timing. They‟ll know the fact that this is good 

quality and environmentally sustainable construction, and I‟m 

pleased as can be to represent that budget in the debate tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to take my word for it. The 

members opposite don‟t have to take my word for it. They 

might want to listen to the people of the province for a change. 

Let me recite some of the headlines that came about as a result 

of the budget released a week or so ago: “Saskatchewan 

Teachers‟ Federation welcomes overdue funding for K to 12 

education.” 

 

Here‟s a headline: “SARM pleased with provincial investments 

in infrastructure.” I‟ll read the quote: 

 

Infrastructure is key to the future growth and development 

of this province and we are glad to see this government is 

committed to following through on its election promises 

and make a provincial investment in infrastructure. 

 

Here‟s another headline: “Chamber supports strategic 

investments to promote future growth.” The “CFIB says 

provincial budget paves the way to prosperity.” I love the pun 

there. The headline from: 

 

Saskatchewan Trucking Association president endorses 

highways budget — Highways department „on the right 

road.‟ 

 

Mr. Speaker, “Mayor Fiacco says the provincial budget is a step 

in the right direction.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what gives me more pleasure than anything today 

is to read all 40 of the promises that we made in the election 

that were incorporated in this budget. Mr. Speaker, never in the 

history of this province has this kind of effort been made to 

incorporate the promises that a political party made on the 

campaign trail into its first budget. Most governments haven‟t 

be able to incorporate all their promises in budgets for four, five 

years. We did it in the first year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this is an initiative that I‟m 

very proud of, and I‟m pleased to have played a role in this. 

This is important stuff. It establishes the credibility of this 

government in the minds of the people of the province. They 

voted for us and now they know why they voted for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support this budget, and I have 

every expectation that the people of Saskatchewan will be well 

served by it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

today and respond to the government‟s budget. A budget is an 

important time for a province and an important time for a new 

government. In my remarks today I would like to spend some 

time discussing what this budget means for Saskatchewan and 

specifically for my constituents in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party‟s first budget is a telling document. 

It is telling because it provides some clear insight into the 

nature of the Sask Party, and it provides some useful lessons for 

the people of this fine province, lessons that I will address 

towards the end of my speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thanks to fiscal discipline that the previous NDP government 

demonstrated and thanks to the hard work of Saskatchewan 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

people, the Finance minister had a mountain of money with 

which to build his budget. This mountain of cash has certainly 

made delivering our province‟s 15th consecutive balanced 

budget a whole lot easier. 

 

You know I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was more than a 

little amused in the early days of this government when the 

Premier made the remark that the province‟s finances were 

quote, “stark.” Now most people in this province saw his 

comments for what they really were, simply an attempt to start 

the process of lowering people‟s expectations. After years of 

rhetoric and claiming to be all things to all people, after years of 

building up many expectations, the Premier realized the 

challenge of governing might be more difficult than he 

previously thought. But the Premier using the word stark to 

describe the massive amount of money his government 

inherited was laughable. 

 

Perhaps the Premier needs to be reminded of what really is 

stark. Throughout our history, Mr. Speaker, there has been a 

stark contrast between the multiple terms of Tory rule and 

multiple terms of New Democratic governance. Many examples 

can be given to illustrate this stark contrast. We could look at 

job numbers, growth of GDP, number of new training seats, 

increase in housing starts, and the list could go on and on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you really boil it down, I think the most 

stark contrast is this. When Tories leave government, there‟s a 

mountain of debt, and when New Democrats leave government, 

there‟s a mountain of cash. That‟s the stark contrast the Premier 

should be talking about, and that‟s the stark contrast he should 

keep in mind as his party rules this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before getting into the heart of my speech, there 

are a couple of inconsistencies in this government‟s messaging 

that has caused me to scratch my head in disbelief. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is not because I couldn‟t understand the remarks 

that the members made. Rather it is that these marks that the 

members made do not mesh in any way with what the Sask 

Party has been spinning for years. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, this is my first term as a member of 

this Assembly. So like most new members, I‟ve spent some 

time looking back through past speeches and debates in 

Hansard out of curiosity and to gain a better understanding of 

the history behind some issues. 

 

So as I was reading through Hansard, I came across some 

interesting statements from the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, made on March 22, 2007. I was truly puzzled when I 

read his remarks, Mr. Speaker. You see, at the time the member 

for Saskatoon Silver Springs was the Sask Party‟s Finance 

critic, and he was responding to the NDP budget. And what did 

he say, Mr. Speaker? Well he said the 2007 budget was not a 

balanced budget. Oh he spouted on and on about what he 

claimed was a $701 million deficit. A little further into his 

speech, he criticized the NDP for increasing spending by nine 

per cent. It was unsustainable, he said, and the sky was surely 

about to come crashing down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear some Sask Party members over there 

reacting to my remarks. I guess they too can‟t believe that the 

member from Silver Springs actually said things like this. 

But wait, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not all. The member went on to 

describe the Fiscal Stabilization Fund as, quote, “an election 

slush fund.” These remarks on their own aren‟t really that 

interesting or particularly insightful. But when these remarks 

are contrasted with the recent spin by the Finance minister, they 

take on quite a bit more meaning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget documents released by the Finance 

minister don‟t agree in any way with what the member for 

Saskatoon Silver Springs had been saying for years. You see, 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister‟s documents recognize the 

sound fiscal management of the previous NDP government. On 

the key facts and figures backgrounder, right under the title of 

sound fiscal management, it says . . . This is the quote, “15th 

consecutive balanced budget.” Well that stands in stark contrast 

to what the Sask Party has been saying for years, Mr. Speaker. 

They used to constantly cry about the previous budgets being 

deficit budgets. 

 

So it‟s good to see they‟ve finally come around in their 

thinking, Mr. Speaker, to recognize the solid financial 

management of the NDP. After years of rhetoric to the contrary, 

they finally admit that the NDP delivered 14 consecutive 

balanced budgets and left a mountain of money behind to make 

the Sask Party‟s job of delivering a 15th balanced budget rather 

easy. Now that‟s a stark contrast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also read in the budget summary that spending is going up 10 

per cent. This too is rather puzzling when you look back at how 

agitated the member for Silver Springs was last year about a 

nine per cent spending increase. Again, Mr. Speaker, what a 

stark contrast between their past rhetoric and their current 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s very puzzling to see the Sask Party‟s embrace 

of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Oh sure they‟ve renamed and 

tinkered with it slightly, but make no mistake, the fund in its 

essence is the same. The Finance minister himself admitted this 

in the Leader-Post when he said, “fundamentally, there is very 

little difference.” So once again, the before and the after is a 

stark contrast. 

 

It‟s almost as though the Sask Party is experiencing a bout of 

collective amnesia. I would have assumed that the member for 

Silver Springs would have been able to find the time to brief the 

Minister of Finance on what the Sask Party rhetoric had been 

for several years. But I guess he was too busy, likely too busy 

reading some SaskPower reports that he has yet to share with 

the rest of cabinet. But that is the topic for a different speech, 

Mr. Speaker, so I will move on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the Sask Party got some things right, they 

have left some gaping holes in terms of addressing the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. The first area is the Sask Party‟s failure 

to provide real property tax relief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no other incoming government in the history of 

this province has inherited such a strong financial situation as 

the Sask Party did last November. They are sitting on $1.3 

billion. In such lucrative times, Mr. Speaker, it is bewildering 

that all the Sask Party will do on the property tax file is give a 

meagre $27 rebate to the average homeowner. This $27 rebate 

is in stark contrast with what the Premier promised in his last 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

election campaign. 

 

In his platform, he committed to, quote, “doubling education 

property tax rebates saving the average homeowner $450 a 

year.” That‟s a pretty explicit promise, Mr. Speaker, a promise 

which this government has failed to keep. They did not double 

education property taxes; they didn‟t even come close to that. 

Rather they simply increased the rebate that homeowners 

receive on education property tax bills from 10 per cent to 12 

per cent — a 2 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a far cry 

from fulfilling their promise. 

 

As for their promise to save the average homeowner $450 per 

year, well they fall $423 short on that promise. The average 

homeowner will receive just an additional $27 in a property tax 

rebate. Now that‟s a stark contrast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been thinking about what $27 means to 

my constituents. Twenty-seven dollars would buy a few 

delicious coffees and desserts from Café Vivant on 33rd Street. 

It would buy a good chicken supper from Chicken Delight. It 

might even get you half a tank of gas at the 33rd Street Co-op. 

So sure, it‟d buy you a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But the likelihood 

of homeowners in my constituency actually being able to spend 

their $27 on such purchases is slim because this government‟s 

failure to adequately fund municipalities. 

 

Allan Earle, the president of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, said that the Sask Party‟s budget 

“. . . will not allow municipalities to avoid property tax 

increases this year.” And the day after the budget, The 

StarPhoenix reported that “The provincial budget does not 

contain enough revenue sharing dollars for the city of 

Saskatoon to stave off another increase to its property tax rate 

this year, Mayor Don Atchison warned . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t recall the Premier talking during the 

election campaign about forcing communities to raise taxes for 

the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s strange, Mr. Speaker. On the 

one hand, the Sask Party is giving a skimpy $27 of property tax 

relief, and on the other hand they‟re forcing municipalities like 

the city of Saskatoon to increase property tax, so at the end of 

the day Saskatchewan people will be paying more and getting 

less. That meagre $27 rebate that homeowners in Saskatoon 

Massey Place and across the province are supposed to receive 

will simply be gobbled up by higher taxes. 

 

Even the Canadian Taxpayers Federation is frustrated by this, 

Mr. Speaker. Lee Harding said he is, quote, “. . . concerned 

because when Saskatchewan is doing so well as an economy, 

when you cannot see some kind of meaningful tax relief in a 

circumstance like that, it makes a person wonder if you‟re going 

to see it at any time.” 

 

Sitting on $1.3 billion and not providing meaningful tax relief, 

that‟s a stark contrast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just days before the election the Premier said, “„If we can make 

permanent property tax relief in Saskatchewan, it‟s going to 

lower the cost of housing, whether it‟s rental or principal 

residences‟ . . .” But when he had a chance to act and actually 

do something, he failed to put his money where his mouth used 

to be. Rather he simply promised further study. 

Well back when the member from Wood River actually had a 

voice around the caucus table and in this Chamber, he said 

regarding the property tax issue, quote, “There‟s been enough 

study. It‟s time for action.” On this issue at least, the Premier 

should take the member‟s advice. They inherited a mountain of 

cash when they came into office, Mr. Speaker. Surely the Sask 

Party could do better and provide real property tax relief to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second area that is a glaring oversight is any 

real action on affordable housing. Over the last several months, 

I‟ve heard from many of my constituents about the critical area 

of housing — student housing, seniors‟ housing, low-income 

housing, and the rising cost of rent. Affordable housing is a 

priority for many of my constituents and many people across 

the province, but if this budget is any indication, housing is not 

a priority for the Sask Party. They have done nothing to address 

this issue. They have done nothing to provide help to students 

or seniors or low-income people and they‟ve done nothing to 

provide relief to renters. 

 

As I pointed out earlier, the Premier really liked to use the word 

stark shortly after he was elected. Well the contrast between this 

side of the House and that side of the House could not be more 

stark than on the issue of affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Housing is an important issue for the NDP, but clearly it hardly 

registers on the Sask Party radar. Mr. Speaker, you may recall 

that the member from Regina Rosemont and I camped out with 

university students at the University of Regina. And several of 

us from the NDP caucus joined University of Saskatchewan 

students to draw attention to the critical issue of student 

housing. And we presented many petitions in this Assembly on 

the issue of affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And the previous NDP government allocated a lot of resources 

to a variety of housing initiatives. There was the $200 million 

for the HomeFirst housing strategy to improve housing 

conditions for low- to moderate-income households, which 

resulted in almost 1,500 affordable housing units in 

communities throughout the province. The NDP increased 

shelter allowances and rental housing supplements for families 

receiving assistance. The NDP created a HomeFirst secondary 

suites program to help people build basement suites in existing 

housing. And the NDP helped some 500 families purchase a 

home with forgivable loans and a deferred repayable 

low-interest mortgage through the HomeFirst homeownership 

program. Clearly members on this side of the House recognize 

that housing is a critical issue for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But what has the Sask Party done? They‟ve simply created a 

housing affordability task force to spend more time studying the 

issue. No action, Mr. Speaker. What a stark contrast from the 

NDP. 

 

The third area that the Sask Party fails to address in their budget 

is the need to continue to aggressively increase training seats. 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we know how important 

training spaces are, which is why the NDP continually invested 

in new training seats and new opportunities for young people to 

fully participate in our economy. The NDP budget last year 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

provided for an additional 2,000 new training spaces. 

 

That stands in stark contrast to the Sask Party budget this year, 

which cuts the expansion of new training seats in half as 

compared to last year. At a time when our economy is booming 

like never before, at a time when the need for skilled workers is 

higher than ever before, the Sask Party slashes the increase of 

new training seats in half. Mr. Speaker, they‟ve introduced a 

half-NDP budget that goes halfway towards addressing the 

critical issues. 

 

This budget is apparently supposed to be about getting ready for 

growth. But without skilled workers, there will be no more 

growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two years ago the member from Swift Current 

issued a little report entitled Getting Saskatchewan Back on 

Track. This report dealt with, quote, “the immediate labour 

shortage crisis.” Back when the Sask Party was in opposition, 

they said the labour shortage was an immediate crisis. But now 

that they have a chance to act, all we see is less of the same. 

This budget fails to make Saskatchewan ready for growth 

because it falls so horribly short in providing the training spaces 

that are essential for our booming economy. 

 

Another area where this budget misses the mark, Mr. Speaker, 

is in the area of the environment. The environment is a priority 

for my constituents, young people I meet at our universities and 

colleges, and for people across Saskatchewan. But 

unfortunately, it is not enough of a priority for the Sask Party 

government. Now to be fair, Mr. Speaker, it was a good thing 

that the Sask Party has adopted all the previous NDP 

government‟s targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions. That‟s a good thing. But the problem is that they‟ve 

gutted most of the funding that is necessary to actually meet 

those targets. 

 

The Sask Party cut the $320 million that the NDP set aside in 

the Green Future Fund to help our province to meet our 

emissions reduction targets. They simply cut it. So now under 

the Sask Party we have emissions reduction targets, but we 

don‟t have the money set aside to meet them. Rather we have a 

paltry sum of $10 million put towards climate change with an 

obscure reference to 7.8 million of that as simply being 

earmarked for other green initiatives. Just 10 million and there‟s 

clearly no plan whatsoever for most of that money. That‟s a 

stark contrast from firm emission reduction targets with 320 

million to meet them under the previous NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There‟s a lot about this budget that falls short, Mr. Speaker. But 

there are some good things that I was pleased to see included in 

the budget. So let me briefly address two particular aspects of 

this budget that stood out for me. 

 

In February 2007 the NDP government committed funding to 

the expansion of Oliver Lodge long-term care facility in my 

constituency. I am pleased that the Finance minister didn‟t pull 

the plug on that project and has allocated funds to continue this 

expansion. This is an important project. It will more than 

double the number of residents receiving care. It will enhance 

programming for seniors in my community, and it will increase 

specialized services for people living with dementia. So that‟s 

positive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, since community schools were first 

designated in Saskatchewan in 1980 under Blakeney‟s NDP 

government, they have played an important role in so many of 

our communities. Community schools are a crucial part of my 

constituency. I‟ve had the opportunity to visit some of them, 

and I look forward to future visits as well. So I was pleased to 

see $500,000 committed to school lunch and anti-hunger 

programs in community schools. That‟s a good thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Those are two particular aspects of this budget that have 

positive implications for my constituency. So I thank the 

Finance minister for allocating that funding. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve identified four areas where much more 

needs to be done — property tax relief, affordable housing, 

training opportunities, and the environment. And as we look at 

this budget as a whole and as we observe the government‟s 

actions over the last while, we can gain a few insights about the 

Sask Party. 

 

The first lesson is that we need to read the fine print. The 

government talks about a tuition rebate, but when we read the 

fine print, Mr. Speaker, it becomes apparent that the rebate is 

only for some students and not for others. 

 

The government talks about expanding the $15 drug plan, but 

when we read the fine print, we soon see how they are kicking 

out a whole bunch of seniors out of the plan who were 

previously covered by it. 

 

On budget day the Finance minister stood in this Assembly and 

waxed eloquently that, quote: 

 

Today‟s budget will benefit the hungry and provide care 

for the vulnerable adults and children in our society . . . 

Today‟s budget will support active and healthy families in 

Saskatchewan, and encourage safe and vibrant 

communities. 

 

Well contrary to the minister‟s speech, the Sask Party ripped 

away the funding that has been given for Station 20 West 

initiative in one of the most stressed neighbourhoods in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The plan for Station 20 West is to bring together a broad range 

of services including: affordable housing, a co-operative 

grocery store, a library branch, health care and dental services, a 

legal aid clinic, and community development offices. This is 

such an important project, Mr. Speaker. But contrary to Sask 

Party talk about safe and vibrant communities, the truth was in 

the fine print when we learned that their concern doesn‟t extend 

to the west side of Saskatoon. 

 

Well they‟ve tried to come off as moderate, their Harper 

tendencies — dare I say Devine tendencies — are beginning to 

shine through the glossy coat of paint. They‟re leading students 

out of the tuition rebate, they‟re kicking seniors out of the $15 

drug plan, and they‟re pulling the plug on a critical inner-city 

project. Clearly the brutal details are in the fine print. 

 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

The second lesson that Saskatchewan people can take away 

from this budget is brace yourself for its delivery. This is where 

it gets ugly. Let‟s look at Social Services for example, Mr. 

Speaker. After the complete fiasco we‟ve seen in the last couple 

of weeks, Saskatchewan people are left wondering who is in 

charge of Social Services. The reorganization plans have left 

Social Services staff in turmoil. One income assistance worker 

is quoted in the The StarPhoenix as saying, quote: 

 

“It‟s an emotional roller-coaster. It‟s been very hard on 

staff morale. The stress level has been phenomenal”. . . 

 

“And there has not been a whole lot of answers.” 

 

Now what does the minister do? Pathetically she slams civil 

servants and takes no responsibility for her decision she must 

have approved. 

 

On the Station 20 West front, they ripped away the funding, and 

then they couldn‟t even get their story straight. One minister 

gave one reason, another minister gave another reason, and then 

the Premier himself came out and gave yet another reason. It‟s 

no wonder that just this past Saturday The StarPhoenix wrote 

that, quote: 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the 

public purse, Premier Brad Wall‟s team has been 

extravagant in its spending, ham-handed in its 

communications strategy and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

My advice to the people of Saskatchewan — brace yourself for 

the ham-handed communications and the incompetent delivery. 

 

The third lesson is that the Sask Party views the world through 

an us-versus-them lens. We actually see this right within the 

Sask Party itself, Mr. Speaker. The so-called voices of 

moderation, the self-identified liberals over there, like the 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, appears to be 

shut right out of decisions, totally ignored, serving as a token 

representative. 

 

I would have thought that when the war on the poor was 

approved around the cabinet table and the funding was ripped 

away from Station 20 West that she of all people would have 

been a dissenting voice. So one can only assume that her voice 

is ignored. She‟s one of many over there who is clearly outside 

of the inner circle — the inner circle of old boys. That‟s also, by 

the way, a page right out of the federal Tory playbook. 

 

But the us-versus-them approach doesn‟t only apply to the Sask 

Party‟s internal dealings. It extends to how they deal with the 

public and how they make funding decisions. I could give many 

examples, but the most pertinent right now is again the Station 

20 West decision. Each minister says something different, but 

the Premier‟s is the most telling. He pretends that the private 

sector is chomping at the bit to set up a grocery store in the 

inner city and fails to understand that there hasn‟t been a real 

grocery store in the core communities for years. 

 

This led The StarPhoenix to write: 

 

But Wall‟s clear lack of understanding about the dire 

needs of core neighbourhoods and the history of 

Saskatoon demonstrates just how out of touch he remains 

with urban Saskatchewan. Considering the role the 

province‟s largest city is playing in the economic revival 

of Saskatchewan, such ignorance could have dire 

consequences. 

 

With the Sask Party, it‟s an us-versus-them approach in which a 

few benefit but most lose, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to wrap up my response to the budget, some 

things about this budget are right but far too many things are 

wrong. This budget just doesn‟t hit the mark for my 

constituents. It fails to address the important areas of property 

tax relief, affordable housing, training opportunities, and the 

environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the fine print reveals too many nasty details, 

the delivery of those details has demonstrated clear 

incompetence, and the Sask Party seems to view far too many 

issues with an us-versus-them lens. Sadly, my constituency 

seems to fall into the them category for this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be able to support this budget because to 

do so would be a betrayal of the people of Saskatoon Massey 

Place, who‟ve sent me here to stand up on their behalf and to 

work to make their lives better. Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I am pleased to rise today to speak to 

my government‟s first budget. And I would like to begin by 

thanking the Finance minister and his officials for all of their 

hard work. We were working on a much shorter time frame 

than normal, and I know that there was many late nights put in. 

And I want to express my appreciation to the Finance minister 

and to those in his office. 

 

During the election campaign last fall, our party laid out a 

platform that contained numerous common sense and 

achievable ideas. We promised the people of Saskatchewan that 

we would keep our word to them, that we would keep our 

promises. In this budget we did just that. 

 

I talked to a reporter on budget day and said to him, quite 

simply, that there were not a lot of surprises in this budget. The 

reason for that is we delivered in the budget what we promised 

people during the campaign. People could look at our campaign 

platform and see for themselves what would be in this budget. 

The one good surprise was the $1 billion, ready-for-growth 

infrastructure fund — the largest capital investment in the 

history of this province. 

 

After 16 years of NDP neglect, there is much work to be done 

to ensure that the economic momentum in our province is built 

upon and that we‟re ready for continued growth. The NDP left 

behind, after 16 years, crumbling highways and roads, 

overcrowded and broken schools and hospitals. And why is 

that? It is because the NDP never planned for growth. They 

planned at the very least for status quo, and at the worst, they 



450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

were planning for decline. 

 

The NDP didn‟t have a vision for this province. They never 

truly believed that we would grow. They had no plans for the 

growth that we are seeing today. While the NDP apparently 

think that Saskatchewan is a great place to be from, we on this 

side of the house believe that Saskatchewan is a great place to 

be. 

 

As we sit through question period and hear the preambles to the 

NDP questions with references to things that happened in the 

1980s and the 1990s, it is very clear that they are looking 

backward. This new government is looking to the future. 

Saskatchewan is already leading the nation in many areas of 

growth. We are seeing a steady stream of people moving to 

Saskatchewan — some for the very first time, and many are 

returning after leaving for other provinces. And we welcome 

them all. 

 

And we believe that it is incumbent upon our government to 

ensure that the services that people expect and deserve are here. 

People expect decent roads and highways. This budget has 

delivered over $400 million for roads and highways. People 

expect schools for their children. This budget has delivered over 

$160 million for capital projects and school improvements. 

People expect timely access to health care, and they expect safe 

health care facilities. This budget has delivered over $190 

million for capital and repairs. It also delivers 120 additional 

training seats for registered nurses, an additional 42 seats for 

health care professionals at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], and expands medical student 

training positions to 100 and residency training to 120 over the 

next few years. 

 

[20:30] 

 

As Saskatchewan grows and prospers, we must take care to 

make sure that all of our province‟s citizens benefit. And we are 

addressing these needs as well. We have committed increased 

funding to school lunch and hunger programs. We have 

expanded prescription drug coverage to include children aged 

14 and under. We have also committed millions more to food 

banks and community-based organizations that provide life and 

employment skills training. 

 

Our most vulnerable citizens will also benefit from our 

province‟s prosperity. We exceeded our commitment with the 

caregivers tax credit. Funding for addiction centres, transition 

houses, and sexual assault centres has also been increased. 

 

And what does the NDP have to say about all this? In their 

typical pessimistic attitude, they say it‟s not enough. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have one thing to say in response: what we delivered 

for the people of this province in this budget is more than the 

NDP ever did. The NDP had 16 years to address these issues 

and failed. That is their record. 

 

I read through the NDP Finance critic‟s budget speech the other 

day and was once again taken aback by the sheer hypocrisy of 

his remarks. He complained that the property tax relief wasn‟t 

enough. However the reduction that we announced in the 

budget was exactly what we promised we would deliver. On top 

of that, the Premier has asked the member for Rosetown-Elrose 

to develop a long-term plan to address this issue. 

 

I would point out that the NDP promised to do this but failed. 

The NDP have been talking about fixing property tax issue 

since the days of Tommy Douglas. That‟s a six-decade record 

of failure and broken promises. The NDP leader boldly 

announced a few years back that, with respect to property taxes, 

the status quo was not on and then promptly proceeded with the 

status quo. 

 

The Finance critic also lamented the fact that we used the NDP 

slush fund from their privatization of the NewGrade Upgrader 

for things other than an NDP slush fund. We chose to use it for 

things like highway construction, debt repayment as well as 

climate change initiatives. Shortly before the last election, the 

NDP sold off the provincial interest in the upgrader for a 

climate change slush fund right before the election. However 

they had no plan on how to use that money. It was nothing more 

than an NDP press release. Much of what the NDP did on this 

file is nothing more than a press release or a photo op. 

 

The NDP‟s Environment critic complained that we were not 

keeping their climate change secretariat. There was nothing to 

keep because it never existed. It was nothing more than yet 

another NDP press release. When asked by reporters why a 

climate change secretariat was necessary, her answer was that 

only an NDP secretariat had the necessary clout to ensure that 

the government‟s policies were implemented. What a shocking 

indictment of the former NDP government and cabinet 

ministers. I find it interesting that the NDP‟s own Environment 

critic didn‟t believe that her government and ministers had the 

necessary clout to make sure their departments would get the 

job done. 

 

The NDP‟s slush fund press release aside, our budget delivered 

an additional $10 million per year for climate change and go 

green initiatives. This more than doubles what the NDP had 

allocated in their last budget. And speaking of the NDP‟s last 

budget and their last budget speech, I would point out once 

again that our Finance minister actually talked about climate 

change and go green plans in his budget speech. The NDP‟s last 

budget speech failed to even mention the word environment. 

The reason there is so much work to be done on this file is that, 

under the NDP, greenhouse gas emissions were allowed to rise 

by 62 per cent. Their bluster on this issue was absolutely 

hypocritical. 

 

Instead of issuing press releases and organizing photo ops, we 

will work with Saskatchewan residents, business, Crowns, and 

industry to ensure that the money we spend through go green 

funding goes to projects that make a difference and offer real 

results. 

 

We don‟t expect the NDP to endorse our budget. Their job as 

official opposition is to oppose, but as recent polls show, the 

people of this province are pleased with their new government. 

We are humbled by the support that we have received and will 

continue to work hard to earn that support. There are many who 

are very pleased not only with the specifics of this budget but 

with the new direction that this government is taking to ensure 

continued growth and prosperity for Saskatchewan residents, 

business, and industry. On our ready-for-growth infrastructure 

fund, business commentator Paul Martin said, and I quote: 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

With the title Ready for Growth the Saskatchewan Party 

directed its attention to infrastructure, the foundation for 

economic growth as we build a new platform to continue 

building upon. And the government‟s promise in the last 

election that it will deliver a growth agenda took a giant 

step forward. 

 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation president Dianne 

Woloschuk responded to the millions of dollars in new funding 

for education by saying, and I quote, “This is significant and in 

truth it‟s been long overdue.” Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ 

Association executive director Donna Brunskill, on our 

government‟s commitment to addressing the nursing shortage, 

said and I quote, “For the first time in a decade I am confident 

that the RN shortage is getting the attention it deserves.” 

 

Denis Prud‟homme, president, Saskatchewan Trucking 

Association, in response to $400 million for highways said, and 

I quote: 

 

This is an exciting time for truck transport. We‟re seeing a 

government that wants to lead change. 

 

And to sum it all up, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

president, Steve McLellan had this to say, and I quote: 

 

The new capital investments in post-secondary education, 

roads, municipalities, and healthcare . . . will help the 

province realize sustainable, strategic growth not only in 

the short term, but in the future as well. 

 

And as I said earlier, there were not a lot of surprises in this 

budget simply because we are doing what we said we would do; 

we are keeping our promises. Prior to this budget, our 

government had already kept a list of promises. This budget 

adds to that list and keeps an additional 40 promises. 

 

We are facing a pivotal moment in our province‟s history. 

Saskatchewan is a leading economic driver in Canada. We 

continue to lead the nation in many areas, such as housing 

starts, retail sales, and for the first time in a long time, in 

population growth. 

 

The status quo is no longer good enough. It is the responsibility 

of government to plan for the future, not to look to the past. If 

we expect our province to continue to grow and to prosper, we 

must ensure that we have the infrastructure in place to meet that 

growth. We believe in our province. We believe in the potential 

of Saskatchewan people. And we believe we can continue to 

grow and prosper. And I believe that this budget is a first step in 

that direction. It is my pleasure to stand today to support my 

government‟s first budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon southwest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in support of the 

budget, and I have taken exception with some of the 

opposition‟s comments on this so-called socialist opposition 

that they call themselves. You know, Mr. Speaker, they make 

comments such as Regina Walsh Acres leaving the poorest of 

us behind or the Saskatoon Massey MLA saying, doesn‟t 

extend to the west side or the war on the poor. 

 

You know, it‟s interesting to listen to them over there. I don‟t 

think one of them has lived a day poor. I grew up in the inner 

city, and when I look at my budget as a member of this party 

. . . where I grew up in the toughest inner city in Canada as a 

product of rape to a teenage mother. I listened to these people 

over there who haven‟t missed a day of meals in their lives — 

especially this one over here — who sit there with their smug 

little defence of trying to call themselves a socialist party while 

we lead in this province, in all of Canada, child poverty. We 

lead number one under their government of 16 years. We 

incarcerate more children in this province than anywhere else in 

North America, and 79 per cent of those children are First 

Nations. And you know, 16 years ago the MLA from 

Riversdale, when he was the Health minister, closed White 

Spruce and they continued to close treatment beds and program 

beds in these last 16 years. And while we incarcerate more 

children than anywhere else in North America, they haven‟t 

opened up one bed; they haven‟t opened up one program. 

 

They announced Project Hope. And in three and a half million 

dollars they spent 750 million on a research Chair, trying to find 

out the answer that any grade 10 kid can go onto the Internet 

and find out and tell them what they‟re supposed to be doing, in 

addressing the crystal meth epidemic that‟s striking our poorest 

of kids in the inner city. 

 

We lead the nation in child poverty per capita. We lead the 

nation in child prostitution; it‟s down to nine-year-olds. We‟re a 

national embarrassment under this government, under 

Riversdale of all places, a place that produced two premiers to 

this province, one deputy premier. They haven‟t done anything, 

but want to open up a grocery store and call it their big project 

of what they‟re going to do . . . [inaudible] . . . they‟re an 

embarrassment to this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — The reality of this government and what 

we‟ve . . . [inaudible] . . . in 16 years of mismanagement of a 

so-called socialist government. You know, under the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], they were a socialist 

government, Mr. Speaker. And then when Tommy Douglas 

decided that he was going to join and go into federal politics 

and change the direction of the CCF, they joined with unions, 

and they developed this manifesto, and they became partners 

with their unionist party. They‟re no longer a social party. 

Socialists, my . . . you can‟t be a socialist party if you lead the 

government . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On a point 

of order. Yes, on a point of order. Mr. Speaker, you perhaps 

may wish to consult . . . in the last sitting of the legislature, 

there was quite a bit of debate primarily brought forward by 

members opposite in opposition, about the names of political 

parties and the discussions that took place across the floor, or 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

the debate that took place across the floor, in naming a political 

party. 

 

We are of course proud to be democratic socialists, but we are 

not the Socialist Party of Canada. And I think that the rulings of 

this Chamber, directed by the members opposite in opposition, 

clearly indicate that the member speaking cannot refer to the 

people on this side of the House as members of the Socialist 

Party. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Melfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to rise to respond to the point of order raised by the 

member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the member that had the floor, in speaking 

about the socialists opposite, are talking about a philosophy just 

as they always on that side of the House choose to label us as 

conservatives or any other label that they deem appropriate. 

Certainly they‟re not so sensitive and embarrassed by the 

philosophical approach that they are clearly identified with, 

have to take exception to the member who has the floor using it 

in that context, Mr. Speaker. And I would urge you to rule that 

the point is not well taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — In the member‟s 

comments I heard several references not in a capital letters, 

more as in a small letter, small “s” socialist as opposed to a 

capital “s.” I will pay particular attention. If it does cross that 

line, I will take note. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — They try to make themselves out as being the 

only party with a heart, that somehow they‟re the only ones 

taking care of the poor or taking care of those who are suffering 

under the financial and economic disadvantage of poverty and 

the inner city, under the reality. 

 

And yet we lead the nation in drug addiction with the least 

amount of resources put to it, where 79 per cent of our kids in 

the correctional facilities are First Nations with over 95 per cent 

of them with drug addiction problems, where there is a 

functional illiteracy rate of 80 per cent. This is all under their 16 

years of government. As we begin to look at their track record, 

as they began to develop a social framework for our province, it 

isn‟t just the highways that fractured or the hospitals or the 

schools, but it was the complete social network that they 

allowed to collapse over 16 years. 

 

And I‟ll give them benefit. At the beginning — and I‟m new to 

this province of six years, so I‟ll say it — they talk about Grant 

Devine. I don‟t know him. What I do know is that they 

inherited 16 years ago a province that was tottering on 

economic collapse. And they began to move it back. That‟s 

fine. That‟s good for them. 

 

But what have they done in the last 10 years, 12 years, 8 years, 

4 years to begin to put back into the social policies of our 

province? We‟re the last province in Canada that didn‟t even 

have a computer system to keep track of our kids. And within 

the system is that we were losing them and couldn‟t find them. 

 

What were we doing for our First Nation kids as they were 

moving off the reserves and getting recruited into the heaviest 

and largest gang recruitment in all of Canada? As they began to 

put themselves on the street as nine-year-old children selling 

their bodies in order to live within the inner cities? 

 

[20:45] 

 

What have they been doing in the last four or five years that 

they have the audacity to stand up and say about this budget . . . 

which is putting more money in social programs, that is 

beginning to develop a network in the community, computer 

system that puts us back into the year of 2008 to track our kids, 

that is beginning to look at addiction centres . . . Wants to put 

100 new beds of addictions, not make-believe Project Hope that 

has done nothing in the three years that it was in operation. It 

didn‟t put one bed into a program. Eighty-eight beds we have 

scheduled under this budget that we will put into place that will 

be actual beds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — You know, if we begin to look at Social 

Services just alone, 164 per cent greater increase in the capital 

budget alone; $3.2 million to implement the child and family 

services case management IT [information technology] system; 

$200,000 to develop the interface between social services and 

personal health registry. 

 

I mean I couldn‟t believe it as I went across last week into 

British Columbia and I spoke in Fort St. John and talked to 

ministers there, as I was in Thompson, Manitoba talking to 

people there, they were aghast that we wouldn‟t have a 

computer system in our Social Services tracking down our 

children. And yet the last social minister refused to put one into 

place when his ministry came and asked him to do so. 

 

When we begin to look at the highlight, there‟s budget funding 

for not only a new computer system that will assist children in 

care, funds for additional child care workers, greater efforts to 

work with family services groups on reserves — which is 

ongoing — as well as 200,000 increase for total funding of 

$470,000 to support the First Nation institute in developing a 

quality care management program to ensure that FNCFS [First 

Nations Child and Family Services] agencies would deliver 

better quality child care delivery. 

 

You know, as a Cree . . . [inaudible] . . . I was embarrassed as I 

go into Quebec and speak on the reserves, and in Alberta, that I 

am an MLA in this province that had for 16 years MLAs 

representing First Nation people that has the poorest reserves in 

Canada, has the highest number of child prostitutes, has the 

highest number of gang recruitment, has the highest number of 

children incarcerated and they‟re all First Nations — 79 per 

cent of them. 

 

When we begin to look into our inner cities which are the worst 

in Canada, which have been rated number one, that is equal to 

nowhere else . . . And I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I grew up in the 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

toughest inner city in Canada in my time, as a boy to a 

14-year-old First Nation girl, living in a rooming house. And 

that inner city has got nothing in comparison to the squalor and 

third world conditions that that government has allowed to 

happen over 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — When we begin to look at the reality to help 

low-income individuals and families, we got 1.1 million in 

increment funding for a total budget of 7.1 million to provide 

and support the increases for Saskatchewan rental housing 

supplements. Implemented, this will benefit 3,350 families, 

1,140 households with disabilities, another one point million for 

child care parent subsidies. These are people from low-income 

parents, to break down the barriers. 

 

And the audacity for them to say that we are leaving our poorest 

behind . . . they left them behind, and they went into the lie that 

somehow they were the only party that had social programs or 

cared about social programs. They‟re an embarrassment, a 

national embarrassment. They should change actually from the 

NDP to another type of party, because there‟s no similarity to 

any of the NDP parties in this country that have bankrupt 

provinces to help the poor. They haven‟t done any of that. 

 

When we begin to look at our budget, we are increasing funding 

to school programs and hunger programs within our schools and 

in our city schools. 

 

You know, when I worked with Ted Merriman as we travelled 

across this province and I talked to him about his founding of 

the Care and Share program and I said, why do you need to 

raise all of this money to feed inner-city kids, all of them First 

Nation? Why should that be happening? In one of the richest 

cities in Canada, why is this happening? Why isn‟t the 

government doing? And he said, they don‟t vote. They don‟t 

vote. 

 

All they do is come out with the political rhetoric. All they do is 

want to attack the opposition, which was the Sask Party at that 

time and call them Conservatives. 

 

And well I‟ll tell you, as a conservative party, as a moderate 

party, we have more heart in this budget than anything they 

ever stood for in the last 16 years of what they have produced in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — You know, Mr. Speaker, you know they‟re an 

interesting party. They talk about on the one hand that during 

their tenure they‟re claiming credit for our economy. They‟re 

saying that they left all of this to us. It was their fiscal 

management. Well why didn‟t they spend the money to help the 

kids? Why didn‟t they begin to put the drug programs into 

place, to begin to expand the programs for kids locked into 

solitary confinement for 23 hours a day because we have no 

beds for them? 

 

Why didn‟t they begin to address the system that‟s got 35 men 

sleeping on a gym floor using . . . [inaudible] . . . and the 

indignity of incarceration with no programs? Why didn‟t they 

take that money and put it into programming? They didn‟t do it. 

They‟re claiming all of this fiscal management that they have 

done, that they have left us, this is if they had it all, why didn‟t 

they spend on social programs that we‟re spending it on? 

 

When they talk about . . . they go back to the past, you know 

back and they say, but we‟re fiscally prudent. They‟ve 

overspent. The last government before us overspent. We 

brought us . . . we‟re the salvation of this province. We‟ve 

brought us into sound fiscal realities. 

 

Well the reality of it is, we have come up with a budget that is 

fiscally prudent, that is balanced, that isn‟t going to take a 

billion dollars and throw it out and handing it willy-nilly to 

every program that‟s out there. We‟re doing is selectively 

building a foundation for our social programs, for our 

education, for our health, as we begin to claw this province 

back out of the dark ages that that NDP government brought us 

into in 16 years of mismanagement of our economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — You know it‟s really interesting, Mr. Speaker; 

they want to continue talking about this Station 20. And you 

know I‟m very familiar with Station 20. But they did a 

wonderful job of building homes. And you know they built 

those homes; they‟re just about finished. The funding is there; it 

hasn‟t been taken away. They built a beautiful library; that 

hasn‟t been taken away. 

 

But you know what they wanted to do was to . . . I don‟t know 

what . . . I‟m not quite sure what they wanted to do. They 

wanted a grocery store, a co-op, so they could all hug trees, so 

that they could have this wonderful time. Well listen, I grew up 

in the inner city. I can tell you that Giant Tiger almost across 

the street is where everyone of those people in the inner city are 

going to shop. Why? Because it‟s cheaper to do so. And you 

know whether they sell lottery tickets or tobacco in this small 

grocery store that they want us to spend $8 million in, I‟ll tell 

you I‟d rather have that money go into our kids, into our 

addiction programs, into our juvenile custody programs, into 

the programs that are going to make a difference in the 

inner-city people‟s lives — not some silly building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — And I‟ll tell you what . . . You know, they talk 

about this clinic thing. Well you got Community Health 

Services in their letter just before our election, just a few 

months ago, winter 2007. This is what they said. They said: 

 

First and foremost we have reviewed our involvement with 

an eye for protecting the long-term financial viability of our 

organization, alongside of protecting and providing the best 

possible health care services to this community. As a result 

of this work, we recognize that to be a tenant in Station 20 

would require us to require substantial life-long financial 

commitment from our clinic. The costs associated and 

involvement with Station 20 are significantly higher than 

our current cost. 

 

What they were trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is to get the West 

Side Clinic after 29 years of operation to sell their building. 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

And they were going to go lease it over there. And I met with 

them, and they said we can‟t understand it. We want to buy 

another building on the other side of the core; we weren‟t going 

to move. We own the building — 29 years. We paid the 

mortgage, and now they want us to sell the building and take 

that money that we have made from the mortgage and pay lease 

costs. And we don‟t even want to be there. 

 

You know, and they talk about consultancy, and they talk about 

people being involved in the community. I‟ve gone down in the 

community. I‟ve talked to the inner-city ministries. None of 

them were involved with this thing. The only thing they were 

interested in was the housing which has been done, which has 

been paid for. We‟re not talking about removing anything from 

that. We‟re talking about from this warehouse type of building 

that‟s going to provide offices to . . . going to provide this and 

that. Well the West Side Clinic says we don‟t want to move. 

We‟d rather be in our clinic; we‟ll provide double the services. 

 

And you know us as a party, I‟d take a look at the most pressing 

need of the inner-city — and it‟s eight years away under the 

NDP, eight years away they had the creation of new school — 

St. Mary‟s. That has put 100 people, more kids in the 

population of that school because they put programming in, 

they put pediatricians in. They‟re beginning to deal with the 

families. We audit $8 million . . . we got to build that school 

because that‟s where the need goes for the kids — not for a 

building, not for some grocery store, not for some offices for 

somewhere. 

 

And when they talk about the board, I‟ll tell you what they 

talked about in the clinic. They said the clinic has requested that 

the appointed board at Station 20 West be reconstituted as a 

community-based board, a democracy ruling by being elected 

by the tenants and by the community. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when I look at who is on that board 

and see appointed the past CA [constituency assistant] of the 

MLA of Riversdale, I begin to wonder what is this all about. It 

certainly isn‟t for the benefit of the people. Not when they had 

— from eight years away — to rebuild the most important 

aspect to that inner city, which is St. Mary‟s School. 

 

You know, the reality, I‟m sick and tired of listening to them 

over there telling us that we‟re without a heart. When we take a 

look at this reality of this budget, it is balanced. As we begin to 

look at health care, to putting a children‟s hospital in the place; 

as we begin to deal with cancer victims, proper drugs for them; 

as we begin to look at the drugs that should be on the 

formulary; as we begin to look at the programming of 

addictions from our ministers for corrections, for inner city 

work, for anti-gang, for anti-poverty, for anti-child prostitution, 

I see it in this budget. I‟ve never seen it in their budget. It was 

never balanced. It was always announcement after 

announcement — rhetoric — and it never got put into place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, they can cackle over there like a bunch 

of crows if they want to. They can do whatever they want to do 

over there. The reality of the truth of my words is in this budget, 

and it‟s their track record of 16 years. We lead the nation. 

Anybody can pick up the stats and see the child poverty, see the 

violence, the gang recruitment, the child incarceration, the child 

poverty, the degradation of inner city life among our most 

vulnerable, which happened under their watch. Under our 

watch, we‟re changing it. 

 

I support this budget, and I think their amendment is a childish 

piece of dung. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. 

Order, order. Order, order. Order. I believe the member is aware 

that the last comments were inappropriate, and I‟d just ask for a 

simple apology. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak on the budget in front of us. 

My only regret of course is that I have to follow the crap that 

we‟ve just heard. 

 

[21:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d like to remind the member 

from The Battlefords that that language is inappropriate. And I 

would ask the member to, as well, apologize. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would apologize. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter the 

debate today on the budget speech and the budget of the 

government. Mr. Speaker, there are quite a number of ways in 

which I would like to take a look at the budget in front of us 

today. 

 

But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention that 

indeed I was listening carefully to the speech from the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. And there were some significant 

inconsistencies in his speech compared to what has been spoken 

by other members of government that I think people should be 

aware of. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, his criticism of Station 20 

West in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, indicates a complete lack of 

understanding about that project, how it developed in the city of 

Saskatoon, and indeed the services that it‟s going to provide to 

the people of Saskatoon. And his comments are also at 

complete odds with the Minister of Health who was answering 

questions in the question period earlier today in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will recall that Station 20 had its genesis in 

the community of Saskatoon. Station 20 came from individuals 

working with inner-city children and other families living 

within the inner city of 20th Street and that area of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a report was issued about a year and a half ago, 

the health determinates — a study — indicating the correlation 

between poor learning and poor health to poverty and lack of 

access to transportation and lack of access to services and lack 

of access to good quality food, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

And as a result of that study done about the people of 

Saskatoon, the community rallied. And they talked to the 

regional health authority, and the regional health authority 

talked to the Government of Saskatchewan. And a partnership 

emerged, Mr. Speaker, a partnership that ended up creating a 

response to the health determinates study, a response to the 

needs of the people in Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

partnership became Station 20 West, Mr. Speaker — not a 

shopping mall, not a grocery store, but a place that will meet the 

needs of poor people and, particularly, poor children in the 

inner city in Saskatoon. And the members opposite from 

Saskatoon Northwest, his comments indicate that he has no 

understanding whatsoever of where that project had its genesis 

and what it intends to do and how the partners, Mr. Speaker, are 

going to respond to that. 

 

Secondly, he says that money shouldn‟t be used for a building; 

it should be used for food, it should be used for education, it 

should be used to help those kids. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Health this afternoon said, the government can‟t spend that 

money because why? We need to put a new chiller on the roof 

of the hospitals in Saskatoon. We have to put new fire alarms. 

It‟s all infrastructure that the Minister of Health says. We can‟t 

spend the money on the kids because we‟re spending it on 

infrastructure on buildings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member from Saskatoon Northwest wants to 

lobby anybody about funding for children, he now has to talk to 

the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s where the 

diversion of funds is going, Mr. Speaker. It has nothing to do 

with any project, any plans that this government had in place. 

So the member from Saskatoon Northwest had better start 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, where things come from, where 

they‟re going to, and what the members opposite have to say 

about what is indeed the responses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sorry that we‟re not going to have unlimited 

speaking time tonight, Mr. Speaker, because indeed there are so 

many things that the member opposite had to say that need 

some response, Mr. Speaker, but I‟ve got things that I want to 

say about the budget, about The Battlefords, about my own 

critic area, Mr. Speaker, and certainly in general for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s take a couple of moments, Mr. Speaker, just to have a 

look at the genesis of this budget, Mr. Speaker, and where we 

find ourselves today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

First and foremost I recognize that the government opposite 

were elected on November 7 — usually about halfway into the 

creation of a budget cycle, Mr. Speaker. I acknowledge and 

recognize that the government — the new government opposite 

— came in to create a budget for the people of Saskatchewan 

with about half the time that a government normally has to 

produce a budget. So they‟ve gone through the whole process of 

reviewing the status of the province, the circumstances that we 

find ourselves in. And, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve got the election 

promises to put forward — how do they fund these? — those 

sorts of things. 

 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, there was a very sound, a very sound 

fiscal foundation that had been built in this province over a long 

period of time. And as a result, this government has had the 

opportunity to take advantage of that sound fiscal framework, 

that fiscal foundation, to work on creating a budget. 

 

So when my colleagues here, Mr. Speaker, talk about this being 

an NDP-lite budget, or an NDP-like budget, Mr. Speaker, they 

are simply acknowledging that indeed this government had 

taken that foundational base, used that to create and put this 

budget together and, at the end of the day, have left 

Saskatchewan in a situation whereby while there are some 

things being done, they‟re building on other things that have 

already been done and at the same time recognize that there‟s a 

surplus that‟s going to have to be used into the future. And I‟ll 

have more to say about that in a moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But all in all what we‟ve got here is a government that‟s 

inherited more money than any other government has inherited 

from an outgoing government for use into the future. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has inherited an economy that‟s better 

than any other economy than any government anywhere in 

North America has inherited from an outgoing government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that with an economy that‟s less 

strong than in the province of Saskatchewan, the province of 

Manitoba last year re-elected their New Democratic Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, with an economy that wasn‟t as 

strong as ours or with a foundation that wasn‟t as strong as this 

one. In the province of Ontario they re-elected the Liberal 

government there. The people re-elected the Liberal 

government there, again with a collapsing economy and no 

money in the bank, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this government knows that they are very fortunate, very 

fortunate indeed, Mr. Speaker, to have inherited a lot of money. 

The surplus in this budget here — the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

that we used to called it, the fiscal security fund — that Growth 

and Security Fund that they now call, has $1.3 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, in the bank that government can use for funding 

additional programs. And I‟m going to have more to say about 

that in a minute. 

 

But never, never has a government inherited so much money 

from an outgoing government. The question that Saskatchewan 

residents have to ask, Mr. Speaker, is what did they do with it? 

And we‟re going to come to that too in a minute. 

 

So this budget contains an awful lot of what New Democrats 

had started, what New Democrats began while we were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. It continues a lot of those things. 

And in fact even those things that the members opposite were 

very critical about in opposition, this budget contains those as 

well. 

 

And I point out, as my colleagues have as well, simply the use 

of the fiscal stabilization and the balanced budget process, Mr. 

Speaker — the same as what New Democrats did in 

government for a number of years and that they criticized us for 

year after year after year. In fact the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest indicated that the NDP had never balanced a budget, 

and yet the budget documents opposite indicate that this is the 

15th balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, recognizing, Mr. Speaker, 

that there were 14 balanced budgets before this one came along. 

 

And how is this budget balanced, Mr. Speaker? This budget is 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

balanced on the basis of the use of the fiscal growth and 

stabilization fund, Mr. Speaker. They talk for years, Mr. 

Speaker, about how this Fiscal Stabilization Fund was funny 

money; it was no account. Yet, Mr. Speaker, all across, all 

across the world where Saskatchewan went for bond dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, for funding to cover our debts, Mr. Speaker, the 

bond rating agencies and the lenders in the world, Mr. Speaker, 

in Europe and in the United States, recognized the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund as a valuable tool for helping to ensure that 

the economy was well run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite used those tools in this 

budget to balance this budget. We recognize, we support, that 

concept. We just don‟t understand how one day it can be so 

wrong and the next day it can be so right by the members 

opposite — say one thing before an election, Mr. Speaker, do 

something completely different after the election. I just point 

that out, Mr. Speaker, for the people at home who may not have 

read all of the budget documents or heard all of the speeches 

that have come up to this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other interesting things 

when we look at the budget overall. Let‟s take a quick look. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe in simplifying things. I really firmly believe 

that it is better to understand a matter from its simplest 

perspective and then build out from that to help to understand 

some of the complexities. The simplest part of this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is at the bottom of the page. The bottom of the page 

says, a $250 million surplus which will be used to pay down 

debt. We go up the page just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, and we 

see that in revenues, in revenues, there is a dividend declared 

from the Crown Investments Corporation. That dividend from 

the Crown Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker, comes from 

the sale of the NewGrade upgrader, the asset that the 

government has sold and brought those revenues into the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that dividend, that dividend from the Crown 

Investments Corporation, revenue in the budget, Mr. Speaker — 

$375 million. What was that surplus number I just pointed to at 

the bottom of the page, Mr. Speaker? $250 million. Without of 

the sale of the NewGrade upgrader and the dividend from CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], this 

government did not have enough money to balance this budget, 

Mr. Speaker. They would‟ve had to have used Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund money to balance this budget. And they have 

chose, they have chose not to do that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking a lot 

about, over there, who sold it. Mr. Speaker, there was a plan 

that was put into place by the previous government to utilize the 

sale of this energy asset to assist the Crown corporations with 

developing green initiatives to assure us of a strong response to 

the emissions issue and the whole issue of improving our 

environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has scrapped that plan, scrapped that plan 

completely, brought the money into the GRF and at the end of 

the day is using that money for general operating procedures 

and paying down the debt because that‟s what the bottom line 

when you simplify the budget is all about, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s 

also talk . . . And the member from Saskatoon Northwest is 

clapping about getting rid of environmental protections, Mr. 

Speaker, and paying down the debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was an asset that was created from energy 

resources that had contributed to carbon in our atmosphere and 

we were going to use the dollars to reduce carbon emissions, 

Mr. Speaker. The member from Saskatoon Northwest, the 

members opposite should pay very close attention to what‟s 

happening here. 

 

The other thing is the whole debate around Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. If there‟s anything that points clearly to the benefit to 

government and therefore ultimately the benefit to the people of 

the province, of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, is the dividend paid 

by the Crown Investments Corporation to government. It is 

revenue in the budget. That revenue can be then used for 

purposes that are beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan. The 

Crown Investments Corporation dividend is an important part 

of the budget. 

 

I want to talk just a little bit more about why that‟s important, 

Mr. Speaker. Take a quick look on the expenditure side of the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. If you take education and health care, you 

all remember, Mr. Speaker — everyone will remember — the 

good old days where we used to have an education and health 

tax, before the provincial sales tax came along. We utilized 

retail sales taxes to help with and pay for education and health 

care in this province. That was removed. The provincial sales 

tax came into being, and of course that then started to help fund 

generally the work of government. 

 

[21:15] 

 

But where are the expenditures, Mr. Speaker, on education and 

health care today? Well take a look at the budget. Advanced 

Education budget is $761 million. The budget for Education, 

Mr. Speaker, $992 million. And of course the budget for health 

care — record spending — 3.7 billion. Mr. Speaker, you add 

education and health care spending in this budget, it‟s $4.6 

billion. 

 

Go to the next page, Mr. Speaker, revenues. How much revenue 

do we take in in taxes in this province, Mr. Speaker — 

corporate tax, fuel tax, income tax, sales tax, tobacco tax, other 

tax — what‟s the number? $4.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. We spend 

every dollar collected in taxes on education and health care in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Every dollar, one for one — 4.6 

billion. 

 

So how do we fund everything else in government, Mr. 

Speaker? How do we fund it? We fund it from non-renewable 

resource revenue, Mr. Speaker. It‟s cyclical. It goes up. It goes 

down. Sometimes we have it. Sometimes we don‟t. It comes 

from transfers from Crown entities, Mr. Speaker — dividends 

from the Crown Investments Corporation, dividends paid by the 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker — really another show of how valuable 

those Crown revenues are to the people of Saskatchewan. They 

help to pay for everything above education and health care. 

 

What are the other revenues? Of course, fines, penalties, fees, 

permits — things that everybody wants to get rid of eventually, 

Mr. Speaker. But of course that‟s part of the revenue of 

government. And then lastly, Mr. Speaker, transfers from other 

governments. What other governments? The federal 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

government, Mr. Speaker — equalization and an energy accord. 

There is no better argument for this province settling with the 

federal government on equalization and an energy accord than 

this budget, Mr. Speaker. Those federal revenues continue to be 

important not just for today but down many years into the 

future.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is currently representing every 

taxpayer dollar is paying for education and health care. The 

other revenues of this government, of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, are important to pay for all those other things — 

highways that they‟re spending lots of money on of course and 

hospitals, the infrastructure pieces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That equalization ball that‟s in the air has been dropped by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. It needs to be picked up. We need to 

go to work. We need to ensure that the resource revenues that 

we collect stay in this province and work for the people of 

Saskatchewan, just the same as those resource revenues work 

for the people of Alberta and those resource revenues are today 

working for the people of Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and 

Labrador. Mr. Speaker, that‟s very important for all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just briefly about my own 

constituency. Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud of The Battlefords. 

I‟m very proud of the people who live in The Battlefords and, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very proud of the work that‟s going on in The 

Battlefords. And I‟ve been very happy to have assisted the 

people in The Battlefords over the last four years to have the ear 

of the provincial government to gain access to various 

government departments and programs and initiatives to the 

benefit of the people in The Battlefords. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve spent a lot of time recently on doorsteps 

and in coffee shops, at the curling rink, at the community 

theatre, talking with people throughout The Battlefords. And 

it‟s very clear from those discussions that the major issues in 

The Battlefords today can be outlined very simply as, number 

one, housing. 

 

We have a booming economy. We have a very strong economy, 

and of course that means we‟ve got new workers coming into 

the community. We have people from other surrounding 

communities coming into the community. We have seniors. We 

have students. We have immigrants, Mr. Speaker. Actually The 

Battlefords is very pleased to be able to say we have 10 per cent 

of the province‟s immigrant nominee program now located in 

The Battlefords. We‟ve done very good job, Mr. Speaker, of 

attracting and settling immigrants into our local workforce. 

 

Well all these people coming into The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, 

has put a tremendous amount of pressure on this community for 

housing. It is a direct result of the economic boom that has 

taken place on the west side of the province and obviously in 

other parts of the province as well. 

 

Now housing — number one issue. Students, seniors, First 

Nations people, young people moving in for jobs, and of course 

our new immigrant population — number one issue. 

 

Number two, infrastructure highways, Mr. Speaker. Recently 

the town of Battleford‟s town council, members of the chamber 

of commerce from the town of Battleford, citizens in the town 

of Battleford have been talking with the Department of 

Highways about developing a piece of road, Mr. Speaker, that 

comes off of Highway 16 and Highway 4. It‟s very necessary to 

create a new commercial, industrial, and residential subdivision 

to meet the growing needs of our growing community. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government members since November 7 

have been saying wait, wait, wait; we‟re going to give you our 

highways budget. You‟ve got an important project here; it 

would be a priority of this government. You just wait, be nice, 

good little people and wait, and our highway budget will come 

out some time after after the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well last week the highway budget comes out. What‟s in year 

number one? Nothing there for town of Battleford. What‟s in 

year number two? Nothing there for the town of Battleford. 

Absolutely nothing on a project that they were indicating was 

going to be a priority project for them and is directly related, 

Mr. Speaker, to the growth of the economy — the growth of the 

economy of Saskatchewan, the growth of the economy of a 

community in the heart of oil country, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

very important project for the future of our community, and I 

would urge the government to give careful consideration not 

only in this budget but in the mid-term and in next year‟s 

budget, Mr. Speaker, to projects like this whereby 

municipalities have identified ways in which to utilize their 

infrastructure to ensure that the growth is able to be met by 

those communities. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important projects in The 

Battlefords is the Saskatchewan Hospital, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Hospital. Two years ago, February 2006, Mr. 

Speaker, the community was pleased — excited, delighted — to 

find out that the Department of Health and the Government of 

Saskatchewan was supporting the rebuilding of Saskatchewan 

Hospital, North Battleford. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last year‟s budget put $1 million in place to 

facilitate the planning for that project. Mr. Speaker, this year 

there‟s nothing in the budget for Saskatchewan Hospital. A $60 

million project a couple of years ago, now it‟s probably a $90 

million project. Mr. Speaker, that project is going through a 

continued phase in its planning process. There has to be some 

acknowledge, some commitment from this government, to 

ensure the people of The Battlefords that that project is still in 

progress, is still going to go ahead as was promised and 

projected and planned previously. Sask Hospital, Mr. Speaker, 

project number three that‟s important to us. 

 

Fourth, immigration is important in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker. As I indicated we‟ve already got 10 per cent of the 

provincial nominee program active there, and over the next year 

we‟re looking at another 70 people and their families moving 

into The Battlefords to meet some of our labour force needs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the community college has recently started 

to offer a English as a second language program, highly 

respected within the immigrant community. Mr. Speaker, we 

need to ensure that those community college programs and 

others about settlement in the community are able to be 

enhanced and are able to continue to provide the needs for the 

community and of course, Mr. Speaker, our First Nations 

community. We are surrounded by 10 separate, individual First 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Nations communities, Mr. Speaker, around The Battlefords — a 

large population, a large, young population, Mr. Speaker, that 

will be of great assistance to meeting the labour shortage in and 

throughout The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, despite what the government opposite 

says — the First Nations people know this more clearly than 

anybody else — First Nations people know that in this budget, 

for First Nations people in communities like The Battlefords, 

there‟s absolutely nothing there to facilitate their inclusion in 

the development of the workforce in and around communities 

like The Battlefords. 

 

We need to see more of that and, Mr. Speaker, generally the 

labour shortage — what further assistance is there from the 

government representing the people of The Battlefords to 

ensure that the labour shortage that exists is going to be dealt 

with? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was online the other day. Jobs are currently 

posted, available jobs in The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

community of under 20,000 people. The number of jobs 

available in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, 378 jobs available 

today in the community of The Battlefords — very large 

number of job shortages. Our business community is anxious to 

see that they can go forward. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, something that I was very close to in 

the past and something that I remain very close to, Mr. Speaker, 

finally, education property tax relief. During the election 

campaign, the people of The Battlefords were pleased that the 

candidates in all the political parties were campaigning on a 

platform of education property tax relief, Mr. Speaker. They 

were. They believed the members opposite. They believed the 

members opposite when they said, if elected, we will double the 

education property tax credit, Mr. Speaker — they will double. 

Therefore they expected that that relief would go from 10 per 

cent promised and delivered by New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, 

to 20 per cent from the members opposite — that was the 

campaign promise. But, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, 

what do we get in this budget? We get a 12 per cent credit 

instead of what was in place — a 10 per cent credit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not naive in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker. Property tax collected on the average house in North 

Battleford is probably around $2,800, equally split between 

municipalities and school boards. So you‟ve got $1,400 

collected by the municipality. You‟ve got $1,400 collected for 

education. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 10 per cent, which was the credit they were 

getting on that $1,400, Mr. Speaker, is $140 credit they were 

getting from the New Democratic Party government. What are 

they going to get this year on that, on that $1,400? A 12 per 

cent credit, which is $168, Mr. Speaker, or a difference of $28. 

 

The people of The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, when this 

government was elected, expected — expected — a credit that 

was worth at least $300. They get a credit worth $168, Mr. 

Speaker. That $28 promise has disappointed every person who 

did not vote NDP in that last election. 

 

Every, every small “c” conservative, every Sask Party supporter 

in that community right now is disappointed because that 

promise, Mr. Speaker, was not kept — $28 — they‟re 

embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. They‟re embarrassed to sit in the 

coffee shop and say, my government gave us $28, $28 on 

education property tax relief. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue. We said at the top 

$1.3 billion in Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Surely to goodness 

they can do better on education property tax relief. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve gone over my time. I appreciate the 

ability to speak. As you will know, Mr. Speaker, I was kind of 

thrown off my speech by the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest and his crazy talk just before I got up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that I was very pleased with 

the speech that was delivered by our Finance critic, the member 

from Regina Douglas Park, the other day. I would commend the 

reading of that speech to every member of the public. It‟s an 

almost good budget. It needs some tweaking. Certainly in The 

Battlefords it needs a lot more attention, and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

my intention over the course of the next few weeks and months 

to ensure that we hold the government account for those 

promises and for the delivery of programs to people in 

Saskatchewan like those who live in and around the 

communities of The Battlefords. 

 

[21:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I give you my indication that I am supporting 

the amendment. I‟m not supporting the government motion to 

support the budget, and I thank the members of the House for 

their patience this evening. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to enter into 

the debate on the budget tonight — a budget that‟s ready for 

growth, a budget that keeps promises, and a budget for 

everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First though I want to thank the Finance minister and his 

officials as well as the other members of Treasury Board that I 

sat on with for the great time and for the advice and leadership 

that was provided to me as a brand new MLA. Thank you very 

much from a brand new minister. 

 

This is a very historic budget, Mr. Speaker. It‟s the first 

Saskatchewan Party budget that gets us ready for growth as we 

move forward. And especially important to me, having two 

young daughters, it sets up their future, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank this government for that chance. 

 

Many promises already have been kept by this government. 

Even before this budget was delivered we were keeping them. 

A promise to toughen penalties for repeat drunk drivers, Mr. 

Speaker . . . and from my background, Mr. Speaker, the police 

community just thought that was the greatest thing to hear that 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

initiative right off the hop, to see a government that‟s going to 

keep their promises and especially be tough on crime. That 

gains credibility we‟ll get the job done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A promise to provide cancer patients with access to drugs to 

prolong their lives, that was a no-brainer that took 16 years to 

get done, and as far as I‟m concerned that alone will make this 

government much more credible to the people of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We came to power with an ambitious agenda and are serious 

about the work ahead of us, and we are keeping our promises. 

Mr. Speaker, a little history lesson here. On March 31, 2003, 

the member from Regina Dewdney stood up in the House for 

his budget debate speech and I am quoting the member for 

Regina Dewdney, when he was talking about what he thought 

the people of Saskatchewan wanted, the member from Regina 

Dewdney said, “They don‟t want a government that would be 

out there promising to give them everything and not being able 

to deliver any of it.” 

 

That is a direct quote, Mr. Speaker, from the member opposite. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it appears that the people of Saskatchewan 

do want a government that makes promises and keeps them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the first year of our mandate, in our first budget, heck in less 

than five months in office, Mr. Speaker, we have kept more 

than 40 of our promises to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — We did not, as the member from Regina 

Dewdney said, promise the people everything, Mr. Speaker. We 

did however promise what the people wanted and what the 

province needed, Mr. Speaker. And we are delivering on those 

promises. 

 

On November 7, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan told 

us that yes, they do want a government that keeps its promises, 

and the 2008-2009 budget does just that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is not a budget that relies on federal handouts or a budget 

that will spend $100 million of taxpayers‟ money for a mill that 

closed during the NDP‟s tenure and was unlikely to ever 

re-open under their anti-business government. 

 

This is a budget that is ready for growth, Mr. Speaker. Thanks 

to this government‟s fiscal prudence, the 100 million the NDP 

would have squandered to buy votes is now available for 

investment in Saskatchewan‟s future, Mr. Speaker. The voters 

of Saskatchewan and in my constituency of Prince Albert 

Carlton saw through this election ploy, Mr. Speaker. In the 

2003 election of Prince Albert Carlton, voters cast 1,891 ballots 

for the Saskatchewan Party. The NDP won the riding that 

election, Mr. Speaker. And the former Speaker of the House 

was a well-respected member of Prince Albert, and he truly was 

a great member to the people of Prince Albert before he was a 

Speaker, so no disrespect to him whatsoever even though he 

served in an NDP government; he‟s a great man. 

 

But in the recent 2007 election there was a very different result, 

Mr. Speaker. In 2007 3,675 ballots were cast for the 

Saskatchewan Party in the vote that I won, Mr. Speaker — 

almost double the 2003 votes. And in that case, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP lost votes this time around in 2003. This shows the 

people of P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton saw through these 

desperate last ditch efforts by the NDP to hold power. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s time is now. The signs are all around us, Mr. 

Speaker. Just last week it was announced more than 3,000 

people have moved to our province in the last quarter of 2007. 

Overall more than 16,000 people moved here last year, Mr. 

Speaker. We are an economic leader in North America. 

 

The Canada West Foundation is forecasting Saskatchewan to 

lead the nation with economic growth of 3.6 per cent in 2008. 

Building permits are up. We are number one in the country for 

housing starts, Mr. Speaker. Unemployment is among the 

lowest in the country. We have an abundance of natural 

resources. The economy is red hot, and we are the envy of the 

rest of the country, Mr. Speaker. We are ready for growth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But if we are to sustain our economic momentum, we need to 

ensure that infrastructure is in place for growth. That is why the 

Saskatchewan Party government has invested $1 billion in 

infrastructure in the province — $1 billion, $1 billion, $1 

billion. This unprecedented investment focuses on our capital 

efforts, on long-term economic and social solutions. Our roads, 

our schools, and our health facilities across the province will 

benefit from this investment. 

 

In fact, to go back to the $100 million that was going to be 

squandered on Domtar, Mr. Speaker, to buy votes, I truly 

believe that money will be spent in my local constituency and 

surrounding area for health care, education, and infrastructure. 

 

We promised to fix the crumbling highways, and we are. Over 

1400 kilometres of highway construction and maintenance is 

planned for this year. New bridges, improved bridges, highway 

twinning, and upgrades to northern and rural roads will happen 

this year. Over $500 million will strengthen our roads and 

highways, Mr. Speaker, in this year‟s budget. 

 

Over $160 million is going to repair and upgrades for schools, 

university, and training centres, Mr. Speaker. Nearly $200 

million will go to health facilities and hospitals for key repairs, 

upgrades, and to help purchase new medical and safety 

equipment — addressing that deficit, Mr. Speaker, in health 

care . . . long overdue. The ready-for-growth initiative also 

includes capital spending plans for municipalities, parks, and 

other priority areas. We are serious about growing this province 

and creating a successful future. This balanced budget is a start, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A shortage of health care professionals is also a barrier to 

growth. Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget helps remove those 

barriers with money for expansion in nurse training seats and 

increasing our capacity to train physicians right here in 

Saskatchewan. Recently the government signed a historic 

agreement with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, an 

agreement that commits to hiring 800 new nurses by 2011. This 

is the Saskatchewan Party government keeping promises. And 

in fact on that note, Mr. Speaker, 300 new nurses from the 

Philippines will be arriving in Saskatchewan. We‟re halfway 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

there already in five short months. 

 

I‟m pleased that my ministry, the Ministry of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, has been well represented in this 

budget. This budget underscores the government‟s commitment 

to keeping Saskatchewan citizens safe and free from the fear of 

crime under our securing-the-future agenda. 

 

When the NDP formed government in 1991, the Leader of the 

Opposition had some dreams. In the December 11, 1991, 

Hansard, the current Leader of the Opposition is quoted as 

saying, quote: 

 

. . . we are a government that dreams of a province where 

women and children and men can live and walk in their 

communities and walk on the campuses of our province 

without fear, without fear of violence, Mr. Speaker. We 

dream of a new society without . . . fear of violence, and we 

say why not? 

 

Yes, why not, Mr. Speaker? Those are some noble dreams, Mr. 

Speaker, but they were only dreams for the opposition and for 

the people of Saskatchewan while the NDP formed government. 

In reality the NDP created a nightmare for the women and 

children and men of this province. After 16 years of a tired, old 

NDP government, Saskatchewan has the highest crime rate in 

the country. In 2006 Saskatchewan reported the highest crime 

rate in Canada for the ninth year in a row, Mr. Speaker. This 

budget makes our communities safer, with more police officers 

on the street, and more resources to fight gangs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — This government promised to hire more 

police officers, Mr. Speaker, and we are doing just that. This 

year 30 new police officers will be keeping the citizens of 

Saskatchewan safe — 30 officers who are part of a four-year 

commitment to put 120 more officers on the streets. 

 

As most people know, Mr. Speaker, I was a police officer. I 

know what officers and citizens face every day in this province, 

and I know putting more officers out there will make the streets 

safer. Additional funding for the Saskatchewan Police College, 

where I received my training and all new municipal police 

officers in the province receive their training, ensures that our 

officers are ready for duty. Specialized units to protect children 

from Internet predators and units to target organized crime and 

gangs are promises we are keeping, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget calls for 11 officers for the Internet child 

exploitation unit or ICE. These officers will cover all areas of 

the province, and they will be both municipal and RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers. This unit helps 

protect our children from Internet exploitation. And as a recent 

high-profile case shows, they were desperately needed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, although the previous administration 

funded this position, this unit for four officers, they never 

deployed resources to that unit, Mr. Speaker. And I have to 

wonder, had they actually been committed to the safety and 

security of our citizens, that family in Swift Current may have 

had a different outcome, Mr. Speaker. 

We will also put officers on First Nations — one on the Dakota 

Whitecap First Nation and one on Fishing Lake First Nation, 

Mr. Speaker. Other municipal officers will be added for 

community policing. Officers will also be added to the RCMP 

major crimes section, and new officers will be added across the 

province for organized crime and gang investigations. 

 

Violence reduction related to corrections is also a key priority 

of this government, Mr. Speaker. This budget will help the 

ministry advance its violence reduction strategy inside the 

province‟s correctional centres, as well as helping achieve 

similar objectives for offenders released into the community. 

By reducing offending in facilities, we can work to reduce the 

same behaviours that cause reoffending in the community. 

 

In-facility treatment units to deal with substance abuse among 

inmates will also be established in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Addictions treatment is part of the programming made available 

through the corrections system to help offenders successfully 

reintegrate back into their communities. 

 

Construction of the replacement of the oldest part of the Regina 

Provincial Correctional Centre will be completed this year, Mr. 

Speaker. We are on schedule and on budget. Services will be 

transferred to this new facility by September of this year. A new 

kitchen will also be constructed at Regina Correctional Centre 

to meet the capacity needs of the facility. 

 

Construction will also begin on a new 90-bed dormitory in the 

Saskatchewan provincial correctional centre, Mr. Speaker. This 

dormitory will help free up programming space that had been 

used for housing inmates. At the same time, the new dormitory 

will help alleviate overcrowding at the Saskatchewan 

correctional centre, Saskatoon Correctional Centre, that posed 

security and occupational health and safety risks. The new bed 

spaces will be operational in the fall. 

 

A huge priority for my ministry is public safety, Mr. Speaker, 

and part of that safety is response to emergency situations. Last 

year there was extensive flooding in many parts of this 

province, particularly in the Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake 

areas. While the previous government promised help, they 

didn‟t deliver on that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this budget provides $4.7 million to help residents protect 

their properties against future floods. This is in addition to the 

$4.2 million previously announced before the budget — $4.2 

million. These grants will be used in a cost-sharing program in 

order to mitigate future damage from high water levels. While 

we could not cover all of the losses, Mr. Speaker, we can help 

the communities develop their own flood protection plans and 

prevent future flood damage. Despite the significant amount 

provided to residents of Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake for 

flood protection, residents still must pay at least half of their 

own costs for their flood protection solutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, this budget does many things. I 

mentioned how it provides a future for my two girls. My wife 

will see funding as a teacher in the education system as well, 

Mr. Speaker. My colleagues in policing will see funds as never 

before. We will find in fact that we will see money going to the 

right needs to address crime trends, as we address issues like 

gang violence, drugs in institutions, drugs in the communities. 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

And more recently, the sexual predators who hunt our children 

on the Internet, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to hunt them down 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that secures 

the future for the residents of this province, a budget that keeps 

promises, and a budget that is ready for growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Thursday I spoke at the chamber of commerce in Prince 

Albert luncheon, on this budget, to a packed house. My 

colleague from Sask Rivers was there. And I‟ll tell you what, 

Mr. Speaker — rounding applause every time I talked about the 

positive nature of our promises we‟re going to keep, where the 

future of this province will go under this government, Mr. 

Speaker. The people in Prince Albert truly believe that this 

budget has their future in mind as well. Prince Albert will 

benefit from this surely. 

 

This is a budget that I support, Mr. Speaker; in fact, I am proud 

to do so. I support this budget and do not support the NDP 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I am very excited to stand in the House tonight, late 

this evening, and speak on behalf of this budget. 

 

I‟m pleased to be here, the first ever budget by our government, 

and the ‟08-09 budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is so much 

excitement in the province. I know I‟ve seen your Speaker‟s 

gallery has been just totally filled with people up there tonight, 

came all the way from Yorkton to watch the proceedings. Our 

side of the House is packed, and I want to echo the sentiments 

of my colleague from Prince Albert. 

 

When I spoke to the chamber of commerce on Wednesday 

morning, Mr. Speaker, they were totally excited that they had 

about 50 per cent more people there to show up for my budget 

presentation than they expected. So things were really 

happening in Yorkton — a lot of happiness in the city. 

 

People are very excited. There is a lot of opportunity. There‟s a 

lot of good things happening in the province. And you know, 

Mr. Speaker, the excitement‟s just continually grown ever since 

November 7, where, you know, Saskatchewan people, they 

made a choice. 

 

Yorkton had been a NDP stronghold for many, many years, and 

the people saw fit to support myself and this government and 

the Premier Brad Wall in this last election. They‟re excited 

about our ideas, our commitments, and the energy we have to 

sustain the momentum, the economic momentum of the 

province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, upon doing some interviews in Yorkton 

over the past week, one interview asked me how we came up 

with such a great budget in only four months. There must have 

been a lot of prep work done. I should tell you, Mr. Speaker, if 

you look at the history of how we‟ve come around to this, 

where we are today, there actually has been some groundwork 

done. A lot of work done ahead on our policy development, Mr. 

Speaker, policy that I had a couple of years to read through and 

learn and reflect to the people of Yorkton and the people in the 

surrounding areas, policy that grew, and it evolved, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It‟s a living document talking to people around the province and 

hearing what they wanted and conveying our ideas and 

developing the policy that eventually lead to the evolution of 

our platform, Mr. Speaker — our election platform, our plans 

for the province, our promises that we made, and promises that 

we plan and will keep, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And from our platform became the Throne Speech. Our Throne 

Speech delivered admittedly not a big surprise to anybody in 

the province because it was derived directly from our platform 

— promises we kept — verifying in the Throne Speech what 

we said we wanted to do during election. We intended to keep 

those promises. 

 

And that developed, Mr. Speaker, into our budget, delivered by 

our honourable and very, very capable Finance minister. And 

what were the messages of that budget, Mr. Speaker? Well I‟ll 

tell you the messages of that budget. Our budget is to carry out 

our plans, Mr. Speaker, by first of all keeping our promises to 

the people of the province, preparing for the growth that is 

inevitable.  

 

You know, granted, the province was growing; things were 

starting to move along fairly well. But, Mr. Speaker, I can 

honestly tell you I had people calling me from out of the 

province the night of the election and past, since the election, 

pretty much in tears, Mr. Speaker, so happy that there‟s been a 

change of government, a change of attitude in this province. 

And they‟re starting to move back. We were growing slowly 

but we can just see the momentum picking up and growing. We 

just can‟t even hold them back, Mr. Speaker. They‟re just 

coming into the province at a fast rate. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton — although it‟s a problem, I 

guess, in some ways is good to have — is growing at such a 

rate, you know. There‟s talk of subdivisions expanding. The 

city can‟t keep up with lot development. They‟re very happy 

with the one part of our plans, our budget — the $300 million 

interest-free tax, interest-free loans for property development in 

the province, Mr. Speaker, for municipalities. And Yorkton 

fully intends to use that program, Mr. Speaker, in developing 

lots for the growth, not only for our residents but our 

commercial and our industry. 

 

We‟re just on the verge of expansion around Yorkton and not 

only in the known things — the canola plants and the things of 

that nature, Mr. Speaker — but value-added and resource 

development and you name it, industry, manufacturing. People 

are very excited to come around, come to the Yorkton area. In 

fact some of our businesses from the area, Mr. Speaker, are 

growing at such a rate they‟re winning awards left, right, and 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

centre. 

 

At a recent Celebrate Success Awards, I had the opportunity to 

stand in this House and do a member‟s statement a couple of 

weeks ago. Very booming agricultural businesses, Mr. Speaker, 

industrial businesses serving the industrial sector, 

manufacturing, the value-added, the list goes on and on. 

Yorkton‟s a place to be, a place to do business, and you know, 

we‟re proud to have them come to our fair city. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in stating that we‟re going to keep with our 

promises and sustain the momentum, we are preparing for that 

anticipated growth. We‟re ensuring that all Saskatchewan 

people do benefit from the growth. And, Mr. Speaker, on that 

I‟d like to say — it‟s maybe been said a few times in this 

House, and different ways — but you know, we are, as the 

Saskatchewan Party government, we‟re looking to the future. 

We‟ve got both hands on the steering wheel, and we‟re looking 

forward through the windshield, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking to 

the future. We‟re looking to what‟s coming, and we‟re 

preparing. And we got a nice firm grip on that steering wheel. 

We‟re going to have control of this and manage this growth. 

And we‟re going to be, you know, very responsible for the 

people of the province. 

 

We are not doing what the previous administration did, Mr. 

Speaker. The previous administration drove with their left wrist 

casually on that steering wheel, their right arm folded around 

the seat back, gazing out the back window, just out of control 

willy-nilly, Mr. Speaker, and just out of control. But we‟re, 

we‟re managing that a little bit better, I think, Mr. Speaker. Just 

willy-nilly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just willy-nilly. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Willy-nilly. We are blessed, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re blessed with natural resources in this province that not 

only other provinces, other provinces in our Dominion, you 

know, many states in the United States would, would just do 

just about anything for, Mr. Speaker. There‟s countries in the 

world that go to war over any one of our resources, let alone 

what we do have in this province, something we‟re truly proud 

of and we should be using for the benefit of all people in the 

province — not hoarding, not keeping for ourselves till some 

day in the future that those resources become worth a little bit 

less, and we‟re stuck with not taking advantage of the 

opportunity that the Lord has given us here. 

 

So you know, it‟s very proactive, Mr. Speaker. We‟re trying to 

be proactive and not reactive in this government, which has 

been kind of the state of affairs in the previous administration 

for years. 

 

As it‟s been said a few times tonight, Mr. Speaker, but it‟s got 

to be said again, we‟re leading in many areas. We‟re leading in 

retail sales and international exports — number one in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. Value of our building permits, housing starts — 

number one in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Population growth — 

guess what? Most growth in 30 years, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

experts from outside of our province predict Saskatchewan will 

jump to the very top of economic growth in 2008 — number 

one again, Mr. Speaker. We have more people working in this 

province, our province of Saskatchewan, than ever before — 

something we can all be very proud of, whether opposition or 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, more than any other province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan, with its solid economic fundamentals, is well 

positioned to ride out the storm, a view taken not by people 

within this government, not necessarily people within the 

province, but people, economic experts from United States and 

around the world, Mr. Speaker, realize Saskatchewan‟s position 

to weather storms that other provinces and maybe the countries 

around us won‟t be able to handle, Mr. Speaker. But we‟re 

poised to do that because of what we‟re blessed with. 

 

And that being said, Mr. Speaker, you know, we do, we are 

facing challenges. We have seen jurisdictions around us face 

challenges with their growth. Other jurisdictions have run into a 

lot of trouble with the way they have grown and the way they 

managed their growth. But we have to learn, Mr. Speaker, from 

their experience — good and bad — we have to learn from 

other‟s experience. We can learn from our neighbours, you 

know, maybe cutting a lot and doing things to pay down their 

budget in too quickly a matter, not doing things in a balanced 

approach with debt reduction and growth of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re going to balance that approach. We are going to 

pay down our debt in a responsible manner as well as make sure 

that we have what we need to grow the province in a 

sustainable manner. 

 

That being said, Mr. Speaker, we are ready for growth. 

Saskatchewan, I believe, is ready for growth. This government 

is ready for growth. But let us state as well tonight, Mr. 

Speaker, that our infrastructure system is not; we have a failing 

infrastructure system in the province. You know, we have 

schools that are built in the ‟40s, ‟50s, and ‟60s that are 

substandard and they needed either renovation or replacement. 

We have hospital and health facilities, Mr. Speaker, in the same 

predicament. They are crumbling. They are needing upgrading 

and updating and renewal. Roofs that are leaking, as my 

esteemed colleague from Saskatoon Northwest has said and, 

you know, he‟s an awfully tough act to follow, Mr. Speaker, but 

I‟m going to do my best here. 

 

Roads and highways crumbling. The Minister of Highways 

doing an excellent job with his plans and his infrastructure 

investment, planning of $408 million. And I think, as he has 

stated already too, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be upset this year, not with the state 

of the highways but the delays in the construction of our 

highways that they‟ll have to put up with. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that‟s something they‟re willing to put up with. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, many years our province has been very 

reactive, but now we have to make a big investment in our 

future for sure, a 1 billion dollar investment. It‟s time to be 

proactive. We have to invest now. We are ready for growth, Mr. 

Speaker. The largest capital investment in Saskatchewan is 

coming —$1 billion. That‟s right — $1 billion in investment in 

our infrastructure — 1 billion, 1 billion, $1 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Largest, you say. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Largest investment in our infrastructure in 

history — investments in our hospitals, our highways, our 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

schools, and in fact in our families and our children in that 

respect. Mr. Speaker, $191 in hospitals for facilities, buildings, 

medical and safety equipment. In fact, Mr. Speaker, my home 

constituency of Yorkton is already benefited to the tune of $1.3 

million, Mr. Speaker, in Yorkton, an announcement we‟re very 

happy to make in Yorkton not that very long ago. 

 

Over $160 million on upgrades for repairs in schools. I‟m sorry 

to the Minister of Education, the Deputy Premier; I have to let 

the cat out of the bag before he has a chance to stand and speak. 

But I‟ll let some of this news as well out, but he can reiterate 

that when it‟s his turn, Mr. Speaker. And he‟ll speak to that in 

detail I‟m very sure. 

 

As I said, over $400 million in highways, roads — very 

important, Mr. Speaker — our economic corridors, our 

corridors connecting our economic areas in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, we realize Regina and Saskatoon are major 

economic corridors. And something I will not let anybody 

forget is Yorkton — the third largest trading area in the 

province, the third largest health region in the province — and 

I‟m very happy that my government is investing in my home 

constituency in a reasonable and timely manner. We‟d always 

like more but, Mr. Speaker, you know, I‟m very happy with 

what we have coming. And they‟re looking to Yorkton and 

know the value of our home in Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well I‟d like to speak a bit about Yorkton being 

that third largest trading area. If you do look at the map of the 

province, we have Saskatoon in the centre and Regina kind of 

in the south centre. Yorkton is serving a trading area, a huge 

trading area, Mr. Speaker, covering a good chunk of Manitoba. 

We go all the way up to the bush line of Preeceville; highest, 

Norquay area; we go way over to the west quite a ways, you 

know, halfway to Saskatoon pretty much our trading area goes; 

all the way down to Fort Qu‟Appelle area. A huge trading area, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yorkton is serving a large area with health care, with retail, 

with recreational, with industry, Mr. Speaker, with jobs, people 

travelling. You know, coming to Regina this morning, I realized 

how how many people we had commuting from the Melville 

area and from south of Melville, Mr. Speaker, to Yorkton for 

jobs. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, with our investment in roads and 

highways in the rural areas, with the possibility of economic 

development in the rural areas, those people, Mr. Speaker, they 

won‟t have to travel to Yorkton. They‟ll have economic 

development in their own cities, their own towns. 

 

We already see growth around Yorkton where small-town 

communities, little communities around Yorkton, where they 

were thought to be dying or dead, Mr. Speaker, now you can‟t 

buy a lot. Little places like Willowbrook, little places like 

Ebenezer, Rhein, Theodore, Springside, Wroxton — Mr. 

Speaker, you name it — these places are starting to . . . they‟re 

pretty much out of lots. They may need some of those 

low-interest loans to develop lots for those communities as 

well, Mr. Speaker, because we have bedroom communities 

flourishing around Yorkton right now because of the 

development coming to our city and just spilling out, Mr. 

Speaker, just spilling into the surrounding communities, and it‟s 

very great to see. 

 

I‟m so happy to be from that area and representing that area 

along with my colleagues from Canora-Pelly, the Deputy 

Premier; and my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena, the 

Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs; and my colleague from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister of Agriculture — three 

excellent colleagues surrounding the community of Yorkton, 

the constituency of Yorkton. I couldn‟t be happier to have such 

excellent neighbours for support and all of us working together 

for the greater good of all of our communities and for the 

province, along with the leadership of our very Hon. Premier 

from Swift Current. My seatmate, I can‟t go without talking 

about my seatmate from Saskatoon Northwest, the man that 

keeps me on the straight and narrow and keeps me anchored 

over here, feeding me information. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk a little bit about keeping our 

promises, something I‟ve touched on already. But we are 

keeping our promises. We‟ve already carried through a lot of 

promises, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve carried through a fixed election 

date, smaller cabinet, stronger balanced budget legislation. 

That‟s already known. We‟ve already stopped the provincial 

sales tax on used cars. 

 

Something I‟m very excited about personally, Mr. Speaker — 

and I‟ll have a chance to maybe speak about that a little bit 

tomorrow as well — is providing extra care for our cancer 

patients, access to drugs that will prolong their lives and ease 

their pain, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve been a strong advocate of cancer 

treatment and cancer care for the past dozen or so years, and 

I‟m very excited to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, there‟s added investment in cancer care; I believe it‟s 

$10 million in extra cancer care for our cancer patients in the 

province, Mr. Speaker — something that warms my heart and 

tells me that, you know, I am truly stating facts when I say that 

our party is a free enterprise party, Mr. Speaker, but we have a 

very strong social conscience. 

 

Some other things we‟ve carried through with making our 

streets and highways . . . through stiffer penalties for drunk 

drivers. And it just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of my colleagues tonight have spoken about shortfalls of 

the former administration, and you know we can beat that dog 

to death, so I‟m not going to go there any further. I‟m going to 

focus on the positives . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

okay, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll get to a few of them over time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — My wife is here; I‟ll give her a show. 

 

You know what I‟m going to do, Mr. Speaker, I‟m just going to 

. . . Well no, let‟s talk about some of our social conscience of 

our party, Mr. Speaker. You know, I‟m just going to run 

through a list here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I am rubber; 

you are glue. 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Some of our social policies, Mr. Speaker. We‟re committed to 

ensuring the people of Saskatchewan benefit to our growing 

economy. That includes our people that need help, Mr. Speaker. 

Our budget provides for the most support for the most 

vulnerable in our society. 

 

Something very close to my heart, Mr. Speaker — my years of 

CBO [community-based organization] experience and work — 

an extra $5 million for food banks and community-based 

organizations, Mr. Speaker . . . We realize our CBOs, our 

community-based organizations, are essential. They‟re efficient, 

effective modes of delivery of services, and you know we have 

to support them. And they‟re delivering great life skills and job 

training. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, our government has provided $3.3 

million extra dollars for increases in salaries and operating costs 

for those same community-based organizations. Our capital 

budget for Social Services is . . . our capital budget, that‟s right, 

Mr. Speaker, for in the Social Services department this year, $5 

million, increase of $3.1 million, 165 per cent increase, Mr. 

Speaker. 3.2 million for implementation of the child family 

service case management IT system, so we can track our 

children that are needing help in the system, Mr. Speaker. We 

won‟t lose them. 

 

Our budget also commits to something I‟ve been delegated to 

do by our Hon. Premier . . . is half a million dollars in one-time 

funding to host a summit of our community-based organizations 

in 2008, something that will happen this June, Mr. Speaker. 

And they‟re going to help us. The front line is going to have 

input. Our front-line CBOs are going to have input in the 

development of our social policy for our government. We‟re 

going to listen to them, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re going to help 

us in the direction we go with our social programming. 

 

$1.1 million in new funding to transition houses and sexual 

assault centres, Mr. Speaker. 5.1 million for an additional 88 

drug-addiction beds, Mr. Speaker, something the former 

administration talked about doing and never did carry through 

with, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague from Saskatoon Northwest 

pointed out, that you know, not one bed was opened under 

Project Hope; 88 beds will be opened shortly, Mr. Speaker. 

$298.5 million in total funding for income assistance programs, 

that includes a 1.1 million for rental housing supplements. 

 

We also are doubling our caregiver tax credit to $8,190; doubles 

the infirm dependant tax credit to $8,190, Mr. Speaker; 

increases the disability supplement tax credit, $8,190. All these 

are double, Mr. Speaker. 2.9 million — a 2.3 per cent increase 

for approximately 300 of our community-based organizations. 

We‟re going to provide 2.4 million to support our growing 

caseload of individuals with intellectual disabilities accessing 

residential day programs, Mr. Speaker. The budget also 

provides $400,000 increase — up to 1.9 million — for the 

disability housing supplement. 

 

We‟re building safer communities for children also, Mr. 

Speaker, providing 5 million for 30 additional child protection 

caseworkers, 30 permanency placement planners. The list goes 

on, Mr. Speaker. Preparing for future growth, we‟re allocating 

50.6 million in federal funding, providing for the affordable 

housing program for Aboriginal housing program. The budget 

also provides 60 million for the provincial neighbourhood 

revitalization housing initiative which targets the inner cities, 

Mr. Speaker — something my colleague from Saskatoon 

Northwest spoke of — in major urban centres and northern 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to breeze through some other promises, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in fact I think my time is coming to a 

close. We touched on the 40 promises here, I think, over and 

over. I don‟t know if we‟ve touched on all tonight here through 

the different colleagues going through this list, but it‟s a very 

thick list. People can, you know, go to our website on the 

Internet and check things out . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 

am very happy. I couldn‟t be more happier. Coming through 

with that many promises in our first four months since our 

election, Mr. Speaker, and as that interviewer said, he‟s just 

amazed, totally amazed at how we could come up with such a 

good budget, how our colleagues — our Finance minister and 

cabinet — come up with such a good budget and carry through 

so many promises in such a short time, promises that our 

Premier made and we‟re keeping, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I‟m not going to support the amendment brought 

forward by the opposition, but I‟d be more that honoured — 

very honoured, Mr. Speaker — to support my government‟s 

‟09-08 budget brought forward by our Finance minister. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — I‟m very pleased tonight to enter in the budget 

debate. And I‟d like to start by giving credit to the Finance 

minister and those who worked with him in preparing their first 

budget. 

 

We on this side who had the opportunity of being in 

government understand the difficulty there in the job of 

preparing a budget in a relatively short period of time. The 

budget was prepared in about half the regular amount of time, 

and, Mr. Speaker, we want to acknowledge that. We want to 

acknowledge the hard work by the Finance minister and others 

enabled to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe in giving credit where credit is due. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the Finance 

minister for during his speech, he gave credit to the members on 

this side and the former government for doing many good 

things that put a foundation in place for the budget which he 

presented. And, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate that. 

 

Many members opposite have taken the opportunity to say 

everything was terrible, terrible, terrible when they formed 

government. But, Mr. Speaker, using a baseball analogy, the 

province was doing terrific. Things were going really well in 

this province over the last couple of years. Things have been 

progressively getting better. And, Mr. Speaker, they inherited a 

province where they were on third base. But to hear them talk 

about the situation, you‟d think they‟d hit a triple instead of 

inheriting a province being on third base. 

 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is the 15th balanced budget 

acknowledged by the Finance minister and acknowledged by 

the members opposite. There is some irony in the fact though 

that, Mr. Speaker, over the last 14 balanced budgets they said 

they were all not balanced but when they formed the 

government, all 15 budgets were balanced. We do thank the 

Minister of Finance for acknowledging that. We think that to 

his credit he stepped up to the plate and acknowledged the 

situation as it was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to give credit to the Finance minister 

for understanding once he became Finance minister the need for 

a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker, regardless what you 

want to call it, this province has needed a Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund because of the volatility of its resource revenues. And, 

Mr. Speaker, give credit to the Finance minister for 

understanding that was a necessity and continuing a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker, that‟s in stark contrast to 

where the current government, when they were in opposition, 

portrayed the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They said it wasn‟t 

needed. It wasn‟t required. We should never have such a fund. 

But, Mr. Speaker, they have such a fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the day that they formed government, the day the 

members opposite formed government, they spoke of the 

province‟s finances being stark. The situation was dire. 

Everything was falling apart. Just a few, few months later, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re going and talking about how great the province 

is and how much money is there. Well, Mr. Speaker, they 

inherited $1.3 billion — $1.3 billion. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, that was the fiscal situation of the province. It‟s nice 

the Finance minister acknowledged that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about our province and 

our economy. Mr. Speaker, we‟re a have province, and we‟re 

proud to be a have province, and we should all be proud to be a 

have province. Mr. Speaker, we‟re a province that . . . because 

of our own initiative, not because of any initiatives from other 

provinces or from the federal government, we‟re a have 

province. The business people, the entrepreneurs, and the 

investors of this province worked hard. They worked hard with 

government — and with the opposition — but with government 

to make this province a have province, and we should all be 

very, very proud of that. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to work 

hard to keep this province a have province. We need to continue 

to work hard to make this province the very best it can be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of things that 

would have made that easier. Mr. Speaker, I want to start with 

equalization. I want to talk about the promise made by the 

federal government. Even though we‟re a have province, Mr. 

Speaker, much of our revenue comes from resource revenues, 

one-time resource revenues. Once they‟re used up, won‟t be 

there any more, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, just think what 

we could do if we had that equalization money, equal to about 

$800 million a year, and we‟re able to put it away in a fund for 

our future when, Mr. Speaker, we won‟t have those one-time 

renewable resources available to us. That day will come. 

 

The issue of renewable resources and the ownership of 

provinces has been a long-standing issue. But most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, we had a promise. The people of Saskatchewan 

received a promise from the federal government. And our 

promise was, Mr. Speaker, the promise was that we would get 

100 per cent of our non-renewable resource revenues. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they didn‟t keep that promise. And as a result 

Saskatchewan people have $800 million less approximately 

each year. 

 

It says so in their own budget, Mr. Speaker, in the budget that 

this government tabled for all the people of Saskatchewan. And 

if we had that money and we put that money aside, Mr. 

Speaker, we could build a heritage fund that would allow us to 

continue into the future being a prosperous and a have province 

regardless if there were significant downturns in resource 

revenues. And we need to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we do what 

we can to build a future for our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw this year a budget with a 10 per cent year 

over year increase. Mr. Speaker, a significant increase. And I‟d 

like to point out that we haven‟t seen a significant tax decrease 

for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we tabled several 

budgets with far less increases year over year with significant 

tax decreases for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 

significant tax decreases for the people of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a significant disappointment to the people of 

this province that we didn‟t see a significant tax decrease in this 

budget. It‟s a disappointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a promise from the government when they 

were running in this election, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 

the election, Mr. Speaker, they promised a significant property 

tax cut. And, Mr. Speaker, what did urban taxpayers see as a 

significant property tax cut? Two per cent, Mr. Speaker. It 

amounts to about 22 to $30 a year, Mr. Speaker — 22 to $30 a 

year. That doesn‟t buy you a pizza today, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

their significant tax cut. It doesn‟t amount to what a pizza costs 

you today 

 

[22:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the government thinks that we 

can do with a pizza rebate. And that‟s what I‟d like to refer it to 

as the pizza rebate because it doesn‟t even buy you a pizza, Mr. 

Speaker. And I‟ll tell you, my constituents, my constituents 

expected more. My constituents wanted more and they didn‟t 

get it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have members opposite chirping that they 

didn‟t get that from us. Well I‟ll just remind them that we gave 

a 2 per cent PST cut just the year before. A 2 per cent PST cut, 

Mr. Speaker, and that added up to significantly more than the 

pizza rebate, Mr. Speaker. That added up to several hundred 

dollars back for the average family. Not a pizza rebate of less 

than $30, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, we got a pizza rebate 

this year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they had come forward with a meaningful 

tax cut on property, if they‟d gone the full 10 per cent in year 1, 

this would have been a much better budget. And it would have 

shared the wealth among all the citizens of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a pizza rebate doesn‟t do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were several other shortcomings in this 

budget. And I‟d like to talk about this budget and some of its 

shortcomings. Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve also talked about many, 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

many good things in this budget because there are many good 

things in this budget as well. But this budget fell short in a 

number of areas. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget fell short in the 

area of housing. 

 

Today we are experiencing a very significant housing crunch in 

our province, both in availability and in actual cost, Mr. 

Speaker. There is a problem with availability in major urban 

areas as well as smaller urban areas across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. But there is also an affordability issue. And that 

affordability issue is accented depending on the size of the 

community. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s an issue that is not 

addressed. Mind you, it is an issue that developed over a 

relatively short period of time in the last 12 to 14, 18 months. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it still needs to be addressed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to address the issue of affordability 

in housing. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am pleased 

with the Minister of Social Services, that she continued and 

they funded the changes that we made, that we made to 

affordability in housing for those on assistance. And I also 

would like to acknowledge that the minister acknowledges that, 

and we do appreciate that she did acknowledge it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but there is still a significant gap in affordability 

for people. The problem is even greater than it was six months 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, we saw no new funding to deal with 

that affordability gap for those most vulnerable in our society. 

Mr. Speaker, we need to continue to ensure that those who are 

the most vulnerable in our society continue, continue to be able 

to meet their basic needs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the other shortcomings of this budget 

was we saw no increase, no increase in income assistance for 

those on assistance in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, one of 

the outcomes of a hot economy, one of the outcomes of a very 

vibrant economy is increased costs. Whether or not we like it or 

not, part of a hot economy is increased living costs. Everything 

from food to housing to utilities — all go up when you have a 

hot economy. And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing to increase the 

funding for those who are on assistance in our province in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. It leaves them even more vulnerable. And 

this budget doesn‟t address that issue. And, Mr. Speaker, those 

who are most vulnerable are going to feel more vulnerable as a 

result of this budget. And that is one of the shortcomings of this 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other shortcomings of this budget is 

training seats. We have a very, very hot labour market, and as a 

result of an extremely hot labour market, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the need to increase significantly our training capacity for 

young people in our province. We need to take full advantage 

of the opportunities that our young Aboriginal population 

presents for this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge there‟s been an increase 

of some training seats — and that‟s appreciated; it‟s good — 

but we need more. And, Mr. Speaker, we need about double 

that. And that‟s what was in last year‟s budget, about 2,000 

training seats, Mr. Speaker — 2,300 in the 2007-08 budget. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we need to acknowledge that 

our hot economy, our wealth that this province now 

experiences, requires us to examine some of these issues very, 

very carefully. And, Mr. Speaker, in the area of the most 

vulnerable in housing and assistance rates, in the area of 

training seats, we fell short. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one more area where I 

think there is significant shortfall. And that‟s the environment, 

Mr. Speaker. When you have the level of economic wealth, you 

know economic growth that we have in this province, we have 

an increased responsibility, increased responsibility to ensure 

that growth is environmentally sustainable and that we do it in a 

manner that leaves our province and our country in as good if 

not better condition for our children than it is today. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we need, we need to ensure that what we do 

economically is environmentally sustainable. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there is just not enough emphasis in this budget about 

environmental sustainability, about climate change and about 

meeting our needs as a province to leave the province that we 

have environmentally sound for our children. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to emphasize the environment to a greater 

degree as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to talk about the amazing last five 

weeks of 2007. Now we are hearing statistics today about 2007 

that we knew were going to be there by the end of the year: 

population growth, great economic growth. We‟re seeing 

increased sales. We‟re seeing increased activity, increased 

investments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was throughout all of 2007. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we knew that we would have, by the end of 2007, well 

surpassed the $1 million mark. We knew that we would have 

economic growth that would lead the nation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we should all be proud of that. But, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite would do well to acknowledge that that took a 

significant amount of work over all 12 months, just not the last 

five weeks after the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the good things in the 

budget. I want to talk about some of the positive things that are 

going on in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to acknowledge the continuation of the 

tuition freeze. That tuition freeze is important to young people. 

It‟s important to students that are going to post-secondary 

education. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll give them credit for 

continuing the tuition freeze that we had in place for a number 

of years. We think it‟s a good step and it is a positive step for 

young people. And I believe you have to acknowledge those 

things that are positive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk about the increased infrastructure 

budget — the capital budget, the $1 billion they talk about. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, nobody in this province, including the 

members on this side, are going to say the $1 billion towards 

infrastructure isn‟t (a) good and (b) important because, Mr. 

Speaker, budgets are about delivering things to the people of the 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have today, we have today an 

unprecedented economic situation. We hear about the last 16 

years all the time. But members opposite should acknowledge 

that the last 16 years haven‟t had the economic realities and 

possibilities of today. Mr. Speaker, it was about building the 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

foundation so that we could have the economic reality of today. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we worked hard, the business people and the 

citizens of this province worked hard to build the foundation to 

allow for the economic reality of today. It isn‟t the members 

opposite or the members on this side that do that; it‟s the entire 

population of the province of Saskatchewan that had to make 

choices, had to make sacrifices in order to build that economic 

potential and possibility. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about, I‟d like to talk about 

this budget, and I‟d like to talk about some of the positive 

enhancements, Mr. Speaker. It‟s very difficult because I can‟t 

hear myself speak, let alone deal with the issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That seems that things have quietened 

down a little bit; now I can at least hear myself speak. I hope 

that members opposite had the opportunity because I‟m talking 

about good things in their budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to thank the Minister of Social Services 

for continuing the funding for foster care and the improvements 

to foster care. Those were initiatives that became very 

problematic in the latter part of last year, and we moved on and 

we‟re very pleased that you‟re continuing that funding. Mr. 

Speaker, that funding goes to help vulnerable children in our 

society. And when we had the opportunity to move forward 

with that with the money in the latter half of last year, we were 

extremely pleased with what those outcomes would mean for 

foster families and foster children, and we‟re very pleased to 

see it carried on today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to now take a couple of minutes to talk 

about some of the things in the budget that we‟re very 

disappointed in and some of the things that weren‟t clear to the 

people of Saskatchewan as the budget was delivered and things 

that we are just starting to become aware of and some of the 

implications. Station 20 in Saskatoon is one example. That was 

a community-driven initiative. It was driven by the people of 

Saskatoon and the people from the community that were going 

to benefit from the projects, going to benefit from the initiative 

put forward by the community. Mr. Speaker, to have the 

funding pulled is . . . without having consultation of the 

community and those involved, the funding was simply pulled, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they should go back and take the 

opportunity to meet with those community leaders that were 

responsible for the Station 20 project and understand from those 

community leaders what the community needs, what the 

community wants, and why that project was so important to the 

community. Mr. Speaker, I would ask them to take the 

opportunity to go back and meet with the community. Talk to 

those community leaders because that project was important to 

those people. It‟s important to the community and important to 

those neighbourhoods. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to continue to work with the community 

as we plan, and this is clearly one case where the government 

didn‟t take the time to consult with the community. He didn‟t 

take the time to talk to community leaders in those projects 

about the importance of the project, and we urged him to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at this budget . . . as I said earlier there 

are many good things in this budget. This budget, it‟s been 

referred to by many of my colleagues as NDP lite or NDP like. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many initiatives here that 

build on the exact budget of a year ago. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s normal. It is normal to continue programs and continue to 

enhance them, and continue the second- or third-year phase-in 

of programs. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget does a great deal of 

that. And we do appreciate the fact that the government 

continues to build on previous budgets because that‟s normally 

how it is done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many things here that would have 

been done in this budget — that are in this budget — would 

have been done whether we were the government or the Sask 

Party was the government. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why people 

on this side refer to it as an NDP lite or NDP like budget in 

many ways. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that, with only 

some shortcomings, is a very good budget, but there are 

significant issues that need to be dealt with. And those 

significant issues should be addressed by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just quickly would like to recap what those 

issues are. Mr. Speaker, it‟s the property tax relief. With the 

economic situation this province is in, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan should have been afforded the full 

implementation of the property tax relief. Mr. Speaker, there 

needed to be something there to address the cost of affordable 

and accessible housing, particularly for those most vulnerable in 

our society, Mr. Speaker. And that should have been coupled 

with, Mr. Speaker, some enhancement to the basic benefits 

afforded to those who are most vulnerable in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we needed to see a greater increase in training 

seats to meet our needs. Mr. Speaker, we were looking to see at 

least the same number as last year, about double that was 

brought forward in this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, lastly, Mr. 

Speaker, we needed to see some enhancement to the 

environmental protection of our province, Mr. Speaker. And if 

those four things had been in there, Mr. Speaker, I think you 

would have seen a unanimous support for the budget. 

 

But because they‟re not there, Mr. Speaker, because they‟re not 

there, Mr. Speaker, people — citizens of our province who are 

vulnerable, the most vulnerable in our society, Mr. Speaker — 

are left out. And, Mr. Speaker, ordinary families are left out 

because there‟s no meaningful tax break for them. Mr. Speaker, 

the citizens of this province feel that they didn‟t get, they didn‟t 

get what they believed they should get. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s at a time where we have $1.3 billion, $1.3 billion left in 

the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s at a time 

when we have a $250 million surplus going to pay down debt. 

Mr. Speaker, it is affordable to make the changes that would be 

good for the people of the province. It can be done in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. They can make the improvements if they 

want to. And, Mr. Speaker, they should make those 

improvements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Being 10:30, the time of adjournment, this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 437 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 438 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 441 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 443 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 445 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 449 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 451 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 454 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 458 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 461 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 464 

  Taylor (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 451 

  Gantefoer (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 452 

  The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan) (point of order) ........................................................................................................... 452 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 440 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


