




















































Hansard: May 14, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 43A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 14, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1293 

 May 14, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today 

we’re honoured to have a very special guest seated in your 

gallery. Here joining us to observe the proceedings of the 

Assembly, as well as to participate in a number of meetings, is 

Mr. Mohammed Hassan Bal. We’d ask Mr. Bal to stand. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Bal is the consul general of Malaysia based out of 

Vancouver, British Columbia. He has had a distinguished career 

in terms of his country’s diplomatic service. Prior to his 

appointment in July as consul general in Vancouver, Mr. 

Hassan Bal served as principal assistant secretary in the 

Malaysian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He has also represented 

his country at the 57th United Nations General Assembly in 

2002. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Malaysia is an ever-increasingly important trading 

partner with the province of Saskatchewan. In the last five years 

alone, Saskatchewan exports to Malaysia have grown from $78 

million to $148 million primarily, but not limited to, potash 

exports. 

 

While he’s here in Saskatchewan it is our great hope that Mr. 

Hassan Bal will have productive and useful discussions on how 

to help continue expanding the very important trading 

relationship between the province of Saskatchewan and 

Malaysia. 

 

This is his first visit to our province, so we warmly welcome 

him here. And I ask all members to join me in welcoming him 

to this Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier on behalf of the official opposition in 

welcoming Counsel General Hassan Bal to the Saskatchewan 

legislature and to the province of Saskatchewan. We hope that 

your visit will be successful from your point of view and from 

our point of view. And welcome again. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the members of 

this Assembly, I would like to introduce a group of people that 

are sitting in your gallery. They are the Campaign to Control 

Cancer. They’re here marking Cancer Day of Action, which is a 

nationwide awareness day to certainly bring our attention to the 

devastating effect that cancer has on so many of our lives. 

 

I want to thank them on behalf of the government especially for 

being here and lobbying government. I met them when I was in 

opposition, their association or group. And I’ve had the 

opportunity to briefly meet them this morning. We’ll have more 

time to spend later on this evening with them to continue to 

lobby and push government to make the right decisions to 

reduce the incidence of cancer in our province. So I would ask 

all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m 

on my feet I’d also like to welcome a number of members from 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses that are seated in your 

gallery. They are here in Regina, I think, for many reasons — I 

can think of one in particular — but I would like all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 

welcome to the members from the Campaign to Control Cancer. 

We also met with them this morning — the C2CC — which is 

kind of a neat acronym. Harley Ast is here with patients, 

survivors, and many other people who have been touched by 

cancer. And they told us their stories and they shared with us 

their concerns. And I am certain that they have raised the 

awareness of many of us, and I’m hoping that this national day 

of action will continue to work towards making their goal, their 

key message, their result — they want to see cancer cut in half 

in our generation. So welcome to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m on my feet, 

I want to introduce the members from SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses]. They are the SUN bargaining committee, and 

I’d ask them to stand as I read their names. Barb Abele, Jan 

Anderson, Fred Bordas, Sandy Ewert, Charlene Falkiner, Barb 

Fisher, Sandy Keating, Paul Kuling, Linda McKinnon, Rita 

Nell, and Don Yates, and they are SUN’s bargaining 

committee. 

 

Their presence here is a statement on the troubled progress that 

the SUN-SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] negotiations are taking. 

 

But since it’s nurses week, I’d like to say thank you to them for 

the work that they do to improve the working lives of nurses 

and the working conditions that everybody lives in and the 

patients receive their care in. So welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all the members of this Assembly, I would 

like to introduce to you, seated in the west gallery today, Ms. 

Lara Zaluski. 

 

Lara’s one of our many outstanding members of our caucus 

staff, and we wanted to acknowledge her today, Mr. Speaker, as 

the session draws to a close, for a number of reasons. She’s 

usually at work well before most elected members and is there 

at least as late as elected members. And the detail and care and 

enthusiasm she puts into anything she tackles is second to none. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to be the type of person Lara is may be 

astounding to some when you consider what life has sent her 

way over the past number of years. She lost her brother Darcy 

to cancer in 2003. She lost her grandfather in a tragic motor 

vehicle accident just a short time ago. And last Thursday, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

Raynelle Wilson, Steve Rennick, and Brooklyn Elhard from our 

caucus office and myself attended the memorial service here in 

Regina for her father, Lorvin Edvin Zaluski, after his passing 

due to cancer on April 28. 

 

In Lara’s closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the 

service, she mentioned the one thing she wanted to do with her 

dad before he had passed away was to bring him to this 

Assembly, watch the proceedings live, and have him introduced 

so his name would be recorded in Hansard, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, for all Lara does, for the person she is because of her 

mom, Elsie, and her dad, Lorvin Edvin Zaluski, raised her to be, 

it seems the least we could do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with her life being so touched by cancer, I feel it’s 

very appropriate to introduce her on this day, the Cancer Day of 

Action. So I would ask all members of this Assembly to 

welcome Lara and acknowledge the life of her father, Lorvin 

Edvin Zaluski in this Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you today two school groups 

from my constituency. The first is a group of 44 students from 

Hague High School in grade 11 and 12 classes. They are seated 

in your gallery. They are accompanied today by their teachers, 

Russell Dyck and Margi Corbett, and chaperone Dave Unger. 

 

And I had a chance to meet with them earlier today and they got 

to peek inside the Premier’s office, so that was pretty special. 

And one of the students, Alyssa Unger, her mom and I have 

been friends for over 30 years so it’s pretty special to have her 

here in the Assembly with us today. 

 

Also seated in the east gallery are 40 students from Osler 

School, grade 8 and 9 students. They’re accompanied by their 

teachers, Grant Elke and Glen Osmond, and chaperoned by 

Lucy Friesen, Sheryl Banman, and Pam Spence. And I’ll have 

the opportunity to meet with them after question period today. 

And I would like all members to join me in welcoming these 

two groups to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, I believe. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to do an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Southwest 

asked leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery today 

we have several guests who are here in honour of the centenary 

of the Caliphate in the Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam. 

 

We have with us Lal Khan Malik, who is the movement’s 

Canadian president who is visiting us from Ontario; Tanveer 

Shah, who is president of the Saskatoon branch; Dr. Habib ur 

Rehman, who is president of the Regina branch. 

 

And with them are Munib Ahmad, Humayoon Nasir, Rafiq 

Sahi, Kabir Chughtai, Musaddaq Hayat, Nasser Malik, and 

Fazal Masood Malik. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges for all Saskatchewan people 

is to create an environment where diversity is welcomed and 

celebrated, and where our differences are set aside and the 

values which we share are paramount. 

 

In our world of ever-increasing technology, you would think it 

would be easier to achieve these goals, that a world reduced in 

scope would be less susceptible to the idea of hatred and 

violence. But ironically, technology has made it easier for those 

who breed hatred to get out their message. However there are 

times when people of different faiths can come together and 

take a stand for a world that is inclusive and caring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why I am pleased to recognize the centenary 

of the Caliphate in the Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam, a 

movement which has members in my constituency of Saskatoon 

Southeast and throughout Saskatchewan carries a simple 

message — love for all, hatred for none. As founder Hazrat 

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad wrote: 

 

It is our principle to have sympathy for the whole of 

mankind. If a person sees that fire has broken out in the 

house of a Hindu neighbour and he does not get up to help 

in putting it out, I tell you truly that he is not of me. If one 

of my followers sees a Christian being killed and does not 

go to his assistance to rescue him, then I tell you quite 

truly that he is not of us. I say it on oath that I have no 

enmity with any people. 

 

Established in 190 countries, the Ahmadiyya Muslim 

community continues to preach a message of peace and 

tolerance. The movement is a reminder that the values we all 

share are stronger than those who would seek to divide us. 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

Differences in the way we worship may exist but the underlying 

belief in the goodness of humanity is common to us all. 

 

As the Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam celebrates this 

centenary, I would ask that all members of the legislature 

recognize their commitment in reducing strife in the world and 

building a society based on respect and understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen will be outside in the rotunda 

shortly following question period and I would certainly like to 

invite all members to introduce themselves and to meet these 

people, and I would like to thank them very much for being 

here and for their contribution to humanity and peace in our 

world and ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 

to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also join in welcoming 

the members from this Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam. It’s 

well that we acknowledge the leaders of various groups within 

our community and it’s especially a treat to welcome the 

Islamic leaders here. We know that they are contributing greatly 

to our country of Canada as well as to the whole world and we 

very much appreciate having them there, so I would urge all 

members to welcome them. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and 

to the members of this Assembly, I would like to introduce a 

gentleman in the west gallery. He’s an esteemed engineer, a 

corporate leader, a successful entrepreneur, he’s on the board of 

the Central Alberta Economic Partnership, and I’m pleased and 

proud to also add that he’s my father. I would ask legislative 

colleagues to welcome Bud Norris to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce a couple 

of gentlemen in the west gallery. First of all a good friend of 

mine, Mr. Jim Angus. Jim’s the administrator for the RM [rural 

municipality] of Harris and is in town this week for the annual 

convention of the RM [Rural Municipal] Administrators 

Association. Jim and I have been good friends for a lot of years, 

and in fact he was my campaign manager during the recent 

election. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Did a bang-up job, I might add. With Jim is 

Dave Dmytryshyn. Dave is from Alberta. He’s involved with 

the Municipal Administrators’ Association there and is here as a 

fraternal delegate to the convention. I ask you to please give 

these gentlemen a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Oh pardon me. The member 

from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like 

to take the opportunity to introduce to you and through you to 

this Assembly a group of 43 grade 8 students from Rosetown 

High School. With them are teachers Norm Cline, Ken Boyd, 

and Vicki Moore as well as chaperones Blaine McGonigal, 

Shawna Goyer, and my curling friend, Wayne Jensen. And I’m 

sure you’ll agree, Mr. Speaker, with that many Rosetown 

students in the Assembly, the air just seems brighter and 

happier today. So I look forward to talking to them later. Please 

give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the member 

who just introduced the Rosetown students, and we may not 

agree on everything, but I think we can agree the air is brighter 

and more beautiful in this Chamber today because of the 

students who are with us — all of the students. 

 

I do however, Mr. Speaker, want to recognize one student in the 

Rosetown grade 8 class. That is Kirsten Horning. Kirsten is not 

only visiting the capital city; she’s not only visiting the 

Chamber and the legislature today; she has a chance to visit her 

grandma and her aunt, both of whom work with us in the 

legislature. So a very specific welcome to Kirsten for being here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce two guests seated in the west gallery to you and 

through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly. We have 

Jesse Barmby from Milestone with us today. Jesse is going to 

be our summer student in the Enterprise and Innovation 

ministry office. Jesse’s a third year student in the marketing 

degree program at the University of Saskatchewan. She has 

successfully completed two university economics courses and 

wants to enhance her knowledge of economics. And we’re 

looking very much forward to working with her and hope to be 

able to help to strengthen her skills in the workplace over the 

summer months. 

 

And Jesse is accompanied by her grandmother, Carole Barmby, 

from Lang. And would both ladies please wave and be 

acknowledged. And I hope that all members will extend a warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 

to all the members of the Assembly it’s a great pleasure to 

welcome a welcome but unexpected guest with us today, Mr. 

Neil Robertson. If you could rise and be acknowledged, sir. 

Thank you so much for coming. 

 

Mr. Robertson is the legal counsel to the Regina Police Service 

and helped officiate at new Chief Troy Hagen’s installation 

yesterday. Welcome, sir, to your legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Since we have such a numerous number of 

guests today, let me introduce a couple of people. A young 

gentleman who has joined us, actually neighbours of ours, their 

son Ryan Clark has joined us. He works for the Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency and he’s seated in the west gallery. 

 

And in the east gallery I can see a former MP [Member of 

Parliament], former mayor, Mr. Larry Schneider. Welcome to 

the Chamber today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents in the south side of Moose Jaw, and the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this on behalf of all citizens in Moose 

Jaw. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Housing costs are 

increasingly a barrier to students in Saskatchewan, particularly 

those living away from home, and more affordable housing 

options would significantly help Saskatchewan students cope 

with the cost of their education. I am therefore submitting a 

petition in support of expanding options for student housing. 

The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to aggressively working with 

partners to expand on-campus and off-campus housing 

options for Saskatchewan students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by people from mostly the Eastview 

constituency but surrounding areas as well. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by individuals concerned about the 

Sask Party’s decision to axe funding for Station 20 West. The 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

across Saskatoon, streets like Irvine Avenue, Broadway 

Avenue, Haultain; other streets like 20th Street, Avenue B, and 

10th Street East. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased and privileged today to present a petition to the 

Legislative Assembly, a petition that recognizes that many 

Saskatchewan families struggle or are unable to find child care 

for their children. Mr. Speaker, the petition calls upon the 

Legislative Assembly: 

 

. . . to cause the government to add at least 2,000 new 

child care spaces in Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and by residents of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

because the government MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] will not meet with constituents who disagree with 

them, and because there have been no public consultations with 

the people of this province on Bill 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act, and Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

And I stand today again, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions as I 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

have done throughout this session, Mr. Speaker, many hundreds 

that I have already presented and read the names into the record. 

Today I’ll be presenting an additional 2,267 names of people 

who have signed in opposition to Bill 5 and 6. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Cancer Day of Action 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, May 14 is the Cancer Day of 

Action in Canada. And today the Saskatchewan cancer 

community is taking part in this initiative. The website states, 

this year in our province 5,000 new cases will be diagnosed and 

2,400 individuals will succumb to the disease, but right now we 

have the knowledge to cut that rate of cancer deaths by more 

than half over the next generation. We can prevent thousands of 

our friends and family members from contracting cancer or save 

them from death due to cancer, and we can improve the quality 

of life for those touched by it. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we enjoyed an informative breakfast and 

meeting at the legislature, much to the credit of chief organizer, 

Harley Ast. And this evening we again are blessed with the 

company of the representatives of the Campaign to Control 

Cancer at a reception as they bring awareness to this initiative 

to the members of their Assembly. 

 

The campaign has acknowledged improvements made in areas 

such as patient support, access to new cancer drugs, more 

nurses and health care professionals, and advocates and 

implementation of new management systems, but more can be 

done. We can strive to do better in treatment, early detection 

and screening, shorter wait times, lifestyle change, and 

prevention education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of my government’s focus on 

cancer prevention, treatment, and education. In my private life, 

my family has made a dedication to controlling cancer, and 

today I invite all members of this Assembly to do the same. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

 

Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the words of the Norwegian national 

anthem where they talk about how much they love their land. 

And, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday will be May 17, the Norwegian 

Constitution Day, where Norwegians and Norwegian 

descendants right around the world will be celebrating this 

event. The event took place in 1814, one of the earliest 

constitutions in the world that gave, in many ways, the farmers 

the right to vote. And there are many Norwegian descendants 

that live here in Saskatchewan, live in Canada, live in North 

America. 

 

This celebration will be happening in a number of communities 

in Saskatchewan plus communities right across North America. 

You can get all the information about these if you subscribe to 

the Norwegian American Weekly which is published out of 

Seattle and New York, and I think also if you talk to people in 

your local communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring these greetings on behalf of myself 

and the member for Regina Coronation Park, the member for 

The Battlefords, the member for Saskatoon Massey Place, and 

the member for Saltcoats — all Norwegian descendants. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

We Are Many Festival 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From August 22 to 24 

this summer, Saskatoon will be host to We Are Many, a festival 

of sustainability. We Are Many, also known as WAM, is the 

power of many making big changes by taking small steps 

together. It’s a celebration of the arts, public education, 

community action, and a pact that will unite people in making 

simple adjustments that taken together will have a large, 

positive impact on the environment — a dramatic step toward 

becoming an environmentally friendly community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the centrepiece of the festival, the pact, will 

propose 40 attainable, sustainable personal commitments that 

people can choose to implement in their own lives and in their 

own homes. 

 

Now WAM is youth run. Members of their core organizing 

team are almost all under the age of 30, though they benefit 

greatly from the experience, and members of the advisory board 

and other community members. In fact, they’ve been endorsed 

by dozens of politicians at all levels of government across all 

stripes. They have the support and co-operation of the former 

premier, Environmental Defence Canada, Steven Page of the 

Barenaked Ladies, author Yann Martel, the Hon. Carol Skelton, 

Stephen Lewis, Dr. Jane Goodall, among many others. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as many as 91 per cent of Canadians 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

consider environmental sustainability to be the critical issue 

facing Canada and the world, and a similar number express a 

willingness to make lifestyle changes. This is our opportunity to 

make a difference. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I encourage all members to come out 

to the WAM Festival this summer and sign on to the pact and 

make a difference. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Cultural Events 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

pleasure of attending three wonderful cultural events recently in 

the city of Regina. 

 

On Saturday, I had the pleasure of attending a very important 

fundraising event for the Hindu Temple of Regina. 

 

And on Monday I brought greetings on behalf of the Minister of 

Education to the Volunteer Heritage Language Teachers’ 

Awards Night hosted by the Multilingual Association of 

Regina. They support 27 language schools in and around 

Regina in order to ensure that heritage languages are not lost. 

They provide material and instruction to teachers, as well as 

establishing a certificate in second language instruction at the U 

of R [University of Regina]. Saskatchewan is made stronger by 

our varied culture, and services like this help keep our heritage 

alive. 

 

And on Tuesday night I brought greetings on behalf of the 

province to the annual dinner at the Regina Multifaith Forum. 

This forum works hard to build bridges of understanding and 

co-operation among many faiths in our Queen City. This is 

exemplified in the work done by the Wascana Campus 

continuing care assistant program. This group of Spiritual 

Service Award was accepted by Wendy Treble, Heather Gold, 

and Sharon Goldman. This SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] program helps nursing 

students become more sensitive to the needs of all faiths at the 

end of life. 

 

All of these groups are shining examples of how diverse and 

accepting our province can be and exemplifies our motto, “from 

many peoples, strength.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

National Day Against Homophobia 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 17 

is a National Day Against Homophobia when governments 

across Canada, gay-positive groups, and concerned citizens take 

a moment to recognize the impact of prejudice and 

discrimination on the basis of sexual identity. 

 

The 2008 campaign culminating on this day, Homosexuality is 

not a sickness, highlights the rights of gay, lesbian, transgender, 

and transsexual people to receive health services free of 

discrimination and concurrently challenge the barriers that 

continue to exist in this country, including organ and blood 

donation. 

 

[14:00] 

 

While each person may hold many statuses at any given 

moment, gender construction and identity is an elemental status 

as its recognition begins early, its socialization is intense, and 

its imposition on all other components of achievement and 

relation to the world is so total. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, on this anniversary of officially 

marking this important day in our province, let us all recognize 

that homophobia is on one hand about the hurtful actions and 

attitudes towards homosexuals, and on the other hand about the 

privilege afforded to heterosexual persons. We mark this day, 

Mr. Speaker, in a solemn way while recognizing past 

achievements. On May 17 we in the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] distinguish that we want to see the day when gays and 

lesbians can live with pride, support, and love rather than the 

fear, hatred, and violence associated with homophobia. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

The Wrong Side 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder whether the 

NDP ever get tired of being on the wrong side of an issue. A 

couple of weeks ago a poll came out showing overwhelming 

support for the Saskatchewan Party’s changes to labour 

legislation. The NDP opposed the new labour laws. Today a 

new poll is out showing strong support for a value-added 

nuclear industry in Saskatchewan. The NDP is opposed to 

nuclear power. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP started this streak well before the 

last election. They were on the wrong side of the Murdoch 

Carriere harassment case. They were on the wrong side of the 

Domtar deal. They were on the wrong side of the prescription 

drug plan debate, and now they’re on the wrong side of the 

nuclear debate. Mr. Speaker, at least they’re consistent — 

consistently wrong, consistently out of touch with 

Saskatchewan people, consistently wanting to hold the province 

back instead of moving forward. 

 

The NDP will have another chance to continue this streak today 

when we have the final vote on the essential services Act. We’ll 

see whether they vote against the overwhelming majority of 

Saskatchewan people one more time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the legislature 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

today to acknowledge and congratulate the winners of this 

year’s Battlefords Business Excellence Awards that took place 

on May 6. 

 

It was an incredible evening, Mr. Speaker, as Anderson Pump 

House of North Battleford, specializing in water-related 

products and equipment, was named The Battlefords Business 

of the Year and at the same time was also named the winner of 

the consumer services award. Anderson Pump House owner, 

Howard Kirby, praised The Battlefords as a great place to live 

and do business, adding that he wouldn’t trade this location for 

anyplace else in Canada. 

 

There were of course other winners, Mr. Speaker. The heritage 

business award winner is Kramer Auction Sales Ltd. The 

Community Contribution Award winner is Scott Campbell 

Dodge Ltd. The Export Achievement Award winner is Bernier 

Millwork. The Marketing Award winner is Powerflyers, and the 

winner of the New Business Venture Award is our community’s 

newest hotel, the Gold Eagle Lodge. 

 

There were almost 300 people in attendance at this, the 15th 

annual business awards program sponsored by The Battlefords 

Chamber of Commerce. During the ceremonies, North 

Battleford city councillor Ian Hamilton and town of Battleford 

councillor Bill Halewich summed up the value of the awards 

and the businesses receiving them by saying the contributions 

of the people behind the businesses are making this great 

community what it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to ask all members of the 

Assembly to join with me in congratulating this year’s winners 

and the organizers of the Battlefords Business Excellence 

Awards, BBEX, 2008. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Federal Infrastructure Program 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s no secret that the minister and his federal 

Conservative counterparts have taken their time getting funding 

lined up as part of the Building Canada program. The funding 

for Saskatchewan and the agreement being signed was 

announced well over a month ago and still no money for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Conservatives are saying that this money won’t be 

available until some time in June. Regina’s mayor has pointed 

out that these delays mean millions of dollars in additional cost 

to municipalities. 

 

My question is for the minister. Will the minister just admit that 

it’s because of his bungling and lack of enthusiasm for this 

project that the people of Regina are on the hook for millions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the last time we 

discussed this issue the member couldn’t add our 7 per cent 

increase in revenue sharing to our 8 per cent increase in revenue 

sharing and arrive at a correct total of 15 per cent. Today she 

doesn’t seem to know the difference between addition and 

subtraction. Thank goodness she was never appointed minister 

of Finance. A simple lesson might help the member understand 

the mysteries of arithmetic. 

 

Property taxes aren’t going up because our new government is 

providing more money to municipalities than ever before in the 

history of our province. Property taxes are going up because the 

former government clawed back $300 million from 

municipalities in the first place. When will the member have the 

honesty, the humility, and the courage to stand in this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Member can finish his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When will 

the member have the honesty, the humility, and the courage to 

stand in this House and publicly admit that she and her 

colleagues created this problem in the first place? And, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — . . . have the light on. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister I think has pulled out the wrong fact sheet. I wasn’t 

asking about property tax. What I was asking about is the 

Building Canada fund. This agreement, just to refresh his 

memory, was signed a number of months ago between the 

federal government and the provincial government to provide 

money for the municipalities. So while I’m asking this question, 

he could probably dig out the right sheet. 

 

But in defence of the minister, he’s not the only one bungling 

this file. The federal government has also been dragging their 

feet on much-needed funding for Saskatchewan communities. 

They were told that they could only receive funding when it 

would be ready to offer in June, and then the federal 

government refused to answer calls from the media. 

 

The Speaker: — The member will place her question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — So the minister hasn’t shown a lot of interest 

and concern. The federal government may not be returning calls 

to the media about funding for Saskatchewan. Have they 

returned calls to this minister concerning the delay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, as you yourself have 

noted, the member opposite takes long enough to place a 

question and then we . . . [inaudible] . . . question was in the 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

first place. 

 

If memory serves me correctly, I believe she also wants us to 

address the issue of our relationship with the federal 

government and the Building Canada fund. I do in fact recall 

that agreement that was signed. I had the pleasure of signing it 

myself — $635 million coming from the federal government to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With respect to the IPSCO Place project, we are as concerned as 

anyone about the timing. We are well aware that as time moves 

on, construction prices increase, and we are working as closely 

and as consistently as we can with our federal counterparts to 

make sure that the i’s are dotted, the t’s are crossed, and the 

money flows as soon as it can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he said he’s concerned. 

Has he called the federal minister? Has he inquired? Has he got 

a return phone call? It was a very simple question. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister took his time signing on to the agreement, dragged 

his feet, and now when we see the federal government having 

trouble delivering on its commitments, what is the minister 

doing? It’s a simple question. 

 

The federal government may not be concerned about how their 

delays will cost Saskatchewan people, and I hope that this 

minister is. Will he commit to stepping up with the funds to 

minimize extra costs to Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

member opposite talks about foot-dragging. Her former 

government of course dragged their feet for 16 years with 

respect to a revenue-sharing deal and didn’t even get the job 

done. They also along the way forgot to top up their 

contribution to the IPSCO Place project by nearly $3 million — 

an oversight we have corrected right off the start. And thirdly 

with respect to calls, we are in constant contact with the Prime 

Minister’s office, Minister Cannon’s office, and everyone else 

responsible at the federal level. We’ll simply have to wait and 

see how those calls go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 38 is legislation that 

raises the threshold at which point financial institutions begin 

paying corporate capital tax at a rate of 3.25 per cent. Small 

financial institutions below the threshold pay corporate capital 

tax at a rate of point seven per cent, a significant advantage. In 

fact a small financial institution can realize a benefit of $12 

million-plus annually from the change in threshold in the 

legislation. 

 

In opposition the Sask Party member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs raised concerns on behalf of the Canadian Western 

Bank, arguing that the threshold was too low. Can the Minister 

of Finance confirm that the one and only financial institution 

affected at this time by his legislation, Bill 38, is the Canadian 

Western Bank? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, an unusual fact of life in the role of Finance minister is 

that you have to make decisions that are in the best interests of 

the province of Saskatchewan and those companies that are 

operating within this province. That is something that has 

happened in the past with the former administration when they 

made amendments to the capital allowance for lending 

institutions which were moved from $400 million to $1 billion, 

and the opposition at that time supported that initiative because 

quite simply it was good public policy . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Please allow the Minister of 

Finance to finalize his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

decision was made in 2005, was made retroactive to 2003, and 

the same parameters as to what companies potentially would be 

benefited by this decision, this good policy decision, was the 

same company that benefits today under this decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I raised 

in committee the fact that the Canadian Western Bank had 

given the Sask Party a $75,000 loan in 2006. According to the 

Sask Party’s 2007 financial return, they received another 

$200,000 in loan from the Canadian Western Bank last year. 

Although this bank stands to benefit at least $12 million-plus 

annually from Bill 38, the minister indicated there was nothing 

untoward in passing legislation that only benefits a single 

financial institution regardless of whether that institution was a 

large contributor to his political party. 

 

To the minister: is he still convinced that there is no . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Member may place his question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is the minister still convinced that 

there’s no conflict here, that there’s nothing for the public to be 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m informed that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t 

have any loan with any lending institution at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe we 

have a significant amount of money on deposit, which is a very 

good position to be in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many institutions in this province have provided 

financial support for various political parties over the years — 

the credit unions, other lending institutions, other banks. And 

these are all properly reported by both and all political parties 

that file returns in this province, as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 

So, Mr. Speaker, the fact that there actually coincidentally was 

some loans in the past by this institution, it’s simply that — it’s 

a coincidence. 

 

And it’s inappropriate . . . Just as some campaigns, as mine in 

particular, dealt with credit unions, we certainly also 

participated in making the right decisions about amendments to 

The Credit Union Act. And so those kinds of decisions are 

appropriately made in the best interest of the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Coincidence indeed, Mr. Speaker. The 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner has taken the position that 

ministers are not necessarily in conflict when their decisions 

benefit an interest with whom they have had private dealings if 

those decisions applied to a broad class, to more than a specific 

interest. But he added, if the decisions applied only to a specific 

interest that had made for example financial contributions to a 

campaign, a different conclusion might well develop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 38 applies only to a single institution . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Bill 38 applies only to a single 

institution. That institution stands to realize a $12 million-plus 

benefit each and every year. That institution has also loaned the 

Sask Party $275,000. We do not know anything about the 

nature of those loans. When can the minister table a legal 

opinion or any other relevant documents to explain this 

apparent conflict of interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I find it very strange that this opposition would find it 

absolutely acceptable to take drive-by smear and cheap shots at 

institutions in this province. Mr. Speaker, we heard that 

yesterday, and we’re hearing it again today. This province . . . 

the Western Canada . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that opposition, when 

they were government, supported very similar legislation in 

2005, made retroactive to 2003. Mr. Speaker, we supported that 

resolution at that time as well. We support the resolution now 

because it is helping to establish a Western Canadian banking 

presence not only in Saskatchewan but in Western Canada. And 

we think that is simply good public policy. And we will stand 

by those decisions because they’re the right ones, and we won’t 

entertain any drive-by kind of smears by that opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the questions that 

were taken notice of by my colleague on Monday, May 12. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Monday, May 12, the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

asked some questions with respect to forestry and the Domtar 

situation in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you would remember that just prior to the election 

in 2007 in November, the NDP at that particular time put 

together a deal with a multinational company that would have 

committed the province of Saskatchewan and the people of this 

province to a $100 million of taxpayers’ money being put to 

this project. At that particular time, Mr. Speaker, we indicated 

to the people of Saskatchewan that we did not think that that 

was the appropriate use of taxpayers’ dollars. The people of 

Saskatchewan in overwhelming fashion agreed with us. 

 

The fact of the matter is . . . The other thing that passes strange 

on us, Mr. Speaker, is that that member in his scrum said that 

now he doesn’t support that type of thing. So I would ask that 

member to use whatever little influence he has with the rest of 

his colleagues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

Forest Fire Fighting Policy 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Agriculture recently confirmed what many people 

had been thinking about the Saskatchewan Party. He said, and I 

quote, “In opposition I could say just about anything I wanted 

and I did on a lot of occasions for 12 years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party had a lot to say about 

forest fire policy when they were in opposition. They said that 

the government’s policy was dangerous and needed to be 

changed, but now that they’re in government it hasn’t, Mr. 

Speaker. My question is to the Minister of the Environment. 

Why did you fake concern about forest fire policy in northern 

Saskatchewan for votes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, I just want to 

bring to members’ attention, as I have attempted to, to place the 

questions through the Chair. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for his question. I have looked at the fire strategy 

that’s in place, and under the previous administration there’s a 

20-kilometre buffer that was used as a wall. No action was 

being taken before that 20 kilometres. 

 

I have ensured the fire branch that they understand that there is 

flexibility to act before that 20-kilometre radius is breached. 

Our main focus is the safety and protection of communities, and 

we have made sure that the fire branch understands that they 

have the flexibility to act when they see fit and don’t have to 

wait for the 20-kilometre buffer, as opposed to the practice 

under the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, some people trusted the 

Saskatchewan Party and some people experimented with them, 

and now they’re finding out that that experiment was terrible 

and it’s over, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In an article prepared by the Missinipe Broadcasting 

Corporation titled “Let It Burn Policy Still Mostly Intact,” the 

reporters observed that, Mr. Speaker, quote, “Despite repeatedly 

criticizing the previous NDP government’s forest fire policy, it 

appears [that] the new Saskatchewan Party government has 

made minimal changes . . .” This is from the media, Mr. 

Speaker. Suddenly the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t see northern 

forest fire policy as such a burning issue. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will the Saskatchewan Party just 

admit that their complaints are all smoke and mirrors? Will they 

admit that on forest fires, like in so many other areas, they are 

all talk and no action, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate the member’s concern over the North and the forests 

that are there. And I would point out that I was pretty shocked 

to be approached by a First Nation community not so long ago 

about jet fuel tanks being dumped in the forest under the 

previous administration. And when they approached the NDP 

government to clean up those fuel tanks, they were told no, that 

it was far too expensive. That’s the former government’s 

approach to our northern forests and protection of those forests. 

I can assure the member opposite that under this administration 

those fuel tanks were cleaned up, and that practice will not 

happen here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Round Table Conference 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I attended the duty to 

consult round table conference in Saskatoon over the last couple 

of days. A common refrain that came out of those discussions 

was around the need to build capacity and the inadequacy of 

funds available to do so. 

 

Industry called for more resources, so did the Métis, so did First 

Nations. My question is for the minister. Will she clearly 

indicate what new resources will be provided to First Nations 

and Métis people to ensure that the capacity is there to get the 

job done on duty to consult for the year-end timeline they have 

announced? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Member Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m absolutely 

delighted to talk about the round table that just occurred, the 

round table that didn’t occur under the previous administration 

when they decided it was okay to make all the guidelines and 

not speak to the First Nations and Métis people. 

 

We have been talking to them for the last couple of days. We’re 

very pleased to hear about the issues that they find very 

important, as do we. We actually have the opportunity and the 

pleasure of increasing the capacity fund by 50 per cent in the 

last budget, $1 million more than the previous government felt 

it was important to do. 

 

And what we’re doing right now is listening to them and 

deciding where do we go from here, and that’s very unlike what 

the previous government did for the last 16 years when it had 

anything to do with First Nations and Métis people. 

 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, over the 

last 16 years we did treaty land entitlement. We did the best 

gaming agreement in the country. We did funding for SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. We did 

funding for FNU [First Nations University], GDI [Gabriel 

Dumont Institute], DTI [Dumont Technical Institute], The 

Métis Act. That’s what we did on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, there were a number of concerns 

raised about the conference. It was far from perfect. First 

Nations elders and senators were turned away. Others were 

excluded. The feds were not there. Some chiefs were so 

concerned about the process, they issued a statement which said 

that they, and I quote, “do not recognize the round table 

conference . . . as a valid form of consultation and 

accommodation.” 

 

So maybe the minister could take a break from the back-patting 

and self-congratulation over there, and maybe she could tell us 

right now what new funds will be coming forward for capacity 

to make sure they get the job done on duty to consult. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When it comes 

to First Nations and Métis people in this province, we are very, 

very pleased to be the voice for them and to be working with 

them right now. And I know that at the table right now we 

knew, we knew that the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] — and we spoke with FSIN — they don’t 

represent the First Nations, individual First Nations that come 

to consultation. We deal with each one of them directly, as does 

industry, and this government has known from the very 

beginning. And we speak with each one of them. 

 

And I’m looking forward in the future to going out and meeting 

with them. And when it comes to capacity building, we’ll be 

speaking with each one of them. We’ll understand the need. 

We’ll understand their concerns. And we will talk to them . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I think it would be appropriate when a 

member places the question to at least have the courtesy to 

allow the answer. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Immigration 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour: can he confirm 

that core funding for immigrant settlement agencies which is 

provided through the Saskatchewan immigrant settlement 

assistance grant has been cut to $100,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

The question regarding immigration, it offers a stark contrast to 

what used to happen. That is between 2001 and 2006 

Saskatchewan was a laggard, Mr. Speaker. That is, we can look 

at Manitoba where 30,000 people came into Manitoba. We can 

look at Alberta — 100,000 people. Saskatchewan barely 

scratched over 8,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’ve done is we’ve increased efficiencies within the 

branch by 48 per cent between January and March. We’ve also 

just announced an 85 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, that will 

ensure that 7,500 people will arrive over the next 18 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re happy to do is we’re happy to 

announce — and we did this through the budget — there are 

new monies, Mr. Speaker to ensure that immigration receives a 

higher priority under this government than it ever did under that 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — According to an email sent by the minister’s 

official, the Saskatchewan immigrant settlement assistance 

grant will provide $100,000 this year. That’s $25,000 less than 

last year. And yet on two occasions in committee over the past 

month, the minister has assured me in committee that core 

funding would be maintained. On April 21 he said that in his 

budget, and I quote, “We see the core programming remaining 

constant . . .” And I quote “. . . there is consistency on the core 

funds.” Earlier this week, the minister even implied that core 

funding could increase. 

 

To the minister: why did the minister not just level with the 

committee and tell us that the core funding had been cut by 

$25,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, at least the member opposite 

was paying attention during the committee. That’s refreshing. 

 

What we can say, Mr. Speaker, is the funding increased 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

substantively, Mr. Speaker, and that is to ensure that we’re 

ensuring that what we’re doing is more aggressive recruitment, 

Mr. Speaker. As well, what we’re doing is trying different 

models, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we’re much more 

responsive, and we’re being much more supportive to 

settlement services, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard that across the 

board. 

 

What I did say to the member in committee — and perhaps this 

will tweak her memory — and that’s to turn and say, these 

negotiations are under way, and it would be inappropriate to 

comment at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in committees very specific 

questions were asked of the minister in terms of core funding, 

and in the committee the minister led the committee to believe 

that there was either going to be a status quo or an increase. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the minister did not level with the 

committee. And this seems to be par for the course because this 

minister is asked very simple questions, very direct questions, 

and which the public is entitled to receive an answer, and earlier 

in the committee this week he refused to answer questions. And 

he in fact he told me to get a legal opinion. 

 

So we now learn that some settlement agencies are seeing their 

core funding cut. To the minister: did he not answer the 

questions because he knew that nobody would like the answer, 

or was it because his answers would directly contradict what he 

told committee members on April 21? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to expand again. What we see here is a government 

that’s committed to ensuring that we’re moving forward on 

immigration, Mr. Speaker. That’s a key priority. It’s a priority 

as far as recruitment. It’s a priority as far as processing. It’s a 

priority as far as settlement, Mr. Speaker. That’s absolutely 

essential. And if the member opposite actually missed the point, 

that was we’d actually provide the legal opinion, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Major School Capital Projects Across Saskatchewan  

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I had the opportunity to visit Arcola Community 

School in Regina to make an announcement that we are moving 

forward nine major school capital projects across 

Saskatchewan. This announcement was related to the Premier’s 

earlier Pleasant Hill revitalization announcement that included 

good news for the St. Mary Community School. 

 

We want Saskatchewan citizens to enjoy the benefits of our 

thriving economy, and providing quality affordable housing is a 

key component to securing the futures of low- to 

moderate-income families. Through the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation our government will continue to work with the city 

of Saskatoon and other community partners to help Saskatoon 

people have more options when it comes to finding a place to 

live. I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge their 

dedication to the Pleasant Hill revitalization project and other 

affordable housing initiatives. The city of Saskatoon has 

worked diligently over the years to address their community’s 

housing needs and along with other community partners are 

turning the Pleasant Hill area into a place of opportunity and 

growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that we 

are improving the way we approach major school capital 

projects. We have added a new approval in principle step that 

will give certainty to communities that their projects are moving 

forward. This additional step provides the opportunity for 

meaningful community consultation. The ministry and school 

divisions will use this step to engage the broader community 

and to explore community revitalization. 

 

I am pleased to say that we are committing $27.45 million in 

2009-10 to Regina’s Arcola Community School, Douglas Park 

Elementary School, and Campbell Collegiate. These projects 

are part of the $60.3 million commitment for 2009-10 that also 

include Elrose comprehensive, Hafford Central, Saskatoon’s St. 

Mary Community School, and Weyburn Comprehensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also committed funding and support to 

Humboldt Elementary and Turnor Lake in 2010-11. I think Mr. 

Russ Marchuk, the chairperson of Regina Public Schools, said it 

best when he stated this new step will allow school boards to 

work more closely with partners to design better schools for our 

kids. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — We know student achievement 

increases when learning is supported by high-quality school 

facilities. Yesterday’s announcement demonstrates our 

commitment to ensuring everyone has the chance to share in the 

future growth and prosperity of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is 

transforming into a place of opportunity and growth. Improving 

and maintaining our province’s infrastructure, including 

schools, is closely linked with growing our economy, 

improving our quality of life, and taking pride in where we live. 

That’s why support for school infrastructure is a government 

priority. 

 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

Mr. Speaker, this new approvals in principles step ensures that 

our investment in our school infrastructure will best support 

students, families, and communities. We are committed to 

supporting students and families to take advantage of the 

province’s prosperity and new opportunities for positive 

outcomes in school and in their lives. Providing high-quality 

learning environments supports our students in learning for 

years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to speak to the ministerial announcement. 

Certainly educational infrastructure and the deficit that exists in 

our province is a huge concern within our province and within 

education across communities. 

 

And I know it can be argued that we’ve got likely over $1 

billion of deficit here right now. I know with our strong 

economy that we’ve been experiencing for some time that we’re 

seeing 20 per cent construction inflation on those numbers. So 

when we take those numbers and we look at the accruing 

deficit, we’re certainly not even making headway or keeping 

pace at this time in addressing this deficit. 

 

The Speaker: — It would be appropriate to allow the member 

from Regina Rosemont to reply to the ministerial statement. 

Member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So I guess, Mr. Speaker, I would 

certainly like to reflect that we have a large task in front of us, a 

large deficit in front of us that we need to truly see a priority 

that exists. And we need to actually meet the demands of this 

accruing construction inflation. Otherwise these projects are 

going to truly get out of hand. And I guess you could say that 

while the sun’s shining, it’s time to fix the roof. And I certainly 

think that that’s the time here in our province. 

 

The minister spoke today for . . . talking about projects that are 

going to be next year, in 2009 and ’10, and then projects in 

2010 and ’11. This certainly allows communities the 

opportunity to know when these projects are coming forward. 

And I certainly look forward to the consultation that will occur 

in ensuring that those facilities meet all the demands of the 

community and that we have educational excellence as a result. 

 

What we do have in announcing projects like this at this time as 

well is we have a challenge in meeting timelines. We do have, I 

think, 11 other projects that were announced here this year. I 

know that there’s been some concerns about some of those 

projects and what the actual numbers are going to be for cost of 

completion. I certainly hope our minister’s completed not to 

just the numbers or the budgets but that he’s committed to the 

completion of these projects because that’s going to be maybe 

the biggest task that exists here. 

 

Like I said, take a $1 billion deficit, take 20 per cent 

construction inflation, that’s $200 million a year. They put 100 

million over this year. That doesn’t meet the accruing inflation. 

They put 60 million the year following. That certainly doesn’t 

meet it. We certainly need to make educational infrastructure a 

priority. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I 

move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Economy Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

third report. I move: 

 

That the third report on the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the Economy: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its fourth 

report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the . . . It has been moved by the Chair 

of the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 

I’d like to raise a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

during question period the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

suggested that a Minister Responsible for SaskTel was in a 

conflict of interest as a minister of the Crown. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow made a serious allegation 

of financial impropriety with respect to the minister and the 

Chair of the SaskTel board. 

 

Under rule 50, subsection (f) states that no member shall, and I 

quote, “make a personal charge or accusation against a Member 

except by way of a substantive motion with notice.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow’s accusation, I would like to table a letter today from 

SaskTel president, Robert Watson, indicating that neither the 

minister nor the Chair of the SaskTel board were involved in a 

decision-making process. The decisions were made at the 

executive management level at Jump.ca. And I quote: 

 

The SaskTel Board of Directors and the Minister’s Office 

were not involved in the decision and were not briefed on 

the matter, as implementation of the pilot is not scheduled 

until July 1, 2008. 

 

And further, Mr. Watson states, again I quote: 

 

I can assure you that SaskTel takes very seriously any 

conflict of interest situation and has appropriate 

governance processes in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly takes very serious allegations of 

impropriety of a minister or any member. Therefore I ask that 

the Speaker provide a ruling on this matter and that the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow do the right thing and withdraw the 

remarks and apologize to this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has raised a 

point of order. If there are no further comments to the point of 

order, I will just indicate to the members that I had some 

thoughts but I didn’t have an opportunity to really look at the 

verbatim very carefully, and I will review it as has been 

requested and return with a response. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move General Revenue Fund resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public services for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $6,916,945,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — The item before this committee is no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $6,916,945,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is this motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

The Chair: — Motion is agreed to. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2010, the sum of $188,093,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — Be it resolved that no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2010, the sum of $188,093,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. I move that the committee 

rise and that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to 

certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave 

to sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the resolutions be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 41 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 41, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 41, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On rule 

72(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 41, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) be now 

read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — On division. 

 

The Speaker: — On division. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — We have one more Bill here. Members, in 

accordance with rule 32(1), any business required by the rules 

to be voted shall be disposed of on orders of the day on the day 

prior to the sessional completion day. Presently there was one 

item of business remaining on the order paper that falls into this 

category and which has met the conditions prescribed for 

specified Bills under rule 35. That item of business is Bill No. 

5, The Public Service Essential Services Act, which stands on 

the order paper under the heading Committee of the Whole 

Assembly. In accordance with rule 34(5) for remaining 

specified Bills, I now call on the Clerk to call to order the 

Committee of the Whole Assembly on Bill No. 5. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

 

The Chair: — The business before the Committee of the 

Whole is Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act. 

I want to advise members that this Bill was amended during 

consideration in the Standing Committee on Human Services. It 

was subsequently reprinted to incorporate the amendments 

pursuant to rule 85(b). The Bill in its amended form will now be 

considered in accordance with rule 34(7), which reads as 

follows: 

 

For each specified bill before a Committee of the Whole 

on Bills, the Chair shall put the question on any 

amendments, new clauses or new schedules that had been 

previously proposed before putting a combined question, 

if required, in order to conclude the examination of the bill 

and to adopt a report to be presented to the Assembly. No 

other amendments, new clauses or new schedules shall be 

proposed. 

 

The committee will now proceed to the combined question and 

all clauses of the Bill. Are clauses through 1 through 22 agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Chair: — I believe the ayes have it, on division. Carried. 

The examination of Bill No. 5 is now complete. I recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I move that Bill No. 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act be reported with amendment. 

 

The Chair: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 5, The 

Public Service Essential Services Act be reported with 

amendment. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. In accordance with rule 34, subvote 7, 

this committee will now rise and report the Bill to the 

Assembly. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with rule 34(8), the Assembly 

will now consider the first and second readings of the 

amendments, followed by the third reading of the amended Bill. 

I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, sir. I 

move that the amendments be read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour may proceed to move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

that Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 



May 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:56 until 15:24.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. The motion before 

the Assembly is the motion by the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour that Bill No. 5, 

The Public Service Essential Services Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. Order. Order. 

Members will come to order and allow for an orderly taking of 

the vote. 

 

[Yeas — 36] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D’Autremont Hickie Cheveldayoff 

Heppner Tell Gantefoer 

Harpauer Norris Morgan 

Hutchinson Huyghebaert Brkich 

Hart Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan Michelson 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

Order. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

Calvert Junor Trew 

Van Mulligen Atkinson Nilson 

Yates Higgins Belanger 

Furber Iwanchuk Forbes 

Morin Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

36; those opposed, 18. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Assembly sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I’m informed that His Honour is here, or 

pretty well here, for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 15:28 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly at its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 13 - The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 14 - The Saskatchewan Association of School 

Business Officials Repeal Act 

Bill No. 26  - The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 29  -  The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 

2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

Bill No. 901 - The Briercrest College and Seminary 

Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 28 - The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act 

Bill No. 27 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 1 - The Growth and Financial Security Act 

Bill No. 10 - The Miscellaneous Pension Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 

2008 

Bill No. 35 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 38 - The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

Bill No. 3 - The Potash Development Repeal Act 

Bill No. 19 - The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 21 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 22 - The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 8 - The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 34 - The Graduate Retention Program Act 

Bill No. 23 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 33 - The Active Families Benefit Act 

Bill No. 18 - The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 17 - The Highways and Transportation Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 37 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 25 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2008 

Bill No. 40 - The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Act 

Bill No. 6 - The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

Bill No. 2 - The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 24 - The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 5 - The Public Service Essential Services Act 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2008 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 41 - The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. And 

I wish members on both sides a very pleasant and happy 

summer. Thank you very much. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 15:32.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has asked leave to introduce a guest. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Thank you, 

colleagues. In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is seated a friend 

of mine, Mr. Randy Schultz. Randy is president and general 

manager of R&G Transport, a Regina company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I met Randy’s late father while farming in Colorado and spent 

some great winters working with Randy’s dad, Ron, and Marj 

and the boys, Randy and Roland. And I just hope that all 

members will give Randy Schultz a hearty welcome and 

recognize that the Schultzs are one of the great Regina business 

families. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adjourn? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:35.] 

 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1293 

  Calvert ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1293, 1295 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1293 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1293 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1294 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

  Stewart ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1295, 1310 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1296 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1296 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1296 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1296 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Cancer Day of Action 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1297 

 Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 We Are Many Festival 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1297 

 Regina Cultural Events 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

 National Day Against Homophobia 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

 The Wrong Side 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

 The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Federal Infrastructure Program 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1299 

 The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1300 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1300 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1301 

 Forest Fire Fighting Policy 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

 Round Table Conference 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1302 

 Support for Immigration 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Major School Capital Projects Across Saskatchewan  

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1304 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1305 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1305 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1305 



 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1306 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1306 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1306 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1306 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1307 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 41 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 3) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1307 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

 Recorded division ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1309 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1309 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


