




















































Hansard: April 17, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 28A  THURSDAY, APRIL 17, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1005 

 April 17, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Culture, Parks and Tourism. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you my parents, my mom and dad, 

Jerry and Beryl Tell sitting in the west gallery. And they’re 

back from Arizona. But my dad has been a long-time 

businessman in the province, in Regina and in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I just want to welcome them here today. They’re back 

from Arizona and ready to get at participating in our 

community again. So I just want to welcome them here today. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to introduce to you and through you to the 

members and the members of the legislature 42 grade 5 students 

from P.J. Gillen School in Esterhazy. They have Alisa Leidl, 

Brett Harrison, and Melinda Schentag as teachers with them 

today. They have a number of chaperones, Mr. Speaker: Audrey 

and Nicole Marchand, Kerry-Lynn Geddes, Cindy Hawcutt, Jen 

Duchek, Dawn Helmeczi, Wanita Lippai, Greg Zimmer, Kelly 

Morrison, Peter Haugen, Linda Orosz, Wanda Hnatyshyn, 

Sharon Prazma, and Jackie Tomolak. 

 

I would ask all members to welcome them here today. I 

apologize; I won’t be able to meet with them. I have a prior 

commitment. My colleague from Kelvington-Wadena will meet 

with them, and they may think that’s actually an improvement, 

Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members to welcome them here today, 

welcome to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce to you a very distinguished guest — two guests 

actually — who are seated in your gallery. Joining us today are 

Regina residents Dave Ryan and his granddaughter, Jackee 

Welder, has joined him. And maybe I’ll just ask them to stand 

and give us a wave, so we know where they are. 

 

Mr. Ryan is no stranger to this building. He worked here with 

SPM [Saskatchewan Property Management] in this building for 

a long time as well as in other buildings — we talked this 

morning — including the Walter Scott Building. I invited Mr. 

Ryan here today to thank him on behalf of all of us here in the 

legislature and behalf of the government for his service and his 

family’s dedicated service to this country. 

 

Mr. Ryan and his seven brothers all enlisted in the army many 

years ago. Mr. Ryan’s brothers — Percy, Thomas, Arthur, Earl, 

Don, Leo, and Joseph — all fought for Canada in the Second 

World War. Mr. Ryan was too young to be engaged in that 

conflict; however he served Canada in the Korean War. 

Veterans Affairs Canada has recently acknowledged Mr. Ryan, 

and we wanted to bring him to the legislature today and also 

pay our own special respect and tribute to Dave Ryan and his 

family. He traces his family’s roots back to Atlantic Canada, 

and he says they’re watching today for this event. And if they 

are, we want to pass on a special hello to him. 

 

We had a chance to visit this morning, and Mr. Ryan informed 

me that he, I think it was in 1951, married a southwest 

Saskatchewan girl. His wife’s originally from Gull Lake, and 

we just want to pay some respect to Mr. Ryan today and 

welcome his daughter as well. 

 

And I want to offer this quote from Father Dennis Edward 

O’Brian with the U.S. [United States] Marine Corps, who once 

said these very fitting words: 

 

It is the soldier, not the reporter, 

Who has given us the freedom of the press. 

 

It is the soldier, not the poet, 

Who has given us freedom of speech. 

 

It is the soldier, not the agitator, 

Who has given us the freedom to protest. 

 

It is the soldier, 

Who salutes the flag, 

Serves beneath the flag, 

Whose coffin is draped by the flag, 

Who gives that protestor the freedom to burn the flag. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we welcome Mr. Ryan and join me in paying 

respect to his family this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the Premier in welcoming Mr. Ryan and his family to 

the Assembly. I’ve had the good fortune of knowing Dave Ryan 

for most of my adult life, and he’s an exceptional citizen, a 

great contributor to our community. I happen to know his 

children as well, and they’re terrific contributors to the city of 

Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, there is not a better individual in our 

entire province than Mr. Ryan, and so I rise today with the 

Premier in congratulating Mr. Ryan and on behalf of the 

opposition welcome him to his Assembly as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I join with the Premier 

and the member from Dewdney on behalf of the official 

opposition in welcoming Dave Ryan to the Assembly today. 

We share with his family and, I know, his friends and 

neighbours the sense of celebration that he’s been honoured in 

this fashion, and we sincerely extend our gratitude and our 

thanks. 

 

I also would want to welcome another veteran to the Chamber 

this morning, Mr. Speaker, a veteran of a different kind of 

campaign, let me say, the best MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] that Carrot River Valley never had. That would Mr. 

Mark Pitzel who served as our candidate in the last election. 

Welcome Mark. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise this morning to present a petition on behalf of 

my constituents in Moose Jaw and some from beyond the exact 

constituency. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

signed by a number of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the withdrawal of funding from project Station 20 West. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by numerous residents of both 

Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, today it’s 

my honour to present petitions respecting both the essential 

services Act and The Trade Union Act. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

That we respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw 

both Bills and hold broad public consultations about 

labour relations in the province. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from Yorkton, Bienfait, 

Estevan, and of course Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Record Potash Deal with China 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy is 

red hot. Just a week ago we told this House about the 

unprecedented interest in our oil and gas sector, as evidenced by 

the record-smashing $265 million land sale. Last Saturday’s 

Globe and Mail proclaimed Saskatchewan is the new it 

province. All this week, the Business News Network has been 

running a series on all the wonderful economic news about our 

great province. And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, another record was 

set. Canpotex, the consortium that markets our potash resources 

abroad on behalf . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, another record 

was set. Canpotex, the consortium that markets our potash 

resources abroad on behalf of PotashCorp, Agrium, and Mosaic 

has successfully negotiated a contract with China that will see a 

227 per cent — let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker, 227 per cent — 

increase in the price they will pay for Saskatchewan potash. 

Under terms of the new contract, representatives in China have 

agreed to pay $576 US a tonne for 1 million tonnes of 

Saskatchewan potash this year. That’s up a whopping $400 US 

from the $176 US it agreed to pay in last year’s contract. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan recognizes this growth and 

the infrastructure needs associated with it. This is why we 

established the $1 billion ready-for-growth initiative in this 

year’s budget, and we’ll continue to keep our eyes planted 

firmly on the road ahead, not in the rear-view mirror, as 

Saskatchewan takes its rightful place as Canada’s top economic 

engine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Making Canada a Nation Open to Diversity 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last night 

the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, the members 

from Regina Rosemont, Regina South, Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, and myself had the pleasure of attending the Enriching 

My Canada and Yours, the EMCYs awards gala at the Conexus 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Arts Centre. 

 

The EMCY Awards Foundation is a national program that 

recognizes individuals, institutions, companies, and 

organizations for their work fighting racism, creating inclusive 

workplaces, and stimulating dialogue and action on making 

Canada a nation open to the diversity of the human condition. 

 

Saskatchewan was well represented in the nominees and 

winners for this first ever national event. Special 

congratulations to winners Elmer Eashappie, proud member of 

the Carry The Kettle First Nation in the media category; 

Reginans Jeanne Martinson, business; Richard “Rick” Engel, 

sports; University of Regina for universities; and the Sask 

Intercultural Association, Saskatoon; Hannah Taylor of 

Winnipeg, youth; city of Regina, city or community; Menaka 

Thakkar of Thornhill, Ontario for arts and education; and Kai 

Liu of Ottawa for lifetime achievement rounded out the 

winners. 

 

I want to thank the president for the EMCYs, Dr. Jawahar 

Kalra. I want to thank the selection committee members: Renu 

Kapoor, Pat Hanley, Elmer Brenner, Barb March-Burwell, CJ 

Rowe, everyone on the gala committee, and all the supporters 

that helped us to realize that Saskatchewan’s strength really is 

its people and “From many people, strength” and to help 

Canada celebrate diversity. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Breast Friends’ New Cookbook 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. This morning I would like to pay tribute to some 

remarkable women from Foam Lake, Saskatchewan who have 

teamed up to fight breast cancer and to support breast cancer 

patients and survivors. 

 

Breast Friends is a group of 10 women who came up with the 

idea of writing and selling cookbooks to raise money for breast 

cancer causes. Besides delicious recipes, the cookbooks offer 

comforting words of wit and wisdom. Their first two cookbooks 

have become national best sellers. The third cookbook, Breast 

Wishes from Breast Friends, has just been launched. It already 

looks like it might be more popular than the first two. Mr. 

Speaker, the Breast Friends have already raised nearly $700,000 

from cookbook sales. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes . . . [inaudible] . . . a round of 

applause. 

 

This money is being used for things like a mobile mammogram 

machine, new beds for a rural cancer lodge, and chemotherapy 

infusion pumps to allow breast cancer patients to be treated 

closer to home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us have been touched by breast cancer. 

As Mother’s Day approaches, I hope people will consider 

supporting the work of the Breast Friends by buying a 

cookbook. 

 

I want to acknowledge one of the Breast Friends, Jacquie 

Klebeck, who is seated in your gallery. Jacquie is the senior 

administrative assistant in my legislative office. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join me in thanking Jacquie and the Breast 

Friends for their selfless contributions to such a worthy cause. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Camp Experience for Saskatoon Students 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Tim Horton Foundation 

operates children’s camps throughout Canada. Camps are 

supported by community-based Tim Hortons franchises. 

 

For the past several years, Joni Seaman, owner of Tim Hortons 

on Idylwyld and 33rd Street in Saskatoon Meewasin, has 

sponsored a number of students from St. Michael Community 

School, also in Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

These students have an opportunity to fly to various camps 

throughout Canada. Many of these students have been invited to 

take advantage of leadership camps for the following year. 

Selected students between the ages of 9 to 12 have come from 

economically disadvantaged homes. The hope is that the 

students selected will gain and grow from the camp experience. 

 

The camp is one week long. The Tim Horton Foundation 

provides everything the campers need. The foundation’s travel 

program is unique in comparison to others in the camping 

industry as it includes transportation of the campers outside of 

their home region. This year St. Michael school campers are 

headed to Parry Sound, Ontario. 

 

St. Michael Community School is very grateful to Joni Seaman 

for her continued support in recognizing the value of this 

experience for the students of the school. And I hope that all 

members join me in thanking Joni Seaman and the Tim Hortons 

in Saskatoon Meewasin for their support of this program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Firefighters Honoured 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 

I had the opportunity to attend the Britannia Wilton 16th annual 

firemen’s ball where we were treated to a great meal and a 

fabulous dance. 

 

A special part of the evening was when Captain Ian Brett, 

communications officer Aaron Buckingham, firefighters John 

Mcgerrigle and Craig Robertson were honoured for 10 years 

service, firefighters Dave Wallace and Joe Kube for 15 years 

service. A medal of bravery was also given to Captain Shane 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

Fritsch for his action in protecting a fellow firefighter in the line 

of duty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my retelling of this story will not truly do it 

justice, but I would like to share it with the members of the 

Assembly just the same. While battling a fire at a production oil 

facility, some gases caught fire, setting off an explosion. As the 

firefighters moved to escape the rapidly expanding ball of fire, 

Captain Fritsch threw himself on top, shielding a fellow 

firefighter from the wave of superheated gases that blew over, 

saving both from serious injury. This selfless act of courage 

while in danger reinforces the respect we have for these highly 

skilled volunteers, and I was very pleased to shake his hand 

after he received this award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the Britannia Wilton 

firefighters and their service to our community. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

The Priority of Literacy 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate the individuals and organizations 

that participated in the recent Aboriginal literacy forum on 

April 14 and 15. This gathering in Regina was part of a larger 

pan-Canadian literacy forum that was held simultaneously at 

nine different locations across Canada and linked together 

through interactive technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as stated in the values of the Saskatchewan 

Literacy Network, I too believe that literacy is a basic human 

right and that literacy training is a social responsibility. When 

individuals are able to read and write, they are able to feel good 

about themselves and are able to more fully participate in the 

activities of commerce and culture in our society. Literacy leads 

to a stronger economy, healthier families, and more engaged 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although I was not able to attend the entire forum 

due to House duties, I was able to take in some of the activities 

on the final day. As I listened to the speakers and visited with 

the forum participants, I was impressed as they talked about 

their commitment to improving literacy rates in Saskatchewan, 

and I was impressed to hear of the various projects that they are 

pursuing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while members of this Assembly may have 

different views on how best to improve literacy rates in the 

province, I’m sure we can all agree that literacy needs to be a 

priority for all Saskatchewan residents. And I’m sure we can all 

agree that the people working in this field deserve to be 

commended for their dedicated work and sincere commitment 

to the task of ensuring that every person can read and write. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

individuals and organizations working to ensure that every 

citizen is able to reach their full potential through literacy. 

Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

April 18th is a Special Day 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, Friday, is a special 

day for a special person in my life who also happens to be a 

dedicated, long-time public servant of this province. Friday 

night is the official retirement party of my cousin, Tony Walsh, 

after over 35 years of dedicated service to the people of this 

province. Not only is Tony a dedicated public servant, but he is 

also a dedicated family man, a dedicated community volunteer 

and leader, and a great model for younger cousins such as 

myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, upon ensuring many of his friends and 

acquaintances were invited to the festivities tomorrow, it came 

to my attention that April 18 is also a very special day to 

someone we all in this Assembly know and respect and possibly 

fear. You see, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is also the 21st 

anniversary of our own Sergeant-at-Arms’s 39th birthday. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very sure that here in this Assembly we can’t sing, 

so I’d ask all members to wish cousin Tony a happy retirement 

and our Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, a very, very happy 

birthday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Release of Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that by giving the 

Minister of Justice a second chance, we might be able to get 

some answers for the people of Saskatchewan. The Minister of 

Justice admits that in his duties as minister, he was told the 

name of the suspect in the case of unlawfully obtained police 

files. He says he won’t tell the public who the suspect is, but 

assures us it isn’t anyone connected with the Saskatchewan 

Party. I think the public may desire slightly more evidence than 

the minister’s word. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: will he, in the interest of openness 

and accountability, tell the public who the suspect is in the case 

of the unlawfully obtained police files? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to that 

question is no. As Minister of Justice I come into various pieces 

of knowledge that it is inappropriate to share. If that member 

when he was minister had released that information, I would 

have stood up and called for his resignation, Mr. Speaker. And I 

expect that if I had released that information, that member 

would have done the same. I have absolutely no intention of 

releasing that name, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — That’s not my recollection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are questions remaining about the Premier’s 

current chief of staff. Mr. Downs stood by on three occasions as 

MLAs gave false information to the media. The record was not 

corrected until after a police investigation was launched. 

 

To the Premier: does he condone his chief of staff allowing 

inaccurate information to be put on the public record? And if he 

does not, will he ask Mr. Downs to resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this matter was 

investigated thoroughly by the Regina police. Where there was 

any misstatements or corrections, they were made promptly. 

They were made through the police. Any time there was any 

matter of any significance, it was dealt with, Mr. Speaker. And 

for that member to stand up now and accuse Mr. Downs of 

doing something wrong or improper or accuse him of 

something that would be criminal conduct, I would challenge 

him to repeat that allegation outside of the House. 

 

The matter, Mr. Speaker, was investigated thoroughly, 

completely, and accurate, and no wrongdoing was found on the 

part of Mr. Downs or anyone else within the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have written a 

letter to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner requesting an 

investigation into the conduct of Saskatchewan Party MLAs 

and staff who are involved in the cover-up of unlawfully 

obtained police files. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to 

hear the truth. It’s clear that members opposite aren’t interested 

in coming clean, so there’s no choice but to ask the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner to investigate. 

 

The investigation will only be as successful as the Premier 

allows it to be. To the Premier: will he, his MLAs, and his staff 

commit to co-operating fully with the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner’s investigation into the events surrounding the 

receipt and subsequent release of the unlawfully obtained police 

files? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

entitled to ask the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, the police, 

or anyone else to investigate. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, and 

I can assure all members of the House and members of the 

public that the members on this side of the House will 

completely, fully, and promptly co-operate with any 

investigation that’s undertaken, unlike the members opposite 

who in 1992 chose to engage in an act of cover-up of a fraud 

that took place in their caucus. 

 

When Pat Lorjé brought it forward in 1994, they once again 

chose to consciously make a decision to cover it up. And again, 

Mr. Hagel, when he was a member of this House, chose to take 

a course of action that prompted him so that he was in this 

House apologizing and retracting statements that he had made. 

That is not the conduct that you will get from this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear from the Minister of 

Justice’s answers that he’s not interested in being open and 

transparent. One of the many questions lingering is why he will 

not share the name of the suspect with the public, while at the 

same time assuring them that the suspect is not connected to the 

Saskatchewan Party. I wonder how many suspects’ names the 

Minister of Justice knows. I doubt it comes down to one, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s this one. 

 

There are legitimate concerns that the minister is involved in 

protecting himself, his party, or his associates by refusing to be 

open with the public. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he ask 

the Justice minister to step aside until the investigation is 

completed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding from the 

media is that the investigation is complete and it’s not going 

any further. The indication was — and there’s no issue about it 

— there was not enough evidence to charge anybody in this 

matter, and so my understanding, there is no current 

investigation. If the member chooses to make a reference to the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, you may rest assured that 

the members on this side of the House will fully, completely, 

and appropriately conduct themselves and co-operate with that 

investigation, unlike what took place in 1992, 1994, and 2007 

with the members across. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — And, Mr. Speaker, if that member wants 

to accuse anyone on this side of the House of doing something 

illegal or improper, I challenge him to repeat it outside of the 

House and then he will find what it’s like to be on the receiving 

end of a lawsuit, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Support for Technology Supported Learning 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, school divisions are 

scrambling because of this government’s decision to eliminate 

the correspondence school and offload the technology 

supported learning program to school divisions as of next 

spring. The TSL [technology supported learning] has ensured 

that rural and remote students access to a wide range of courses 

including essential prerequisites. Mr. Bob Vavra, e-learning 

coordinator from the Chinook School Division, was quoted in 

the Leader-Post denouncing this decision. I quote. “[This]. . . is 

really going to hurt the rural, small-town schools.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that while this government has $1 

billion in the bank, they’d be off-loading responsibilities on to 

school divisions, eliminating the correspondence school, and 

cutting almost $1 million from curriculum and e-learning. To 

the minister: with $1 billion sitting in the bank, why cut such a 

valuable program to rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

discussions about technology supported learning have been 

going on for over four years. There has been a process in place 

that was started by that opposition when they were in 

government to ensure that more options, Mr. Speaker, more 

options are presented by technology supported learning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite chirp and say, it wasn’t us that did it. It was you. Yes. 

As the Minister of Education I took the initiative to put in place 

a plan that has been worked on for four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be a delivery of classes. There will be 

the opportunity for rural schools and other students in larger 

centres to have a greater access to classes. Mr. Speaker, we had 

the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy] in this building not more than 10 

days ago. One of the teachers that I met from Moose Jaw is in 

fact delivering five classes. Three of the classes, accounting 10, 

20, and 30 are online. Psychology 20 and 30 are online. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, she is going to be enhancing the 

possibilities to provide those classes to students right across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . I just want to remind 

members, till you’re called . . . The reason I waited is because 

members so close were interfering. It would have been hard to 

hear the question. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a minister can try to 

excuse himself with some sort of plan within the ministry. He 

has the authority to make these decisions in his ministry. I find 

it passing strange that this Sask Party, which paints itself as a 

defender of rural Saskatchewan, would cut such a valuable 

program. The TSL program has been offered and has benefited 

rural students for many, many years. You’d think that with 

improved high-speed access, declining rural school enrolments 

would make e-learning more attractive, not less. 

 

Mr. Vavra states, and I quote, “. . . students will not be able to 

take courses [that] they’ve taken in the past.” The Ministry of 

Education website still lists these valuable courses from grade 

10 English and native studies to calculus 30 and physics 30. 

Will the minister assure us today that students in all divisions 

will still be able to access all of the courses they’ve grown 

accustomed to and deserve access to, despite the off-loading 

and the cuts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for that member to 

suggest that there’s off-loading and that there are cuts to this 

program is absolutely wrong. We’re in fact going to enhance 

the program. We’re going to work with the stakeholders. We’re 

going to work with the school divisions. We’re going to work 

with principals in schools to understand their needs because, 

Mr. Speaker, things have changed. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1968-69 I took correspondence 

from this department through the access to Ukrainian programs. 

I did that, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re going to be offering it 

online. It in fact will be a better program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in the Canora 

School Division when I was there, students in Canora accessed 

calculus programs. They didn’t do it by correspondence. They 

did it online with Campbell high school here in Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, that was in the late ’80s. So for that member to suggest 

that we’re moving backwards somehow by implementing 

technology supported learning and enhancing classes, he’s just 

got it wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the cuts that are the 

problem here. It’s not whether or not technology has an 

opportunity in education. 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

I’m starting to see a pattern here though, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party has handed down a provincial budget which has in 

essence reduced or offered status quo funding to 20 out of 28 

school divisions. Many divisions are receiving reductions far 

exceeding their loss of students. A meagre $1 million has been 

dedicated towards schools of opportunity, enough for a grand 

total of three schools to access full funding. 

 

The Sask Party plan completely ignores urban Saskatchewan. 

Save our Schools, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], Real Renewal assess changes to The Education 

Act as not effective, and now they’re cutting a program aimed 

at bringing education to the learner and improving access to our 

education system. 

 

To the minister: can he explain why both rural and urban 

schools and students are losing under his leadership? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s pretty obvious 

what this government feels, how this government feels about 

education. Education is a priority. We’ve shown it in this 

budget with the Finance minister increasing the Education 

budget by 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker, unlike that group over there 

who for years were in fact reducing the grant by a 4 per cent 

and a negative 2 per cent and a negative 2 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are boards who are going to be affected in a 

negative way. And I’m going to give the member opposite one 

example. Saskatoon public board, which is the largest board of 

education in this province, is in fact going to receive less grant 

money this year than last year. Mr. Speaker, why? Because the 

assessment in the city of Saskatoon will provide them with 

nearly $6 million more without increasing the taxes. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, there is a foundation, there’s a foundation 

operating grant that distributes the grant money equitably and 

thoroughly to all 28 school divisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Dental Sealant Program 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’d think with all 

the time that the minister had to prepare, he could have done a 

little better job on his dental sealant answers. While his answers 

were woefully inadequate on most fronts, they did highlight his 

complete inability to understand the point of the dental sealant 

program. 

 

The program he cancelled was a pilot project that helped 

disadvantaged children get better access to dental care. It was a 

program that focused on prevention and improving health 

outcomes. It was a program that helped the very children who 

need and deserve that government’s utmost attention. 

 

To the minister: why, with hundreds . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member may place her question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — To the minister: why, with hundreds of millions 

of dollars flowing into the provincial coffers, is he taking 

money out of the mouths of disadvantaged children? Is he really 

that cold-hearted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I answered the 

question yesterday as the Finance minister had taken notice. But 

I’m certainly more than willing to review the facts of the pilot 

project that that former government put in place. 

 

They put in place a program that was going to see grade 1 and 

grade 7’s receive dental sealant. It was a pilot project in two 

health authorities, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, at a cost of 

$300,000. 

 

Until the end of March, up until the end of March, 225 students 

received sealant. That’s well over $1,000 a student to receive 

sealant. When you go through the private, the system, the 

infrastructure that’s already available through the dentist’s 

office, it would have, that same amount of sealant provided 

would have cost the government $24,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Health can 

complete his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The decision was a sound decision 

because when you take $300,000 for 225 students, extrapolate 

that over the 12 health regions, their estimate of 800,000 was 

woefully low, Mr. Speaker. The cost would have been much 

greater. 

 

Students that are from families of low income receive benefits 

through the family health benefit. That is still the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister misses the point. 

These children don’t go to the dentist. They don’t go there to 

get the benefits. The dentist has to come to them. The minister 

doesn’t have to take my word for it either. If he’d like, he can 

listen to the health professionals he claims to listen to. He can 

listen to SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations] who in 2007 passed a resolution commending 

our government on introducing a targeted dental sealant 

program. And this year they went further, passing a resolution 

to lobby the government to implement a province-wide dental 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

sealant program. 

 

And Gerry Uswak, acting dean of the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Dentistry, called the program’s 

cancellation a disappointment. 

 

To the Minister of Health: health professionals, the very ones he 

claims to be in step with, say this program is important. With 

more than $1 billion in the bank, why is he continuing his attack 

on the poor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it really quite 

interesting coming from that member. That government was in 

power for 16 years. They didn’t do a thing for the inner city as 

far as dental sealant programs. In the last few months of its 

dying mandate it put money towards a program that they 

thought would prop up their political interests. I find it very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

The program wasn’t offered in the inner city of Regina. It 

wasn’t offered in the inner city of Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, it 

was a pilot project to see how cost-effective it would be. 

 

When you look at $300,000 for 225 students, Mr. Speaker, it 

wasn’t cost-effective. The program will be delivered just the 

way in Saskatoon the way it is being delivered here in Regina 

and the way it has been in Prince Albert for the last 16 years 

under that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That government didn’t act on it, Mr. Speaker, until the dying 

days. We looked at the cost-effectiveness and have changed that 

decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what is the point of unprecedented 

prosperity if it’s not shared with the most vulnerable among us? 

Middle-class views do not work in these neighbourhoods. These 

districts were chosen because they were ready to go with this 

pilot project. 

 

The members opposite are sitting on a mountain of cash with 

more than $1 billion, and more is coming each and every day. 

They continue to tell us how much more money they are 

getting. Yet they are choosing to put the health of inner-city 

children at risk to save a few hundred thousand dollars. 

 

To the minister: how does he defend such a mean-spirited and 

unnecessary cut in the face of Saskatchewan’s unprecedented 

wealth? And more importantly, will he do the right thing for 

children living in Saskatchewan’s inner city and restore the 

funding to the program? Will he put his money where their 

mouths are? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting listening to that question as she says for a few 

hundred thousand dollars. Number one, she’s absolutely wrong. 

She has no clue of what that program was going to cost when 

you extrapolate it over the 12 health districts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But she wants to talk about priorities. Let’s talk about priorities. 

 

The priority of this government is to move on human resources, 

which that government never did, Mr. Speaker. It’s to make 

sure there’s enough nurses and doctors in our hospitals to 

supply the services. But even more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

with an investment of $100 million for infrastructure, as 

opposed to $5 million from that government, those are the 

priorities of this government — to make sure we have buildings 

and people that can supply the services to all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker we’ve seen a fair bit of policy on the fly this week — 

the talk of massive property tax hikes being a result of this Sask 

Party’s inadequate budget; the minister denying that there was 

any problem and defending the 7 per cent increase that was 

proposed. He told us all to brace for a tax increase and denied 

that he could do anything to help, even with a $1 billion surplus 

sitting in the bank. Finally the Premier just couldn’t take his 

ridiculous answers any longer, and he put the minister out of his 

misery. 

 

Will the minister finally stand in the House and admit today that 

his budget failed the municipalities in Saskatchewan, get off 

this mountain of money, and do the right thing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to report that 

the unfortunate member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is 

suddenly suffering from total amnesia. She has completely 

forgotten that it was her party that shamelessly took $300 

million from the revenue-sharing pool intended to help 

municipalities. She has completely forgotten that it was her 

party that crippled the ability of municipalities to meet their 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

infrastructure needs without resorting to property tax increases. 

And, Mr. Speaker, she has completely forgotten that it was her 

party that caused the financial challenges facing municipalities 

today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has completely forgotten all 

of these things but the new Saskatchewan Party government has 

not. And we are moving as quickly as possible to repair the 

damage that they left behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s been 

dragged kicking and screaming to a point where he is thinking 

about increasing funding to municipalities, and now ratepayers 

have to count on him to work out the details in a timely fashion. 

The minister says there is still much to be negotiated, but it 

seems to me the only thing that needs to be negotiated is how 

much money he can convince the Minister of Finance to put on 

the table. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: he’s dragged his heels 

long enough. How much money is on the table, and will he 

promise to get it to the municipalities before they have no 

choice but to increase property taxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the only kicking and 

screaming I’ve seen is on the opposite side of the House in 

response to our answers to their questions. I understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more amnesia from the unfortunate member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. She conveniently forgets that it was her 

party that decided that supporting municipalities wasn’t that 

important after all. She forgets that it was her party that took 

money needed by her own constituents in Moose Jaw for much 

needed road repairs and decided to buy a potato plant instead. 

 

She also forgets that it was her party that decided that the only 

time it was worth giving a significant increase to municipalities 

was, conveniently, just prior to the election in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the opposition very conveniently forgets 

all of these things. The current government doesn’t forget, and 

we are acting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well this has been quite a dramatic session, I 

must say, Mr. Speaker. I almost feel like I should be buying a 

ticket, for heaven’s sake. Now the minister also fails . . . If he 

wants to do a bit of a history lesson, he should go back a little 

farther and realize that his party and his cousins left this 

province in debt up to their eyebrows, and there was reasons for 

that. Now they moan and groan, but Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal with the here 

and now. This government is sitting on a surplus of over $1.5 

billion in surplus cash sitting in the bank, which they are quite 

content to keep there. Meanwhile municipalities are struggling 

to provide the services that they need to upkeep and renew in 

their areas. Mr. Speaker, it’s an issue. 

 

Our government previously, whenever there was money 

available, we provided an appropriate share to the 

municipalities. Will the minister provide an appropriate share of 

their resources and surpluses to the municipalities across 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Shame, shame, shame on the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Only 

these folks could imagine that after 16 years of disrespect to 

municipalities, 16 years of systematic neglect of their financial 

needs, 16 years of clawing back hundreds and hundreds of 

millions of dollars from municipal coffers that need to be spent 

on road repairs and other infrastructure needs — only this group 

could leave 16 years of desolation and destruction and expect a 

new incoming government to provide a miracle cure in 16 days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t so pathetic, if it wasn’t so pathetic and 

tragic it would actually be laughable. It’s ridiculous in its 

extreme. We are seeing disrespect. We are seeing arrogance. 

They’re defining this sort of thing for us. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 

image anything worse. We are fixing the problems that they 

created and we’re happy to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll ask the members to come 

. . . The member from Kindersley will come to order. And the 

members will pay attention so we can hear the Bills brought 

forward. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Executive Government 

Administration Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, 

The Executive Government Administration Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that first reading of Bill No. 31, the executive government 

amendment Act be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Executive Government Administration Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, 

The Executive Government Administration Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that first reading of Bill No. 32, The Executive Government 

Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 37, The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — When members are prepared to pay attention, 

we will move on. The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved first reading of Bill No. 37, The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion concerning 

hours. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion to Revise Sessional Order 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move by 

leave of the Assembly that the order of the Assembly adopted 

April 9, 2008, regarding the revision of sessional Assembly and 

committee sitting times be rescinded and in substitution thereof: 

 

That the Rules and Proceedings for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of the 

first session of the twenty-sixth legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sitting of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be at 1:30 p.m. to 1 a.m. of the following day with 

a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. 

2. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

a. on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays: 10 a.m. 

to 12 noon; 

b. on Thursdays: 2 p.m. to 12 midnight, with a recess 

from 5:00 to 6:00 p.m. 

c. on Fridays: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 

3. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 

adjourn earlier than the sitting periods defined by this 

sessional order; and further 

 

The provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day after its adoption and shall expire 

upon the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day of the first session of the 

twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader, the Minister of Finance, that by leave of the Assembly 

that the order of the Assembly adopted April 9, 2008, regarding 

the revision of sessional Assembly and committee sitting times 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

be rescinded and in substitution thereof: 

 

That the Rules and Proceedings for the sitting times of 

the Assembly and the sitting times for standing 

committees shall be varied on an interim basis for the 

remainder of the first session of the twenty-sixth 

legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for daily 

meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be at 1:30 p.m. to 1 a.m. of the following day, with 

a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

2. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

a. on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays: 10 a.m. 

to 12 noon; 

b. on Thursdays: 2 p.m. to 12 midnight, with a recess 

from 5 to 6; 

c. on Fridays: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 

3. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 

adjourn earlier than the sitting periods defined by this 

sessional order; and further, 

 

The provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day after its adoption and shall expire 

upon the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day of the first session of the 

twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 901 — The Briercrest College and Seminary 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill request is for the name change. It’s simply to reflect the 

expanding role and developing nature of Briercrest College. 

 

Briercrest College is an outstanding learning institution just 

outside of my home constituency of Moose Jaw North. It’s 

actually in the constituency of Thunder Creek, next to the town 

of Caronport. 

 

Briercrest College Institute, as it was initially called, opened its 

doors in October 1935 in a rented house in the town of 

Briercrest with 11 students enrolled. Just 10 years later, by 

1946, the student body had grown so much that the school 

rented all of the available space in the town of Briercrest, 

including the disused Yale Hotel. Later that year, in 1946, 

Briercrest Bible College Institute purchased the Royal Air 

Force base in Caron with the task of converting the air base into 

dormitories, classrooms, offices, and staff housing. 

 

The former air base soon outgrew the town of Caron and took 

on its own identity known as Caronport. Caronport High School 

was added to the institution and opened . . . [inaudible] . . . 

September 1946. A grade school also began in that year. 

Enrolment grew and many new buildings were constructed to 

accommodate the growing student body. 

 

In the early 1970s the school began to recognize the need for 

academic . . . [inaudible] . . . Briercrest became a candidate for 

accreditation with the Accrediting Association of Bible 

Colleges in 1973 and earned full accreditation in 1976. In 1982 

the name Briercrest Bible Institute was changed to Briercrest 

Bible College. The seminary began in 1983. All of these 

developments were coupled with the aggressive expansion of 

academic programs. 

 

Currently Briercrest Bible College has an enrolment of about 

1,200 students from Saskatchewan, Canada, and also from 

around the world. The school’s leadership has set an agenda of 

excellence. It strives to exemplify the best in Christian ethics. 

Briercrest is also an incredible source of in-migration to 

Saskatchewan as 10 per cent of the enrolment comes from other 

parts of the world. 

 

Bill No. 901 is in recognition of the expanded role Briercrest 

College has assumed. Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 901, 

The Briercrest College and Seminary Amendment Act be now 

read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Moose Jaw North that Bill No. 901, The Briercrest College and 

Seminary Amendment Act be now read a second time and 

referred to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading and referral to the committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave to introduce 

a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, it’s 

my pleasure and honour to introduce in your gallery a visitor 

from Weatherford, Texas. Mr. Speaker, my brother Ian is a 

well-respected individual in the cutting horse industry. He is a 

breeder, a trainer, a competitor, and a judge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we welcome the winningest 

Saskatchewan- born-and-raised cutting horse competitor to our 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s my honour to rise today to speak on a motion 

which I will be moving at the end of the period of debate, a 

motion respecting the uranium industry in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, which of course is an incredibly important industry to 

our province and an industry which offers a great potential 

going forward. 

 

At the beginning of my remarks I’d like to make clear that our 

government is committed to looking at all aspects of the 

uranium and nuclear cycle, short of storage. I mean that’s 

obviously at odds, although we don’t quite know where the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] stands on this issue. But I want 

to make that clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re committed to seeing development in this industry, an 

industry which is so important and which offers such incredible 

potential. And I would like to just kind of go through some of 

the facts with respect to the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, there currently are four producing uranium mines in 

this province and two mines in pre-construction and project 

development. The number of people employed at uranium mine 

sites in 2007 was 2,167 — a very, very important source of 

employment, particularly in northern Saskatchewan where 

northern residents make up approximately 53 per cent of those 

employed in the uranium operations in northern Saskatchewan; 

approximately 1,155 individuals employed in the industry. 

 

The uranium industry has invested more than $3.9 billion 

between 1980 and 2006, and we of course foresee this number, 

this investment growing into the future because of the 

commitment that our government has to seeing this industry 

develop. 

 

The uranium industry generated revenues of $1.2 billion in 

2007, with 24.4 million in royalties coming to the province. Of 

course this is a very important source of revenue for the General 

Revenue Fund and we again see this number increasing as we 

move forward because of the commitment our government has 

to developing this industry. 

 

Cigar Lake, which is a project that’s currently under 

development, is the second largest known high-grade uranium 

deposit in the world — an incredible, an incredible find being 

developed by Cameco and partners. And the project will 

provide 300 long-term jobs to the province, not to mention the 

jobs that have been created in the context of the construction of 

that facility. 

 

The Midwest project will commence construction in 2008, 

2009, and will employ another 100 people when functioning, 

not to mention the jobs and economic activity created by the 

construction of that facility. 

 

Saskatchewan’s the only uranium producing jurisdiction in 

Canada and the world leader at 26 per cent of international 

production, Mr. Speaker. We are the Saudi Arabia of uranium 

— an incredibly important thing. And we see this as being 

incredibly important to the future of our province and to the 

future of northern Saskatchewan more specifically, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

In 2006 industry spent $130 million in exploration — up from 

15.4 million in 2002 — largely in response to the increased 

market demand, increased production in other countries around 

the world. And as I said, we are the biggest producer in the 

world and much of the industry focused right here in 

Saskatchewan. A forecasted large future supply gap of uranium 

coupled with international desire for emissions-free sources of 

electricity will increase demand for production. 

 

I think it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that nuclear power is 

clean power. There are no greenhouse gas emissions in the 

production of nuclear power, which is one of the reasons why I 

find it so surprising the opposition of the party opposite to the 

further development of the uranium and nuclear cycle in this 

province. 

 

Long-term demand forecasts suggest the need for 80 to 100 

million pounds of production. This is the equivalent of five new 

mines the size of McArthur River. And McArthur River of 

course is a very substantial operation in northern Saskatchewan, 

which I’ve had the pleasure of visiting, Mr. Speaker, which is a 

top-class facility operated in an incredibly professional manner 

and one of the richest deposits in the entire world. 

 

Saskatchewan is the place to mine uranium because we have 

large, high-grade ore bodies, existing infrastructure, a skilled 

workforce, a supportive and stable government. And I think 

that’s much more true today than it was on November 6, 2007, 

with our government who are very committed to working with 

the industry, to providing assistance in developing the industry. 

We want to see a vibrant uranium and nuclear industry in this 

province. 

 

Conversion facilities around the world are aging and being 

replaced with new technology — and we see that in China and 

Europe and potentially in the United States as well, Mr. Speaker 

— and Saskatchewan’s been cited as a good location for a new 

facility. And that’s something that our government is very 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

interested in seeing. We would like to see more development of 

the industry in this province. We know the party opposite 

doesn’t agree with that position, but we think that there’s 

incredible potential for this province moving forward. 

Obviously such a facility would attract highly skilled 

employment opportunities and significant capital investment, 

Mr. Speaker. We know that it definitely would. 

 

We’re committed to providing 22 million over four years to 

create a global institute for energy, the environment, and natural 

resources, in partnership with post-secondary institutions and 

industry, to develop Saskatchewan’s research capacity in 

uranium and energy resources and build a skilled workforce in 

these important sectors of the economy. 

 

We’re also committed to exploring and identifying uranium 

value-added opportunities to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan can realize the full benefits of our vast resources 

by embarking on a constructive and respectful relationship with 

the federal government, which was something we most 

definitely did not see from the party opposite. The Government 

of Saskatchewan is exploring opportunities to partner in the 

field of expanding our participation in the nuclear cycle. 

 

As Saskatchewan continues to develop our resource potential, 

we’re committed to sustainable practice and broadly based 

consultation with all stakeholders. And we know that there are 

many stakeholders in northern Saskatchewan who have been 

impacted and involved with the uranium industry in northern 

Saskatchewan and we’re committed to working with them, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have worked with them as a government and 

will continue to do that into the future. 

 

You know, one of the questions we have here, Mr. Speaker, 

though, is, where does the NDP stand on this whole question? 

And we’ve seen some mixed messages here and it reminds me 

quite frankly of the oil sands debate that we’ve had. You know 

we have had the Leader of the Opposition protesting with 

radical leftists, standing behind a sign saying, shut down the oil 

sands. I mean, Mr. Speaker, we know that we have tremendous 

potential in the oil sands industry but we’ve seen these mixed 

messages. 

 

This group that the Leader of the Opposition was standing with, 

this fossil fuel fools group, that same day they were responsible 

for numerous criminal acts around the world. Yet we have the 

Leader of the Opposition standing with them, supporting their 

endeavours, standing behind the sign saying, shut down the oil 

sands. You know frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

irresponsible. 

 

The party opposite has formed government in this province in 

the past. They aspire to do so again in the future and industry is 

watching, Mr. Speaker. They’re watching. They’re saying, what 

are we going to be? If we’re going to be investing billions of 

dollars going down into the future and we have an opposition 

party that’s standing with groups that are resorting to criminal 

activities to shut down oil sands operations . . . I think it’s 

really, really irresponsible on the part of the Leader of the 

Opposition, the Environment critic, a number of other NDP 

MLAs who attended this protest. Yet we have this mixed 

message from the party opposite. 

 

You know, there was a motion at the NDP convention, Mr. 

Speaker, which maybe I’ll read to the members opposite that 

. . . I’ll read it here. 

 

Whereas oil and gas are finite and non-renewable 

resources with a value that will increase as they are 

depleted; 

 

Whereas our oil and gas revenues contribute to all aspects 

of life in this province including the delivery of public 

health and education; 

 

Whereas much of our oil and gas revenues are currently 

clawed back by a faulty equalization formula; 

 

Be it resolved that Saskatchewan New Democrats support 

an increase in oil and gas royalties so that we maximize 

our oil and gas revenue. 

 

This motion was not defeated, Mr. Speaker. This was discussed 

at the NDP convention and not defeated. I think it’s very 

irresponsible on the part of the members opposite, very 

irresponsible on the part of the Leader of the Opposition to be 

putting these messages out there. 

 

Our government’s been very clear we are not going to be 

raising oil and gas royalties, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, that has 

resulted in incredible benefit to our province. The last land sale 

was $265 million, more than we had ever seen, ever seen in the 

past. More than we have ever seen in an entire year in the past. 

Why did this happen, Mr. Speaker? Because of the confidence 

that the people of Saskatchewan and the oil and gas industry 

have in this government. In this government. The opposition 

cannot take credit for this, Mr. Speaker. The last two land sales 

have been because of confidence in our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP record 

is quite shameful with respect to the uranium industry. There 

was a motion actually brought forward by the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow that said at the NDP convention that 

they would not consider refining uranium, Mr. Speaker. We just 

take it out of the ground, ship it to Ontario, ship it around the 

world. No value added to it, no benefits for the people of 

Saskatchewan, no benefits for the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. Take it out of the ground and ship it to Ontario. 

So the member for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It is totally inappropriate for 

members to be shouting across the floor. If you’ve got 

something to discuss, there’s lots of room in the other areas of 

this building. I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

can understand why the opposition are so defensive about their 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind members that 

when the Speaker calls the House to order, members are not to 

comment on the Speaker’s ruling. I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

Mr. Harrison: — Right. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

the NDP record on uranium really is horrendous. We saw the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow bring forward a motion 

that would preclude any further development of the industry in 

Saskatchewan. We had a former member of this legislature and 

a former minister of the Crown in the previous government, 

Peter Prebble, who was incredibly opposed to any further 

development of the industry, a position we obviously don’t 

agree with. 

 

We had NDP platforms actually, Mr. Speaker, in previous 

elections that called for the phasing out of mining of uranium. I 

mean these are, these are radical leftist positions, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it’s unfortunate that the people of Saskatchewan would 

be, would be . . . lose the benefits of our incredible natural 

resources because of the radical leftist ideology of the party 

opposite. And you know, we’ve seen evidence of that in other 

industries, the oil and gas industry as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I mean . . . I like that comment as well, you know. The 

party opposite say that they’re not the same party as that led by 

their leader, the member for Toronto-Danforth, and you know 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s just not supported by the facts. 

 

I could quote, I have copies of both the constitution of the 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party, or the Saskatchewan 

section of the New Democratic Party and also the federal New 

Democratic Party. And you know, frankly, Mr. Speaker, you 

join one party, you join both; there’s only one membership. 

 

They say they aren’t the federal party, that the member for 

Toronto-Danforth doesn’t speak for them. But we’ve seen the 

positions of the member for Toronto-Danforth who wants to 

shut down the oil sands industry, who wants to shut down 

nuclear reactors in this country and presumably around the 

world, who wants to shut down the uranium mining operations 

around the country and particularly in northern Saskatchewan. 

And obviously these positions are reflected in the 11 per cent of 

the vote that the NDP candidate got in the by-election, but they 

say they’re not the same party. That they’re not the party that 

wants to put more money into the gun registry, but frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s just not supported by the facts. 

 

This party opposite have been captured by the radical left. The 

Leader of the Opposition, or the real leader of that party, the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana, obviously want to go even 

further in that direction, and we think that’s a dreadful mistake, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We think that there is huge potential for our industry, for the 

uranium industry for further development, short of storage as I 

made clear at the beginning of my remarks. And we think that 

it’s really unfortunate that members opposite would take those 

positions. 

 

You know, the member for Athabasca said that the people of 

Meadow Lake made a terrible choice, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

the member for Athabasca had said earlier. And you know 

frankly, I think that’s, I think that’s disrespectful to the people 

of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, who did make a choice. It’s 

very disrespectful for the people of Meadow Lake, but we’ve 

seen that before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw the Leader of the Opposition put out a press release, 

November 6, 2007, that basically accused the people of 

Meadow Lake of racism. It was unbelievable — proved to be 

completely fallacious, completely made up — but people of 

Meadow Lake have not received an apology from that Leader of 

the Opposition. We think that’s incredibly unfortunate. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed, but we do 

need a motion on the floor. It’s the member from who moved it 

first. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Be it resolved that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan supports the enhancement of uranium 

value-added opportunities in Saskatchewan and recognizes 

the benefit it provides to the growth and prosperity of the 

people of our province. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — To enter debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — First of all, I just want to remind members 

that we have precedence to allow the motion. But secondly, it’s 

also important for members to be aware of the time and to have 

the motion in place before their time elapse. 

 

Moved by the member from Meadow Lake: 

 

Be it resolved that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan supports the enhancement of uranium 

value-added opportunities in Saskatchewan and recognizes 

the benefit it provides to the growth and prosperity of the 

people of the province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to enter this debate this afternoon. I 

think this is an important subject, and I’m glad the members 

opposite raised this subject for our consideration today. 

 

My only regret, Mr. Speaker, is that I had to listen to the 

comments made by the member opposite in introducing the 

debate. He reminds me very much of an editor of a paper that I 

used to work for, Mr. Speaker. I remember one day when I was 

watching the editor of the paper go into his office, crank out on 

his old typewriter an editorial and take it into the composing 

room, and I was thinking that I’d noticed this on several days 

previous, several occasions previous to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I asked the publisher, the editor of the paper, I said to 

him, how is it that you can churn out these editorials so 

quickly? Why is it that you don’t spend a lot of time doing 

research and talking to people and gathering information? And 

he said, he said to me, Mr. Speaker, and he said it very, very 

clearly and with a smile on his face, Mr. Speaker, he said, you 

do not need to have facts, Mr. Speaker, just an opinion to write 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

the editorial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Now, Mr. Speaker, every word that the member 

spoke is all opinion, Mr. Speaker. He’s professing, professing to 

know what goes on at a New Democratic Party convention, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s never even been close to the room. He’s never 

talked to an individual, Mr. Speaker. He’s never talked to a 

New Democrat, Mr. Speaker, about these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely incredible to have the member 

opposite not talking about his own party but talking about 

discussions that take place in another party, Mr. Speaker, when 

he should be telling us what the motions were at the Sask Party 

convention, what the policy discussions have been at the Sask 

Party convention, Mr. Speaker. He should be telling us what’s 

the rationale behind the position that he’s arguing because that’s 

what the public wants to know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And before I conclude my remarks, I do want to talk about the 

planning process. And the member opposite I think has an 

obligation, in fact the right, to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan from his place what the process has been that got 

them to where they are today and what process they’re going to 

use to take Saskatchewan forward on this important issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do have a history on this file, and we’re 

very proud of that history on this file. And the members 

opposite acknowledge that the uranium sector is a world leader 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t get there, Mr. Speaker, 

by ignoring the mineral in the ground, by ignoring the industry 

that wants to remove that mineral, or ignoring, Mr. Speaker, the 

activities that take place surrounding that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can review the history of uranium in 

Saskatchewan. There isn’t a lot of time to do that, but I just 

want to put on the record. In the 1940s, Mr. Speaker, under the 

members opposite’s favourite premier, Tommy Douglas, the 

uranium companies were invited into Saskatchewan to do 

business. Then in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, under the 

administration of another great premier in this province, 

Premier Allan Blakeney, the uranium industry grew with the 

expansion at Rabbit Lake, Cluff Lake, and Key Lake. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in just the last few years under the administration that 

many of us have sat with, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a second 

generation of mining development in places like McArthur 

River and McClean Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve toured those projects, and I feel that those 

projects are contributing to the region, to the province, to the 

country, and to the world. And, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud 

of the association and the affiliation that we’ve had. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously what I’m trying to say is that over the years 

that New Democrats have been in government here, our record 

as far as the uranium industry goes is a very positive one. And 

it’s reflected, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that the uranium industry 

itself has indicated to government, both directly and indirectly 

through other means, that in fact they have found the regulatory 

regime and the negotiations and work with government to be 

first-rate, Mr. Speaker. 

We can spell that out by simply looking at a study released a 

couple of years ago by the members opposite’s favourite 

research group, the Fraser Institute, Mr. Speaker. The Fraser 

Institute surveyed mining all across Canada, Mr. Speaker, and 

they concluded Saskatchewan was the best place to be involved 

in mining of all the provinces in Canada. A survey of all mining 

regimes, Mr. Speaker, and the Fraser Institute said mining in 

Saskatchewan best place to be. 

 

Under what government, Mr. Speaker? Not one that ignores the 

industry or the sector, not one that doesn’t care about where the 

future of this is, Mr. Speaker. A New Democratic Party 

government that believes in planning, that believes in an 

understanding of environmental activity, that believes in an 

understanding of job creation and regional activity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I toured the McClean Lake and the 

McArthur River projects, I was really proud to learn that a lot of 

the technology that’s being used on those mine sites has been 

manufactured in Saskatchewan. The companies, Mr. Speaker, 

have worked very closely with the manufacturing sector in 

Saskatchewan to build a secondary industry that creates jobs in 

Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. Speaker. And the mining sector also 

has taken advantage of communities that are nearby for job 

creations. Whether it’s Prince Albert or Meadow Lake, they are 

accessing supply points for various other things, including food 

services, Mr. Speaker. New Democrats believe in the planning 

process and bringing all the pieces together. 

 

Let’s not forget also that in our centennial year the premier of 

our province at that time called a centennial summit, a business 

summit. One of the main speakers at that business summit was 

Jerry Grandey — Jerry Grandey from the uranium sector, Mr. 

Speaker, and someone that the members opposite sometimes 

quote as well. What did Jerry Grandey say at the centennial 

summit? “Make Saskatchewan tax friendly and your investment 

will pay . . . dividends.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government immediately went back, listened 

carefully to the advice given by the mining sector and, Mr. 

Speaker, in the budget that followed that Centennial Summit, 

brought forward initiatives that have increased investment in 

this province because, Mr. Speaker, we paid attention to the tax 

regime that these companies were talking about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a friendly working relationship with 

the industry and a commitment to ensure that environmental 

issues are dealt with and a regulatory regime that does that, a 

regime that takes a look at job creation in the North and, Mr. 

Speaker, deals with secondary industries. 

 

What record can the member opposite point to that the Sask 

Party has in dealing with industry, Mr. Speaker? A record that 

shows that there’s no planning involved in this stuff. Just let 

things happen. Domtar, Mr. Speaker. Do I have to say more? 

Domtar, Prince Albert. Cancel a deal 18 months in the making. 

Cancel the deal, Mr. Speaker, saying there’s a plan for the 

industry, the forest sector. And here we are six months later — 

no plan, no jobs, no work, no prospects, Mr. Speaker. Is that the 

plan for the uranium sector, the mining sector, potash, 

diamonds, others? The forestry sector proves, Mr. Speaker, no 

plan, no activity, nothing to proceed with. 

 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they also talk an awful lot across the way 

about the next stages including they like to talk about we need a 

nuclear power plant, a generator in the province. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I want all the members opposite to know that the 

Minister of Energy made some commitments to the municipal 

sector at the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] convention. 

 

One of the things he said, that a number of things that we need 

to consider before we go into discussion of the next generation, 

we currently don’t have the demand, Mr. Speaker. He 

acknowledges in Saskatchewan we do not have the demand for 

additional power generation. So it’s not economic at this point, 

he said to the municipal leaders. Therefore we have to work on 

export — exporting power from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So that means some planning, doesn’t it, Mr. Speaker? Who are 

the buyers of that product? What negotiations are taking place? 

How do you move that product from one part of the country to 

another? You’ve got to be a part of the national grid. The 

Minister of Energy, speaking to municipal delegates, committed 

himself to dealing with the national grid. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t heard any of that. We need to see 

the plan. New Democrats have had a plan, respected plan. The 

members opposite need to present the plan. They did not do so 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to speak on this motion put forward today because I feel that 

this single issue is probably a very defining issue between our 

party and the party opposite. It really clarifies, you know, where 

we stand and where they stand. 

 

Now the NDP have been clear in the past that they don’t want 

uranium. They’re looking clearly in the rear-view mirror at 

what happened in the past. They’re not looking for growth into 

the future. This Saskatchewan Party, we’re looking for growth. 

We’re looking for initiatives that solve problems. Our party is 

providing solutions today that’s going to pay off for our 

children and our grandchildren. We’re not scared. We’re not 

spreading fear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the NDP, they’ve put forward for the last 16 years their 

opinions on uranium. They’ve sent out the message subtly and 

not so subtly that they don’t want anything to do with it, Mr. 

Speaker. In the ’80s even, they were campaigning on the 

promise of phasing out exploration, not just that they didn’t 

want to produce or value add. They didn’t even want to explore 

for it or produce it. Now, Mr. Speaker, looking back, hindsight 

would show us that that would be a very, very poor decision, 

and I’m glad that they weren’t in power in those years to do that 

damage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their leader called uranium and nuclear energy the 

dirtiest fuel for what comes out the tailpipe. Now when the 

leader, the premier of the province, is telling an industry that 

they have the dirtiest fuel, what does that say to potential 

investors? It says don’t come here. That says we don’t even 

really want to sell you the product, but we’ll hold our nose, and 

we’ll take your money. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s no way for a 

premier to speak nor a government to govern, and I’m very 

heartened that they no longer govern and he’s no longer the 

premier. 

 

Now another issue, Mr. Speaker. They often wrap themselves in 

the cloak of being the green party, to be the one, the protector of 

nature. But when something positive comes up like a clean coal 

announcement, they are the first people to jump up and say no, 

we don’t want clean coal. We don’t want that initiative in our 

province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, just the other night in committee one 

of their members said that, we understand our commitment to 

the world and we understand that, you know, an investment 

must be made. But when it comes down to our government 

doing something positive and a new initiative for our province 

. . . They have brought it up in question period. They’ve 

brought it up again and again that they would not make an 

investment in our future in clean coal. So if clean coal’s off the 

table, does that mean that solar is off the table because it too is 

more expensive than burning coal and putting the fumes out 

into the atmosphere? 

 

As well as wind power — wind power is more expensive than 

burning diesel fuel to create electricity. So that party is clearly 

on the record that they don’t want to put their money where 

their mouth is. They want to burn fossil fuels till the end of 

time. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m certain that they wouldn’t put 

forward the idea of tidal energy. I think that they do have 

enough researchers that would tell them that that’s probably not 

a viable option here in Saskatchewan. But you never know. 

 

Now maybe, Mr. Speaker, their idea was to cut down on 

consumption, but in their time in office consumption went up. 

In fact when we took over from them, Saskatchewan had the 

second worst per capita carbon emissions in the country — 

second worst. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that they speak 

the same language as they act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, they weren’t afraid of spending money on the 

environment though, Mr. Speaker. I will give them that. They 

spent $125,000 to bring Al Gore in to talk about the 

environment. Now you know, Mr. Speaker, if we did the math 

on the carbon they used to fly his jet in, I don’t know if the hot 

air that Lorne Calvert said in his introduction was enough to 

help with global warning. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we want to talk about global warming and 

future issues as far as carbon and that, Ian Hore-Lacy, a 

spokesman for the World Nuclear Association said nuclear is 

the only game in town if you are serious about cutting 

greenhouse gases. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the 

members opposite would be aware that this greenhouse gases 

are an issue and that nuclear has absolutely zero emissions for 

producing power as far as greenhouse gases — zero . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I will say it again and I will say it 

slowly. Nuclear energy has zero greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But maybe, Mr. Speaker, their concern is about the safety of 

nuclear power. Maybe it’s about the radiation. Well I’ve got a 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

couple statistics here about radiation, Mr. Speaker. If you live 

next door to a nuclear reactor, you might get a little more 

radiation than the normal person. Now if you were to quantify 

the amount of extra radiation that person would get, it would be 

equal to eating 30 bananas a year — because there’s radiation in 

wood, in everything. Radiation is a natural component of our 

universe. Now you could live next door to a nuclear reactor and 

the extra radiation you would get would be equivalent to 

drinking 35 cups of milk a year. Now I drink a lot of milk. I 

don’t think that I have too much to worry about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have been producing 

nuclear power in Canada for about 40 years. Not a single death 

has come from it. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, another issue that 

they may want to bring forward for why they’re so negative and 

so against nuclear power is the waste, the output. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, in 40 years of production in Canada the entire amount 

of waste, you couldn’t fill five hockey arenas up to the boards 

— after 40 years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Ontario is a real leader in this. 

It isn’t that we haven’t been producing nuclear power. Our 

largest province has been using nuclear power for over 50 per 

cent of its power needs. Now, Mr. Speaker, they made a large 

investment, and they are reaping the rewards from this. They 

are our most populous province, and yet they feel it is safe 

enough to use nuclear power for 50 per cent of their production. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, talking about our environment, talking 

about what we could do to do it better, the nuclear power that 

we have consumed in the last 40 years has gone a long way to 

reducing our greenhouse gasses. In fact in the last year the 

nuclear power we used, had we used carbon fuels, we would 

have contributed an extra 90 million tonnes of greenhouse 

gasses into the atmosphere. That is the equivalent of 18 million 

cars or trucks. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we took it a broader range, the nuclear 

energy produced from the uranium mine in Saskatchewan, 

worldwide, has saved the world 300 million tonnes of CO2. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a substantial amount, and I think it is 

something that this province should really look at. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a little bit about the industry here in 

Saskatchewan. We have a terrific mining potential. We are 

mining now. It is terrific. In fact two of our mines, McArthur 

and Cigar Lake, have some of richest deposits in the world. 

They are 100 times richer than the average uranium deposits 

worldwide. Now it’s 100 times, 100 times more potent than the 

average mine worldwide . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 

Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the amount of uranium that is in our known 

mines right now is equivalent of 18 billion barrels of oil — 18 

billion barrels — or 5 billion tonnes of coal. Now the amount of 

greenhouse gasses that would be produced by burning 5 billion 

tonnes of coal . . . Mr. Speaker, I have children and I hope they 

have children. I don’t want them to be living in a world where 5 

billion tonnes of coal is burned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — And, Mr. Speaker, for far too long we have 

taken this uranium out of the ground; we’ve put it in a truck, 

and we’ve sent it out of province. And that government held 

their nose, and they did that so they could collect the royalties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the bigger picture. Let’s look at 

Saskatchewan as a potential . . . Let’s talk about the 

Saskatchewan advantage. In fact why doesn’t our universities 

take a leadership role? Why doesn’t our universities say, we 

have a natural advantage in uranium; let’s look at it from a 

positive point of view and do something better. Let’s look at 

taking our raw product, adding value, and maybe utilizing that 

in this province and exporting that added value out of province. 

We’re talking about good jobs for our people. We’re talking 

about training our people in our universities, exporting them 

around the world. Let’s become a world leader about this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to talk about 

my children for a second. They’re growing up in a time with 

global warming is every year more and more and more 

prevalent. If we don’t take the leadership role, if we don’t stand 

up for what’s right . . . I don’t care what the lobby groups that 

are against nuclear power . . . like if they have valid concerns, 

let’s listen to them. But let’s look at the broader picture. Let’s 

do what’s right for my children, for the children of everyone 

here, and for our grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is so many positive things that we can do with uranium, 

but holding our nose isn’t going to do us any good. Let’s be 

proactive. Let’s look at the decisions we’ve made, and let’s 

make the right decisions from this point forward. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity, and I look 

forward to voting on the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to point out, Mr. Speaker, it was with interest that I listened to 

some of the speeches opposite, and I don’t want to re-quote the 

facts that they used, but they spoke about the strong industry. 

They talked about the number of jobs that the industry itself has 

presented to northern people. They spoke about the 

development and the many mines that are certainly on line, the 

fact that they have all this great amount of effort being 

undertaken in Saskatchewan and how great the industry is. 

 

And to the people that are watching and paying attention to this, 

you know, then they turn around and say, but the NDP and that 

former government didn’t support it. Well, Mr. Speaker, if that 

was the case, we wouldn’t have the industry that we have in 

Saskatchewan today if there was no support for it to begin with. 

And the last time I checked, there’s never been in the history of 

Saskatchewan, a Sask Party government — save the Tories in 

the early ’80s — but there’s never been a history of that party 

ever leading Saskatchewan and talking about what they ought to 

do for the uranium industry. 

 

So all the stats that they have expressed to the people of 

Saskatchewan and have expressed through their speeches, it 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

was thanks to this particular government, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to the industry itself for putting in those particular 

investments to show that indeed Saskatchewan is the largest 

producer of uranium. And we have a good partnership, and we 

have a long history, not only as a party, but as a government in 

ensuring that we have good, orderly development of our 

resources, and that includes uranium development as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the quote itself or 

the motion itself, Mr. Speaker, what I would say is I want to 

take the role, just for role-playing for a minute. If I was a 

mining company executive, suppose for a second I was a 

uranium mining company executive, and I’d seen this motion 

come forward from the member from Meadow Lake, seconded 

by the minister of Lloydminster. And I would say to myself as a 

northern mining executive, I would say, why would they bring 

this motion forward? Why would they bring this motion 

forward? If it’s just a political ploy, if it’s just a political ploy, 

they’re doing more damage than good when you start playing 

politics with uranium development overall, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s the danger here. 

 

The danger is when you begin to politicize the uranium 

development of Saskatchewan for cheap theatrics. You are 

doing a great disservice to the uranium mining industry, and 

what you’re trying to do is to drive a wedge between industry 

and the people of the North. And that is not very helpful, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You’re driving a wedge because obviously when you talk about 

mining it, we do that in Saskatchewan. When you talk about 

milling it; we do that in Saskatchewan. Now we start talking 

about value adding. We start talking about a nuclear reactor. We 

start talking about all these other things, and then the member 

from Meadow Lake gets up and says, oh, short of having this 

become a nuclear waste dump. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is part of 

the package, and for the member to say, we’re going to take all 

these good things and not the waste, what he’s doing is he’s 

creating more division within the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you want to do a service, a service to Saskatchewan, if you 

want to do a service to the uranium industry, you don’t pick and 

choose what particular aspect that you want of the uranium 

industry. You got to deal with the whole package, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s why, if I was a mining company executive that 

worked for a uranium company, I would be absolutely upset at 

that member from Meadow Lake. And I would be upset at the 

statements coming across the way, trying to create division 

within the community of Saskatchewan based on pure politics, 

based on pure petty politics, and trying to score some political 

points. At what? At the expense of northerners and at the 

expense of the uranium industry. 

 

They should leave it alone because northern Saskatchewan 

people in due time, in due time will work with the uranium 

industry as they have done historically, Mr. Speaker. They have 

had a good relationship with the uranium industry. Things are 

moving forward. We have record number of people of the North 

working. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the uranium 

industries ought to be commended for some of their work that 

they have done in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But hold it, hold it, we want to politicize the process. So here’s 

a motion made by the member for Meadow Lake to talk about 

uranium development. And, Mr. Speaker, oh we’re not going to 

talk about some of the other issues attached to uranium 

development such as nuclear waste, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The industry wants that issue resolved. Industry wants that issue 

resolved, and what does that member say? Oh we’re not going 

to talk about that. We’re not going to talk about that, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to talk about what the NDP didn’t do. But 

oh by the way, here’s all these wonderful stats about the 

uranium industry. Those stats were compliments of the uranium 

industry themselves, working in close concert with the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker, to Premier Blakeney, and of course 

to Premier Romanow and Calvert. Never in the history of 

Saskatchewan have we had a Sask Party government, so we 

don’t even know their history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s go back to the point of what the member from Meadow 

Lake was trying to do. He was trying to drive a wedge. He was 

trying to drive a wedge between northern people, between the 

environmental movement and between the uranium industry. 

And that’s exactly what the uranium industry does not want to 

do. So why do you put this issue up for public debate? For 

cheap politics, for cheap politics at the expense of such a great 

industry that you profess to support. That is doing a great 

disservice, Mr. Speaker, not only to the uranium industry but to 

the northern people as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what the member ought to know as well when you start 

talking about considering value adding to the uranium chain — 

which I’m assuming he’s talking about a nuclear reactor— Mr. 

Speaker, for security reasons the United States’ position is that 

no country, including Canada, that is not already enriched in 

uranium be allowed to do so. It would require the approval of 

G8 [Group of Eight] group of nations before Canada, and then 

Saskatchewan could become home to an enrichment facility — 

very simple. You have to go to the G8 to ask permission to 

enrich uranium here in Saskatchewan. Did that member from 

Meadow Lake even think about that? Oh no. No, no. This is all 

about cheap theatrics and politics. 

 

And you know the industry is saying to people out there, look 

let’s not politicize the uranium industry. And the question I 

have with the member from Lloydminster or the member from 

Meadow Lake or any member across the way, if we have a 

nuclear facility, where’s it going to go? On Lake Diefenbaker? 

Is it going to go to Lloydminster? Is it going to go to Meadow 

Lake? Is it going to go to northern Saskatchewan? Where’s it 

going to go? Where’s your proposal? Where’s the location? 

 

And if you’re going to build it, who’s going to pay for it? Is it 

going to be the corporations? Is it going to be Saskatchewan 

government? Who’s it going to be, Mr. Speaker? 

 

All these questions and they refuse to give answers. If you want 

it in Lloydminster, get up and say so if you want to support the 

industry. Don’t just take the cheap way and say, oh we need to 

support them. We’ve got some hard questions for them, Mr. 

Speaker. So you want to start a debate on this? You start it; 

we’ll finish it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the bottom line again, if I’m a uranium mining executive, 

I’m going to tell the Saskatchewan Party guys, you stop playing 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

politics with uranium, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I’d say to 

them. You leave us alone. You leave it alone because the 

bottom line is we want to drive the agenda with the northern 

people. We’re going to make sure that we fight the fight on the 

environmental front. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure our investment is safe 

and secure. And when you have theatrics like this today, talking 

about the silly notion of trying to drive a wedge between the 

people and the uranium industry of the North, what’s going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker, is you’re going to do a greater disservice. 

 

Now the questions are going to fly. Now the questions are 

going to fly. And we’ve got a question we’re going to ask. You 

want a nuclear facility. Where’s it going to go? If you think you 

can just choose a nuclear facility and not the nuclear waste 

dump, well guess again because industry’s going to tell you we 

need both. We need both. 

 

That member from Meadow Lake just started talking about this 

stuff. MLTC, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, are doing 

studies, Mr. Speaker, about a nuclear waste site. There’s a lot of 

people talking about this right now. 

 

So what happens? Along they come with no history on the file, 

no history on the file — well no history in government. They 

talk about all the glowing stats about the industry themselves, 

and some government had to work with the industry to make it 

happen. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Not one day with the 

Saskatchewan Party did industry ever negotiate the uranium 

development in the North. And, Mr. Speaker, all the glowing 

praise, it’s deserved of this government and industry, Mr. 

Speaker, over the past number of years in developing that 

industry and ensuring that northern people got their benefits, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s still not fair. We still believe in northern Saskatchewan. We 

need more. We need more, Mr. Speaker. So it’s still not fair. 

We’re still fighting. But guess what? The fight is on. The 

demand is on, and all these questions need to be asked. And the 

member from Meadow Lake and Lloydminster gets up and they 

say, oh do you guys support the uranium industry? And what 

they do, all that is is cheap theatrics and grandstanding. And I 

can see in the background, Mr. Speaker, I can see in the 

background, the background of their caucus chambers saying, 

let’s do this for politics. And guess what? It doesn’t work. It 

doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the only point I would make, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to have 

a profound effect. And a profound statement that I want to 

make today and to make sure I challenge to that member from 

Meadow Lake and Lloydminster, the question is this, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s very 

interesting listening to the member from Athabasca when he 

talks about the cheap theatrics and the grandstanding and the 

politicizing of issues, because that member cannot get up on his 

feet without cheap theatrics, grandstanding, or politicizing 

issues. What I’d like to do . . . And he’s talking in hypothetical 

issues which is very, very common for him to talk about. He 

talked about which part of the cycle that we would leave out. 

And yet he is sitting with a government that has been very, very 

content over all of these years to just use the ostrich theory — 

we’ll mine it, we’ll collect the royalties, then we’ll put our head 

in the sand and not worry about anything else about it. The 

head-in-the-sand theory has been very, very prevalent with the 

NDP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about another aspect of the 

nuclear industry that could have been. That particular party 

when they were in government just were really against anything 

in the nuclear cycle other than the mining — and even in fact 

they were against the mining of uranium. And we’ve heard 

from my colleagues about some of the resolutions put forward, 

that they wanted to stop uranium mining altogether. And how 

did they convince their people of this? And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest to you that it was fear. And we know how the 

NDP operate with fear. That’s the modus operandi of a socialist 

government and a socialist system, is you get into the heads of 

people and that’s how you control them. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Well in the nuclear industry this was very, very prevalent. The 

current Leader of the Opposition and Peter Prebble were ones 

that were protesting against the nuclear industry back in the 

’80s. In fact they voted against Cameco coming into the 

province. They voted against it, Mr. Speaker. And how did they 

do that? It was strictly on fear. 

 

I would like to talk a little bit more about the fear because I’ve 

had the opportunity to speak on the nuclear cycle on numerous 

occasions. And I ask people in the audience right off the top, 

say when I’m going to talk about the nuclear industry, what’s 

the first thing that comes to your mind? Is it weapons, is it 

Chernobyl, is it Three Mile Island? And invariably the answer 

to all of those is yes. And then I ask them, I say, how many 

people do you know that have been saved by the nuclear 

industry? And there’s blank looks. There’s total blank looks. 

And so then I enlighten them somewhat and I talk about 

chemotherapy. And say oh, does that come from the nuclear 

cycle? And the answer is yes. That is one part of it that’s never 

mentioned by the members on the other side of the House. 

 

The public in Canada are starting to get a little bit more 

knowledge about this because of the incident that happened in 

Ontario where we were short of isotopes for some of the 

medical procedures. And I think it’s more aware now with a lot 

of the people in the country and I think that’s why you’re seeing 

an awful advancement of people’s opinion about the nuclear 

cycle and it should be advanced. 

 

The fear, Mr. Speaker — and my colleague from Lloydminster 

talked about parts of it — you could be near a nuclear plant and 

the same radiation, I think he said, was eating a dozen bananas 

or something like that. Well I’m kind of sorry that he brought 

that up because now the NDP are probably going to have a 

resolution that we should stop importing bananas into this 

country because you might get radiation from it. 

 

In the Three Mile Island incident that happened, Mr. Speaker, I 

had the opportunity of flying an air show at Harrisburg. And I 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

purposely flew over the Three Mile Island facility at low level. 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? That night I did not glow in 

the dark. I may have been a shining light, but I did not glow in 

the dark. I did not even have the luminous dial on my watch 

light up. So here again, fear played such an important aspect of 

the people’s minds in this province and around the country 

because oh, we’re going to glow in the dark if we have any 

nuclear issues such as that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked with one of the company representatives a 

couple of years ago when the NDP were in power. And it was at 

a public meeting. And one of the guests at the meeting said to 

the then president, said, why don’t you educate the people of 

the province about all of the benefits of the nuclear cycle — all 

of the benefits? And the president got up and he said, we do 

that. We will spend millions of dollars on educating the people 

of the province, and he said, the then premier or Peter Prebble 

can get up and destroy that in about a 30-second clip on the 

national or the provincial news. And that was the NDP’s modus 

operandi. They wanted to destroy that and keep the fear going 

amongst people. 

 

Now we’ve talked about the value of the nuclear cycle. And we 

know of what happened. They were very much against any 

processing plants in the province, as we’ve talked about, being 

totally against it. And you have to wonder why. Why would the 

NDP be against enhanced businesses in this province? Why 

would they? 

 

Well I think that they’d look at it from a political perspective — 

which they look at everything through political eyes. And if you 

enhance businesses in this province you get people moving in 

that are business friendly. I really don’t think they’re going to 

vote NDP. And that is why they’re against businesses coming 

into this province — because business people, entrepreneurs, 

are definitely not left wing socialists. 

 

And now even getting businesses to come into the province, 

Mr. Speaker, when you have something like a Bill that 

nationalizes industries — such as the potash — still on the 

books, if you were a business wanting to come in and spend 

multi, multi millions of dollars, would you want to come in and 

invest that sort of money when there’s a Bill on the books that 

still will nationalize it? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We heard from the member from North Battleford, and he was 

talking, he was going on about, where’s our plan? Where’s the 

plan for this? He mentioned Domtar. Well there’s the difference 

between that group of men and women than us. 

 

He talked Domtar, which is a very good topic for them to talk 

about, which is also very good for us to talk about because they 

wanted to put $100 million of taxpayers’ money into another 

business. We were totally against that, but that’s the NDP way. 

They want to have equity investment to control. They want to 

control. 

 

And all we have to do is look at an equity investment. Let’s 

look at SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. I think we’ve heard that word once or twice before 

in this Chamber. SPUDCO. They wanted to enhance the 

business of potatoes, and they put money in in a private-public 

partnership, which was wrong. We know that the people of this 

province were misled on the public-private partnership because 

there was no private partnership. It was all public money and, 

Mr. Speaker, that fiasco cost taxpayers $35 million. That’s 

more of how the NDP want to be in business to control. We 

think that the government should not be in the business of being 

in business. We should let business people be in business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to look at what the NDP have done in 

the past, and it leads as to why industry has not been moving 

rapidly into this province until November 7. When you start 

looking at competing with private industry, dot-coms are an 

example. Now what would ever possess a government to get 

involved in dot-coms? Why would they? Why would they? 

 

And what was the result of getting into the dot-coms — $124 

million lost. That’s NDP business; $124 million they lost on 

dot-coms. And yet at the same time they would inhibit growth 

within the nuclear cycle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can look at other investments that this 

government has made that really turned sour. Wanting to get 

into the bingo business, run bingo. And here we’re talking 

about how we can expand an industry in this province, the 

nuclear industry, and here what they’re looking at is running 

bingos. And lo and behold they lost another $8 million. $8 

million lost of taxpayers’ money because they thought they 

knew business better than business people. 

 

Yes, it’s a shame. And of course the photo ops that they like 

too. They wanted to get into the ethanol business with Broe 

industries, and I believe that was just another case of SPUDCO 

too, that it was a private-public partnership with no . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

chance to talk about the uranium industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s almost 30 years ago that I first 

was involved with uranium in Saskatchewan. I started working 

at a law firm here in Regina in September 1978, and almost one 

of the first tasks that I had was to fly to Germany to the head 

office of a uranium company with the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s contract with the company to build the Key 

Lake road. So, Mr. Speaker, over the last 30 years I have 

followed with great interest the tasks that have happened and 

the things that have happened with the uranium industry. 

 

If you remember, in the late ’70s when Premier Blakeney was 

here, there was quite a bit of discussion about the development 

of the uranium mining industry. And there obviously were 

hearings and discussions and many people involved to look at, 

well what kinds of things could be done in Saskatchewan to 

encourage the development of the industry. This is interesting 

because it built on the fact that Premier Douglas back in the 

’40s and ’50s invited uranium companies to come to 

Saskatchewan to look at the possibilities that were here. 

 

But one of the results of the work in the ’70s and that into the 

early ’80s was that a number of commitments were made to 

develop the uranium industry. Clearly, Cluff Lake and Key 

Lake were the first ones, and those were part of that discussion 

that Premier Blakeney and that government took place. Now 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

what happened in the early ’80s was quite difficult for the 

uranium industry as a whole in that a lot of the pricing 

worldwide collapsed in such a way that it made very difficult to 

proceed as everybody had anticipated in the late ’70s. But it 

was quite clear that the policies and the hospitality — if I could 

put it that way — of Saskatchewan people was there. 

 

Also if you remember into the early ’90s or I guess in the 

middle ’90s, my former colleague, Mr. Keith Goulet, was 

minister involved and a member involved representing 

Cumberland. And he, working together with the uranium 

companies and with the people across the North, was able to 

develop, I think, a worldwide first in how to share the jobs and 

the economic activity around the mining industry. 

 

We know that the types of agreements that were reached in that 

period are now the model for economic activity in all of the 

earth because what they did was try to . . . and accomplished 

getting many of the local people involved in more and more of 

the technical jobs that are involved in the uranium mining 

industry and the refineries and things that are up there now. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward, we end up with the 

uranium industry. It has to be something that’s done in 

consultation with them. And I know that a number of my 

former colleagues over the last number of years, but especially 

Mr. Cline in the work that he did looking at all of the things that 

the uranium and the mining industry required, he spent a great 

deal of time talking with people. We had the officials in the 

government working with the industry to look at what options 

are there. 

 

As well as former minister responsible for SaskPower, both in 

the ’90s and just in the last couple of years, nuclear energy was 

always something that was being examined in a whole array of 

energy sources. And that work I’m hoping will continue 

because what happens is we need to be able to provide energy 

and the assurance that the lights are going to work in 

Saskatchewan or that industry will have the power they need to 

run all of their equipment in manufacturing and other places on 

a consistent long-term basis. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly my hope and my colleagues’ 

hope that all of that good work that’s happened over the last 

decades will continue in a reasoned, rational way working with 

the industry. Now that was always how our NDP government 

worked, was to say these are the things that we hear that are 

there. These are the concerns that we have. 

 

One of the interesting issues always comes with the full use of 

uranium. And it’s always an interesting task because uranium 

has a value right through the whole life of that particular 

product. 

 

Some people have argued, and I’m not sure I have time enough 

to talk about all the different options, but some people have 

argued that you would never, ever sell uranium, that you would 

only lease it. People would use it for energy, but it would 

always be owned and the responsibility would be there in the 

community to deal with the long-term effects of what’s left 

after it’s used for energy. 

 

[12:00] 

Mr. Speaker, those issues around that particular use and then 

the long-term consequences are exactly where the nuclear 

industry as a whole knows that they have lots of work to do. 

The only way that we’ll be able to solve and deal with some of 

these problems is if we end up working together with them. 

When you have the issue being used in a way to try to put some 

divisions within the community, that’s not helpful for the 

industry. It’s not helpful for our province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that the NDP governments over 

five or six decades have shown that they are able to work with 

the people in the uranium industry, and they’re willing to work 

and move forward in the long term with what’s right for 

Saskatchewan, but more importantly as stewards of this 

valuable commodity that has a lot of downsides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the task for the next number of years is to see 

what kinds of possible positive things can come from the use of 

that working together with the industry, but also to be very clear 

and assist them in dealing with many of the negative long-term 

issues that are there. I know that the industry’s quite interested 

in doing that. I’m hoping that this government deals with this in 

a rational basis rather than some of the things that we’ve heard 

today because it’s crucial for not just the future of 

Saskatchewan or of Canada, but the earth, that we get it right 

when we’re using this type of a product. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 65-minute debate. 

We now move into the 10-minute question period. I recognize 

the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is in 

regards to climate change. I will start my question by putting to 

the members opposite that I would expect that they recognize 

the premise of climate change and would agree with it as a 

philosophy. And if they don’t, please stand in their place and 

tell us that they don’t believe that climate change is happening. 

And at that point I won’t expect them to answer that question. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, those members opposite 

have come out strongly against the clean coal announcement 

because they don’t feel that putting a little more into our 

environment is good for it. What did they suggest? My question 

is, what would they do? Would they spend extra money on 

solar, on wind? Or do they have some technology to harness 

their own self-satisfaction that we don’t know about on this side 

of the House? 

 

So to the member from The Battlefords, I ask him: is he in 

favour of the clean coal announcement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very good 

question. One of the things that is involved with the budget that 

we’re dealing with in this House right now is the fact that you 

have to change the legislation to allow for the money from the 

sale of the upgrader which has been designated to deal with the 

climate change issues within the Crowns. 

 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

You have taken that money and moved it across — once you 

passed the law to make that legal — to spend it on highways 

and some other places. Now, Mr. Speaker, the issue here is, yes 

climate change is a clear issue. Nuclear power is one of them. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we’re in a situation where it’s very 

clear what our plan was. I know that we’re all watching very 

carefully to see what the government actually does. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

member from Lloydminster who just posed a question and I 

apologize; I didn’t hear the end of his question. He seemed to 

have directed it at me. I appreciate my colleague answering that 

question. When he first rose to pose his question, Mr. Speaker, 

he of course said, and I address my question to the members 

opposite. So we made an assumption it could be any one of us 

to answer. When he addressed it directly to me, I didn’t hear 

that. 

 

But my question to the member from Lloydminster is in relation 

to what appears to be his strong support for a nuclear reactor, 

power generation in the province. 

 

We all know that the planning process around the nuclear 

generation includes location. Can the member from 

Lloydminster tell us, tell the House, tell the people of 

Saskatchewan if he has a preferred location for the nuclear 

generation facility that he is supportive of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I thank the member for his question. He’s 

making the assumption that I am for a reactor. I will make the 

statement; I am not against it. The messages that they put out 

for 16 years is, we don’t want business. We don’t want 

upgrading of our raw materials. 

 

Now this side of the House, we don’t send out the message that 

we don’t want to value add. Now at what point it’s economical 

or at what point it’s the right thing for Saskatchewan, that’s a 

decision to be made. However if you’re talking about what do 

the people of Saskatchewan think of nuclear reactors, I can 

speak for myself. As I said living next door to a nuclear reactor 

is the equivalent radiation of eating 30 bananas a year or 

drinking 45 cups of milk. Now like I say, I drink a lot milk so 

on the radiation issue, it wouldn’t be a problem for me. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Athabasca. That member 

claimed that the party opposite somehow had a good record on 

uranium, Mr. Speaker. You know the facts are that that party 

opposite voted against the creation of Cameco. They voted 

against it. They brought forward a motion at their convention to 

shut down any future value-added possibility for the uranium 

industry. They did that, Mr. Speaker. How do they square that? 

 

I mean the industry have told me that the NDP tolerated them 

because they were contributing money in royalties. Not that 

they liked them, not that they liked working with them, but the 

NDP tolerated them simply because of the revenues that were 

generated which they could then spend on SPUDCO and 

whatnot. So you know, Mr. Speaker, my question is how the 

member squares that record, and also I would like to ask the 

member to apologize to the people of Meadow Lake for 

insulting them, insulting them by saying they made the wrong 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out 

that under the vast NDP governments, whether it’s Romanow, 

Blakeney, or Calvert, Mr. Speaker, we built the uranium 

industry. And that’s why I can’t figure out and I can’t square 

that particular circle over there as to why they bring the debate 

forward because the Saskatchewan Party has never had a record 

of governing, aside from their early ’80s cousins. They’ve never 

had a record of making decisions when it comes to the uranium 

industry. It was the provincial government of the day which was 

primarily NDP government that really helped build this 

economy and that finally that they’re enjoying today. They 

simply inherited this, Mr. Speaker, and part of the fund that we 

handed over to them includes uranium development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, history will show — I’m not going to debate all 

day with the member from Meadow Lake as to the history — 

history will show and dictate the success that this government 

— the previous government had — when talking about 

developing uranium in Saskatchewan. Those guys don’t even 

have a history, Mr. Speaker, so how could they challenge 

history? And finally . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Just to remind members 

and the member from Athabasca, while you referred to former 

premiers and you referred to their first names, you must also 

remember to refer to members currently sitting by their 

responsibility or their constituency. Thank you. 

 

Order. Time has elapsed on the response to the question. I was 

just going to try and do it between. I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to ask another question to the 

member from Meadow Lake who was listening to my remarks 

earlier. And I talked about the planning process. I’d like to ask 

the member from Meadow Lake to equate the planning process 

that he sees the Sask Party would take on the mining sector to 

the planning process that he’s so knowledgeable about in the 

forestry sector. How the planning in the forestry sector that he’s 

aware of — whether it’s around Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, 

Big River, or Hudson Bay — is of any benefit to us in 

understanding the planning process for the uranium sector. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member opposite for his question. You know I think 

the real, the real issue here, Mr. Speaker, is, how are they going 

to vote on this motion? We’ve been clear. Our government 

supports looking into . . . We’re open to any value added in the 

uranium industry. We still don’t know how they’re going to 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

vote on this motion. They haven’t made clear in the context of 

this debate how they’re going to vote. 

 

But I would like to note too, Mr. Speaker, the member for 

Athabasca had an opportunity to apologize to the people of 

Meadow Lake who he insulted, much like the Leader of the 

Opposition insulted in a press release he put out on November 

6, 2007, accusing them of something that never happened, 

which they later were forced to acknowledge — in the context 

of a legal proceeding — never happened. That member has still 

not apologized much like that member has not apologized. He 

had the opportunity. The people of Meadow Lake recognize the 

disrespect that that party opposite is showing to them and they 

don’t appreciate it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will clearly state 

that this question is for the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the pre-election fire sale, that member’s 

government devoted $300 million towards a, quote, “green 

fund” of questionable direction. Now, Mr. Speaker, our 

government reinvested that money where it was needed for the 

people of the Saskatchewan in infrastructure, and we negotiated 

without stomping out of the room or throwing a tantrum $240 

million from the federal government to go into green energy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, will that member recognize that 300 million 

into a questionable fund or 400 direct from the federal 

government . . . [inaudible] . . . Will he support the clean coal 

initiative? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of course 

we support a clean coal initiative. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we were 

promoting the clean coal initiative in this province long before 

some of those members even chose to seek a nomination to seek 

a seat in this House. Mr. Speaker, we’re firmly on record in that 

regard. 

 

But let’s not forget the NewGrade upgrader piece, Mr. Speaker. 

$350 million from the sale of that upgrader were being devoted 

— being devoted —dedicated by members on this side to green 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite have diverted 

them to roads and highways and other things, Mr. Speaker. 

When they brought that money into the General Revenue Fund, 

they created a $250 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Time has elapsed on the 75-minute 

debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Non-Partisan Civil Service 

and Crown Corporations 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Yates.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 

or my job today — maybe it’d be a better way of putting it — to 

rise and speak on motion 1. I’ll get to why it’s my job today not 

my pleasure so much, in a few minutes. But just to refresh 

everyone’s memory, motion 1 moved by the hon. member for 

Regina Dewdney is: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to refrain 

from the political destruction of both the civil service and 

Crown corporations and, in doing so, keep the civil service 

and Crown corporations professional and non-partisan. 

 

Now why it’s a job is, I don’t believe that I should have to stand 

and even speak to such a thing. I think that administrations or 

governments should just believe in a professional civil service 

and a professional Crown corporation management and 

operations staff. 

 

And I say shame on this administration, the Sask Party 

government for moving in exactly the opposite direction, shame 

on them for the chilling effect that their firings have had on 

career civil servants. You know, it’s one thing to have some 

movement in minister’s offices or in directly political jobs, but 

this new government, this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

terminated career civil servants, some with more than 30 years 

experience, and more than 30 years of honourable service to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And the reason that was given was 

that they somehow didn’t pass the blood test. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I say shame on that, because Saskatchewan has a long 

and generally pretty good history, a long and pretty good 

history of working, various administrations trying to work 

towards the development of an ever more professional civil 

service. 

 

[12:15] 

 

I’m choosing to start with, in the 1940s when Tommy Shoyama 

headed the civil service. And Tommy was directed to 

professionalize the Saskatchewan civil service in a way that it 

had not happened to that point in history. And I’m attaching no 

blame. Things should progress, and governments should learn 

from the past and should look for ever better ways of serving 

the Saskatchewan public. 

 

And so Tommy Douglas recruited or his government recruited 

Tommy Shoyama to professionalize the civil service. And 

Tommy Shoyama recruited people like Art Wakabayashi who is 

known for having gone on to Ottawa in the 1960s. The Lester 

Pearson Liberal government recruited Art Wakabayashi, Mr. 

Wakabayashi, down to Ottawa. 

 

And what was smilingly referred to as the Saskatchewan mafia 

really was a powerhouse in the professional civil service of the 

national Government of Canada. And it’s a real credit to a 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

relatively small, by population, province like Saskatchewan that 

we could wield such incredible power from such a distance, if I 

can describe it that way. We could actually offer much to the 

nation in terms of how to professionalize a career civil service. 

 

I know that recruitment took place through the ’40s, ’50s, ’60s, 

and beyond. And there was always a view that there should be 

an ability for people to move up from within the civil service. 

Always that was an important feature of our professional civil 

service because all of us want an opportunity to progress. All of 

us want to get to ever more responsibility through our working 

careers. We want to feel good about what we’re doing. And 

certainly civil servants want to be utilized to the best of their 

natural ability. 

 

They also though . . . You can’t simply recruit from within. 

There has to be some external recruitment, Mr. Speaker, and 

that has happened. We’ve recruited, I think it’s . . . In my 

experience I’ve seen, for instance, deputy ministers come from 

other jurisdictions. They’ve developed some skills, skill sets, 

something that they have to offer, and they’re ready to move up 

but perhaps there’s a blockage in their province. There’s no 

opportunity for them to become for instance a deputy minister. 

 

And Saskatchewan actively recruits. Other provinces actively 

recruit our deputy ministers. I don’t mean to leave the 

impression it’s a one-way street, and it’s as it should be. You 

move people around. You can’t simply hire deputy ministers 

from other provinces either. I’m not suggesting that. You recruit 

many, develop many from within Saskatchewan. 

 

Over time Saskatchewan’s civil service and Crown corporation 

employees, I’ll describe it that way, professional Crown 

corporation staff have been treated with respect and treated with 

fairness. And in exchange what’s happened is governments of 

various stripes tend to ask for good advice, good policy, and 

good delivery of service. And I think that’s an important feature 

of a professional public service. 

 

The problem I have, Mr. Speaker, is today I’m standing 

speaking to a motion that urges the government not to do what 

the government has been doing so far. It’s urging the 

government to stop the wholesale firing, stop spreading fear in 

the civil service and throughout the Crown corporations. We’re 

saying it’s not acceptable to say out with the professionals and 

in with people that simply pass the blood test, because that’s not 

a good way to recruit. It’s not a good way to establish a 

professional civil service. 

 

A meritorious and professional civil service should be capable 

of serving the public interest competently and effectively. These 

are some of the hallmarks. Their recruitment procedures need to 

be based on merit and the professional qualities that the 

applicant has, and not on their personal or political allegiances. 

It should be based on merit and what they have to bring to the 

job. 

 

It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that if you can do that 

when you’re hiring people, surely, surely you should be doing 

that at the other end of a person’s career. Surely you don’t 

simply throw out 30-year career civil servants because you 

think — you think — they might not be giving you the political 

advice or the advice that you want to hear. That’s a dangerous 

precedent, and that’s unfortunately what we’ve seen too much 

of. 

 

I want to refer to a January 25, 2008, article in the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, and it says that the purge of the Saskatchewan 

civil service is harmful according to a political scientist. And 

I’m referring here to Ken Rasmussen who’s the director of the 

Johnson-Shoyama graduate school of political policy at the 

University of Regina. And I’m going to use one quote from Mr. 

Rasmussen, and it’s simply to show that the 30-year career civil 

servants that were fired in January, in December and January — 

December last year, January this year — it’s wrong. The quote 

that I’m going to use from Mr. Rasmussen is, quote: 

 

This government hasn’t done anything yet. How would 

you know what kind of advice they’re getting from the 

public service? 

 

And he goes on and of course talks about that being 

“destructive political culture.” 

 

The point that is made, and I should refer . . . Mr. Rasmussen 

says, shame on New Democrats for trying to raise this because, 

you know, it is a situation that should be above all of the 

politics. And I’m just acknowledging that Mr. Rasmussen has 

said that, but I think his words are profoundly important. And I 

know that some hon. members opposite will say shame to me 

for using this. 

 

But I raise this simply in the context of a defence of a 

professional civil service, Mr. Speaker, and professional Crown 

corporation employees. Shame on any government for firing 

people without giving them the opportunity to at least give 

some advice. 

 

I feel compelled, Mr. Speaker, to remind myself and others that 

in 1991 when we formed government, there was many people, 

many people that complained to me directly — and I passed the 

complaints on — that we weren’t cleaning house. Then Premier 

Romanow, the new Premier Romanow wasn’t cleaning house to 

an acceptable level. Many people complained. I admit I passed 

those complaints on. Remember now, Premier Romanow had 

won a massive, massive, decisive electoral victory, had lots and 

lots of seats, had the clear majority of the Saskatchewan votes. 

And he had all of that going, but unlike 2007-2008, unlike this 

period, Premier Romanow largely resisted, largely resisted. He 

told us, it’s enough; we’ve gotten what has to happen. He 

resisted because he was determined, Mr. Speaker, not to put a 

chill on the professional civil service. He was determined that 

civil servants should feel that they could provide advice to the 

best of their ability to the, in that case, it was the new 

government of the day. 

 

But civil servants, career civil servants have a fiduciary duty, 

have an obligation to provide the best advice that they possibly 

can within their professional understanding. And we have an 

obligation, in opposition and in government, to support that 

notion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a situation not only of civil servants 

being terminated, but we’ve had the spectacle of officials, 

ministry officials, being blamed — in the case of Social 

Services — for not getting the budget right. And we saw a flip, 



April 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

a change in actions in that, and it was department officials that 

were officially blamed. And then lately, more recently, just a 

couple of days ago, we see the minister for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, the Minister Responsible for the Crowns, now 

overruling SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], now 

saying that SGI has to limit and restrict its activities, its 

attempts to earn, to diversify its book of business outside of 

Saskatchewan. It has to restrict that. 

 

And I point out that something like 25 per cent of the surplus 

that SGI enjoyed, the profit that they enjoyed in the past year, 

came from out-of-province business. And why I make anything 

of that is twofold. Of course the first thing is for today’s 

purpose, Mr. Speaker. We have a situation of a government 

minister telling the Crown corporation, you can’t do what 

you’ve been doing. You cannot continue to expand your book 

of business outside. The minister’s saying, I know best. I know 

best. That’s what we have. 

 

And the other thing I want to point out why it’s important for 

SGI to be able to do business outside of Saskatchewan and it’s 

simply this. We can have and we’ve had major storms in our 

major cities. We can have them anywhere. But it’s particularly 

devastating for an insurance company if you have a lot of 

residential insurance policies and a major flood or some other 

natural disaster comes along, and all of a sudden the insurance 

company is on the hook for tens of millions of dollars of 

damage, where if you spread the geographical risk then if you 

have a major storm in one area, you haven’t lost half of your 

business, so to speak. You haven’t unduly harmed yourself. The 

whole nature of insurance is of course that you provide 

insurance services and the insurance company pays when there 

is a reason to do so. So it’s a matter of the minister saying, we 

know best. And that’s always a dangerous precedent to have. 

 

The other thing before I leave the Crown corporations, I want to 

express my distress at the firings that took place in the Crown 

corporations. Our Crowns in Saskatchewan are broadly 

supported by the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve enjoyed three 

years of the lowest-cost utility bundle in all of Canada despite 

the fact that we generate a fair amount of coal-driven electricity. 

And coal is more expensive than, for instance, Manitoba’s 

hydro or British Columbia’s hydro. 

 

We have relatively expensive electricity compared to some of 

our neighbours but we enjoy the lowest auto insurance 

premiums in all of Canada — I think in all of North America, 

but certainly in all of Canada. And it’s no mistake. We’ve 

enjoyed that year after year after year after year after year, 

decade after decade, and that has to do with SGI being a very, 

very well run Crown corporation. It has to do with the Auto 

Fund and the way that has been set up to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Crowns enjoy huge support from Saskatchewan people. 

But what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a situation where we have a 

new government that has campaigned, campaigned — they 

made their bread and butter campaigning — that they’re 

opposed to government being in business. In other words 

they’re opposed to Crown corporations. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Well they won the election. Absolutely. Won the election. Then 

what did they do? They fire professionals within the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, fire professionals within the Crown 

corporations. The very professionals, the very professionals that 

were delivering very, very, very good service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And who did they replace them with, Mr. Speaker? People that 

pass a political litmus test. And to pass the political litmus test, 

I want to point out, it would simply be if you don’t believe . . . 

This government has said they don’t believe that government 

should be in business. People who have that same belief are 

now in charge, now being increasingly put into the Crown 

corporations. And that sends a chill to the women and men that 

deliver the goods so to speak, all of the services — whether it’s 

telephone services, SGI, power, energy, bus services, and/or 

many others, Mr. Speaker. It sends a chill to those people 

because they’re not quite certain which way we’re going. 

 

I think that we now have a risk, a very real risk, of Crowns 

being privatized by this government. And I know they’ll say, 

no. I know they’ll say oh, no, no, no. Trust us. But it’s 

interesting because they’re going about — as in the case of SGI 

that I spoke about just minutes ago — they’re going about 

starving Crowns by telling Crowns, you cannot do what you do 

best. They’re hampering and interfering with the management 

and the running of these very Crown corporations. 

 

And then, then — mark my words — they’re going to act 

surprised when there’s a problem. They’re going to act 

surprised when they have some economic reason to perhaps 

hive off part of a Crown corporation. Perhaps it will be the 

generation part of Power or perhaps it will be the delivery lines, 

the power lines, or perhaps it’s going to be something else, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I’m concerned about what I see happening in the civil 

service and in the Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, I clearly 

support this motion no. 1: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to refrain 

from the political destruction of both the civil service and 

Crown corporations and in doing so keep the civil service 

and Crown corporations professional and non-partisan. 

 

It is not too late. I think that the government can, by its actions 

from today forward, can show that they genuinely have a belief 

in a professional civil service and in our Crown corporations. 

My hope is that the government will in fact do that, will in fact 

support a professional Crown corporations and civil service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. Many people, I know, think 

I already have. I don’t know how better to make my point. I’m 

very concerned for Saskatchewan’s civil service, for Crown 

corporation employees. I’m very concerned for our future. This 

government has the opportunity — has clearly got the ability 

and the opportunity — to make good things happen in the future 

on this front. I sincerely hope that it does so. 

 

It has been my task today to bring this to the best of my ability. 

It’s always an honour to speak up on behalf of my constituency 

and the good people of Saskatchewan. So with that, I will take 

my place. 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2008 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the . . . Question on the motion? I 

recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I wanted to adjourn the 

debate on this motion and I inadvertently neglected to do so. 

With your permission, I move that this debate be adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has made a motion to 

adjourn debate. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And once 

again I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt this 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Motion is agreed. This Assembly 

now stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:35.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1005 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1016 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Record Potash Deal with China 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

 Making Canada a Nation Open to Diversity 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

 Breast Friends’ New Cookbook 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1007 

 Camp Experience for Saskatoon Students 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1007 

 Firefighters Honoured 

  Mr. McMillan .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1007 

 The Priority of Literacy 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

 April 18th is a Special Day 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1008 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Release of Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

 Support for Technology Supported Learning 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1010 

 Dental Sealant Program 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1011 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1011 

 Revenue Sharing With Municipalities 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1012 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1012 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 31 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1013 

 Bill No. 32 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 apportant des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government  

 Administration Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 

 Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 

MOTIONS 

 Motion to Revise Sessional Order 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1014 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 901 — The Briercrest College and Seminary Amendment Act, 2008 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1015 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

  Harrison ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1016, 1026 

  Taylor ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1018, 1026 

  McMillan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1020, 1025 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1021, 1026 



 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1023 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Non-Partisan Civil Service and Crown Corporations 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


