




















































Hansard: November 03, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1497 

 November 3, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am very pleased today to introduce four individuals who do 

very important work within the CBO [community-based 

organization] sector. With us today in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, we have Ms. Karen Moore who’s the regional director 

of the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. We have Mr. Ken 

Howland who is the Chair of the United Way of Saskatoon and 

area. We have Mr. Paul Merriman, the chief executive officer of 

the Saskatoon Food Bank — I’m having trouble here — and 

Learning Centre. And we have Mr. Mike Richter, the executive 

director of South Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre. 

 

I would ask everyone to join me in welcoming these 

hard-working individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in the minister welcoming these friends of the people of 

Saskatchewan here to the Legislative Assembly. We appreciate 

all the good work the CBO sector does for this province. Thank 

you very much and welcome everyone. Welcome these people 

to this House. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you six individuals 

seated in your gallery. They are teacher Andi Schenk and five 

students from the Rainbow Youth Centre. Of course it’s raining 

today, Mr. Speaker, but that’s what maybe brings the rainbows. 

So it’s good to see them here at their Legislative Assembly, and 

I look forward to meeting with them right away. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the west gallery today I’d like to introduce Dave 

Marit, president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]; Jack Hextall, chairman of the Cattle 

Association; Ed Bothner, president of the Stock Growers 

Association; Orin Balas, past president of the Stock Growers; 

Lloyd Thompson, Saskatchewan Stock Growers board member; 

and Chad MacPherson, Stock Growers general manager. 

 

All these producers are interested in the announcement that 

we’re going to have later today to do with many of the areas. 

Whether farm land, ranch land, pasture land — whatever it is, 

they’re very interested in what’s going to happen today. And I’d 

ask all members to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again with a 

petition in support of public safety and security in 

Saskatchewan. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of the safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders, including the policing 

community, the corrections community, and community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs and understand the risks and challenges that gangs 

present to our communities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition on behalf of residents that are concerned with 

the implications of property tax reassessment that will take 

place in 2009 and the negative impacts that they feel should be 

mitigated through broad-based relief, being as the government 

has substantial resources and the circumstance with billions of 

dollars in surplus to offer relief. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

in support of child care in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, through consultation with the child care 

community, to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by good folks and concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of Station 20 and opposed to the cuts made 

by the government to the funding. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people of Saskatoon and 

Colonsay. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

2008 Family Physician of the Year Award 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Prince Albert 

physician, Dr. Brenda Hookenson, is Saskatchewan’s Family 

Physician of the Year for 2008. Dr. Hookenson was honoured 

during a banquet on September 26 during the annual Family 

Medicine in Review conference in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Hookenson began her distinguished service to 

the community of Prince Albert in 1976 at the Prince Albert 

Community Clinic. And in 1985, she moved to the Associate 

Medical Clinic where she continues to practise today. In 

addition to family medicine, Dr. Hookenson performs surgery 

at the Victoria Hospital. Over her career she has provided 

emergency care, anesthetic care, obstetrical care, and as a 

preceptor for rural family medicine residents. 

 

Her colleagues and patients alike are full of praise for Dr. 

Hookenson and the work that she does, and we in Prince Albert 

know full well that she is most deserving of this award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in extending 

our congratulations to Dr. Brenda Hookenson on being 

Saskatchewan’s Family Physician of the Year 2008. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Multi-Faith Plaque Unveiled at Craik 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand today to 

recognize an important event in the history of our province. On 

November 1, Multi-Faith Saskatchewan, SaskCulture, Craik 

Sustainable Living Project, and Three Rivers Trail Association 

came together to unveil a plaque marking Saskatchewan’s first 

multi-faith designated sacred space. Attending this ceremony in 

Craik on Saturday and assisting with the unveiling of the plaque 

were the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport and the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this plaque unveiling marks the beginning of an 

ambitious project located at the Craik Eco-Centre. When 

complete, the sacred space will contain permanent markers 

displaying teaching and reflections of the faiths represented 

within Multi-Faith Saskatchewan. The sacred space overlooking 

this picturesque Arm River valley provides a setting for tranquil 

reflection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative will help promote understanding 

between faiths and appeal to the common bond of humanity that 

we all share. I encourage all citizens of our great province when 

travelling on the Louis Riel Trail to stop by the Craik 

Eco-Centre, check out the Craik sustainable living project, and 

pause and reflect at our newly designated sacred space. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Share the Warmth Program 

Receives National Recognition 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in June 

of this year, Moose Jaw SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] Palliser Campus was 

recognized at the Canadian Environment Awards for a Green 

Home initiative program started by the architecture program. 

Attending the gala were Regina’s Heather Newton, an 

architecture student, and Palliser’s program instructor, Reg 

Forbes. The best part of the Shell Canada-sponsored awards for 

Newton was the networking with representatives from other 

environmental projects from across Canada. Newton said, “It 

was very inspiring to be with other people making a 

difference.” 

 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

Share the Warmth, a venture project between SIAST, 

SaskEnergy, and the Salvation Army, provides a $200 package 

of energy-saving products and weatherstripping. College 

students volunteer to install the products for low-income 

Saskatchewan residents. The Share the Warmth program, off to 

a start with the Salvation Army identifying those eligible for the 

program . . . and SaskEnergy provides the supplies that equip 

the homes for optimal energy efficiency. Each SIAST campus 

participates in the project within their particular communities 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very worthwhile project that has won 

national recognition. And I ask that all members join me in 

thanking SIAST’s campus across our province and in 

congratulating Palliser campus architectural technology 

program for the environmental award that they received. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Murdoch Carriere 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

saying the same thing over and over again doesn’t make it true. 

In March and April 2007, the former premier, the former deputy 

premier, and the member for Dewdney told this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan 29 times that Murdoch Carriere was 

fired or terminated. The problem is it wasn’t true, and they 

knew it. Their government had already signed an agreement 

stating that Carriere had resigned in February 2007 and that he 

would receive 275,000 taxpayers’ dollars for his pain and 

suffering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s what the NDP [New Democratic Party] said 

after the agreement was signed. March 7, 2007, the member for 

Nutana, and I quote, “. . . the government of the day responded 

and Mr. Carriere was fired . . .” March 8, same member quote: 

“We did not want him in our employment. He was fired.” 

March 12, same member: “. . . Mr. Carriere was fired for 

cause.” April 12, same member: “Mr. Speaker, he was fired. He 

was fired.” April 17, same member: “Now we didn’t like the 

way Mr. Scott punished Mr. Carriere. He was fired.” 

 

April 11, the former premier quote: “Mr. Murdoch Carriere was 

terminated.” April 5, member for Dewdney: “Mr. Carriere was 

fired. The right decision was made.” Same day, same member: 

“Members of the opposition urged the government to fire him. 

And yes, yes, we fired him.” 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Celebration of 68 Years of Service by Municipal Employee  

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, October 11, the 

community hall at Hyas, Saskatchewan was the scene of a 

celebration of 68 years of service to the RM [rural municipality] 

of Clayton by Mr. Alex Lysuik. The member from Yorkton 

attended and brought greetings from the Premier, Deputy 

Premier, and the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Alex started working for the RM on a part-time basis at the age 

of 16. At the age of 18, the RM council of the day recognized 

Alex’s talents for operating and repairing heavy equipment, and 

they hired him on a full-time basis for the summer. In the winter 

Alex would travel to northern Manitoba to operate a Cat train 

pulling sleds of goods and material over frozen muskegs and 

lakes to isolated saw mills and bush camps. 

 

In the 1960s the RM bought a patrol with a snowplow and a 

blade for opening the main roads in the winter. At that time 

Alex could stay home and either open roads, push bush, or 

repair machinery in the RM shop. During Alex’s 68 years he 

worked on every road in the RM, some of them many times. 

 

I had the opportunity of sharing 10 of those years with Alex 

when I served as councillor for division 5. Alex is truly an 

amazingly talented person when it comes to operating heavy 

equipment, building a road, or being a dedicated employee. He 

would do whatever was needed from operating an open air 

Caterpillar tractor in the sweltering July heat or lying in the 

snow under a patrol changing a hydraulic pump in the subzero 

weather of January on some isolated municipal road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was not a retirement party, because after 68 

years of service and at the age of 84, Alex still does projects for 

the RM. Just last September Alex, with his D7 Cat, finished off 

a new grade. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Murdoch Carriere 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

victims of Murdoch Carriere are speaking out about how they 

were deceived by the former NDP government. One of the 

women said the only reason they allowed themselves to be 

pressured into signing an agreement for so little was because 

they had been told by the NDP government that Murdoch 

Carriere had been fired. She said finding out that that wasn’t 

true was like the disbelief you feel after hearing a friend has 

died. “That’s the disbelief we feel (after finding out Carriere 

hadn’t actually been fired),” she said. “We feel like fools.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these women are demanding an explanation why 

the NDP said over and over again that Carriere was fired when 

that just wasn’t true. They are demanding to know why 

Murdoch Carriere received $275,000 and a full pension top-up 

for his pain and suffering. 

 

One woman says, “We’ve been lied to from Day One.” Mr. 

Speaker, these women deserve an explanation and they deserve 

an apology from the NDP, their former government. Are they 

going to receive that today? Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Saskatoon Indian and Métis Friendship Centre 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 20, the 

Saskatoon Indian and Métis Friendship Centre celebrated its 

40th anniversary. I was delighted to attend this very important 

event. 

 

The theme for the evening, Home Fire Away From Home, was 

indeed very fitting as Saskatoon’s Friendship Centre, 11 others 

in Saskatchewan, and over 100 other friendship centres serve to 

support Aboriginal people in urban Canada. It was a night of 

celebration and remembering those who helped make Saskatoon 

Friendship Centre a reality. 

 

Louise Oelke, Saskatchewan president of Aboriginal Friendship 

Centres, gave a wonderful overview of the history of friendship 

centres over the past 50 years in Canada, starting out around 

kitchen tables in the ’50s and ’60s, a time many would 

remember that across North America hard-fought struggles for 

basic human rights were taking place. Louise told the audience, 

and I quote: 

 

There is much work to do, but the Friendship Centre has 

quietly marched towards providing our people with 

independence and helping them realize their dreams. 

 

Friendship centres believe that we are all connected as one 

people. When there are people that can’t afford to eat, pay 

rent or find a job, friendship centres believe that it affects 

all of us. It is the fundamental belief that we are our 

brothers’ and sisters’ keepers that makes this movement 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Saskatoon Indian and Métis Friendship Centre and wishing 

them the very best as they keep the home fires burning for those 

not at home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Availability of Shelter and Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, as we head into the second winter 

of this government, many of those facing massive rent increases 

will be forced to seek emergency shelter. And it’s increasingly 

clear that not enough is being done to address many people’s 

immediate needs. Just last week we heard about the crisis at the 

YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] Saskatoon 

Crisis Shelter where 1,500 women and children have been 

turned away over the last year because simply there was no 

room. 

 

To the minister: how can she justify sitting on 60 per cent of 

this government’s historic surplus when 1,500 women and 

children have been turned away from shelter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for the question. Since we have formed government, 

we have increased the funding for emergency shelters by 20 per 

cent. In addition we have expanded capacity in Regina with 

Harbour House. We have also had hopes — and we’re working 

with Saskatoon and the Salvation Army — to significantly 

increase the capacity within Saskatoon. Unfortunately they’ve 

met with a challenge and there’s been a delay in that increase of 

capacity. But they are assuring us that they are still going to be 

able to go ahead, which will add a number of additional beds to 

Saskatoon. 

 

Are we going to stop there, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. We’re 

going to forge ahead in helping the people find emergency 

shelter within our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, YWCA Saskatoon Crisis 

Shelter executive director, Barb McPherson, cites rising rents 

and a lack of affordable housing as two of the reasons why 

more and more people have nowhere to turn. And the minister’s 

own task force reported back in June that the number of 

apartment rental units in Saskatoon has fallen from over 17,000 

units in 1997 to just 13,500 last year. No wonder so many 

low-income families are struggling to find affordable rental 

housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services: at times like 

these one would expect people to turn to Sask Housing for help. 

Can she tell us how many people are on the waiting list for Sask 

Housing units in Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we recognized that there 

was a housing issue, a crisis within the province, immediately 

upon the election. Actually we knew it before the election, 

unlike the members opposite. They had no clue that the 

province was growing. Not only that, they were in denial that it 

even could grow. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, from 1992 to 

2005, they only increased the shelter allowance by — guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? — $5. That’s all they did. 

 

We acted very quickly. We struck the task force. They came 

back with recommendations. We responded to all of the 

immediate recommendations, of which includes an increase to 

shelter rates to 70 per cent of the average market rate. We 

increased the rental supplement to an additional 30 per cent, 

which is indexed to the market rate, Mr. Speaker, and we will 

revisit those numbers every six months. That’s unprecedented 

in our country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here are some real numbers 

concerning people. We’ve been told that there are more than 

560 people on the waiting list for social housing at Saskatoon 

Housing Authority, including 181 families and approximately 

300 seniors. And it seems to me that a government that 

continues to nest on 60 per cent of a historic surplus has the 

money to do something about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: can she tell us how many people 

are on the waiting list for affordable and social housing in 

Prince Albert? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sadly I think 

what that member needs to acknowledge is we are dealing with 

their government’s waiting lists. There was waiting lists prior to 

the election. We have invested, since the election, $67.9 million 

into housing. Of those, Mr. Speaker, 205 units have been 

completed, 429 units are in construction, and we have an 

additional number of units that are being developed. Mr. 

Speaker, that will bring almost 1,000 units on stream for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also announced $1.5 billion for infrastructure in our 

province. In that amount of money, when we do the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, will there be additional money for housing? 

Absolutely. 

 

We are addressing this issue. We are addressing it with those 

most in need with the shelter rate and the rental supplement. We 

are addressing it in building units, Mr. Speaker. We are taking 

action, unlike the previous government which sat on it and 

didn’t acknowledge that we had a problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we’re told that there are 

approximately 55 people on that waiting list for affordable 

housing in Prince Albert, and 78 people on the waiting list for 

social housing. And we’re told there are approximately 200 

approved applications for affordable and family housing in 

Regina, along with approximately 100 seniors. 

 

And meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, this minister cut $5 million out of 

the Sask Housing Corporation budget and then tries to take 

credit for the social and affordable housing projects set in 

motion by the previous NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what new social or affordable 

housing projects, if any, has she initiated since becoming the 

minister? Not projects already in the hopper thanks to the NDP, 

but brand new projects. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how little 

the member opposite understands this file. These were not 

projects that were just sitting in the hopper. The expression of 

interest was just out in November, as well as there was an 

expression of interest put out this year for First Nations and 

Métis Nation’s housing. So their projects were not sitting in a 

hopper. 

 

In addition, if the member opposite understood, there is a 

transfer of money from Social Services into the Sask Housing 

Corporation, but due to prudent financial management, we 

didn’t need to transfer as much money. It did not discontinue 

any of the programs . . . [inaudible] . . . goes towards funding. 

The previous year they spent $9.7 million in the programs that 

that transfer covers, so therefore this year we only budgeted 10 

million. Why? Because it would cover the expenses of those 

programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Decline of the Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, conditions in Saskatchewan’s 

forestry industry keep on going from bad to worse. Late last 

week we learned that another NorSask saw mill in Meadow 

Lake will be ceasing operation and 62 people will lose their 

jobs. And in my home community of La Ronge, 10 people are 

losing their jobs with the closure of Zelensky Brothers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister responsible for forestry: when will 

we see this government’s long-term plan for forest industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would want 

to thank the member for his question. I believe it’s the first 

occasion he’s had to ask a question in the legislature. We also 

understand that this is very difficult news for the 62 families 

involved in this layoff notice. It’s also our understanding 

through company officials that the decision has been based on 

market realities. The US [United States] housing market has 

slumped dramatically, lumber prices have not rebounded in any 

fashion, and the US forestry market and lumber market is 

obviously very important to our forest industry here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Company spokespeople have said that they are optimistic that 

they will be reopening in the spring. And there is one other 

thing that we want to keep in mind here. In Saskatchewan we 

have a very buoyant employment market, and as a result of that 

there are other opportunities for these folks — in other locations 

perhaps, but there’s certainly other employment opportunities 

that they may want to take advantage of. 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, local United Steelworkers 

president, Paul Hallen, had this to say about the latest 

developments quote: 

 

“Neither the provincial nor federal governments have 

shown any interest in finding meaningful solutions to the 

ongoing disintegration of one of our province’s most vital 

industries . . . Governments have tossed up their hands and 

turned their backs. Workers, communities and many 

Canadian forest companies continue to pay the price.” 

 

That’s not me, Mr. Speaker. That’s the workers in the forest 

industry saying that. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what will he 

do to give Saskatchewan forestry workers some hope? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Member, I 

think if you go on in that P.A. [Prince Albert] Herald editorial 

that you’re quoting from, you will find . . . Mr. Speaker, if he 

goes on in that article that the rhetorical question is answered by 

the P.A. editorial staff where they say, what is it that you would 

want a government to do? 

 

What is that you would want to do in the condition where we 

have an absolute collapse in the lumber market in North 

America? Would you want to have the government put 

resources into that? And that question was answered as well by 

the other P.A. member when he said no, he would not. No, he 

would not. 

 

So what is the position today of the NDP? Would they want the 

Government of Saskatchewan to invest resources into that as 

you are alluding to, or would you follow the advice of the other 

P.A. member when he says no, that’s not a good idea. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this government tore up a deal 

that would have reopened the Prince Albert mill, and still has 

nothing to replace it. This was after the member for the P.A. 

Carlton promised his voters, “A vote for Darryl is a vote for the 

mill open . . .”  

 

And they have done nothing to offer workers and their families 

in the communities like Big River, Carrot River, Hudson Bay, 

and others any hope. Now workers in Meadow Lake and La 

Ronge are suffering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has had a year. They rejected the 

previous government’s idea because presumably they had a 

better idea. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much longer do 

people have to wait? What is their plan for forestry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have said 

earlier, it’s a very difficult time for the families involved. In 

terms of the forestry industry, it’s certainly as a result of market 

conditions, as company spokespeople have said. 

 

However, what we on this side believe is, is that investing 

taxpayers’ money into this venture would not have been a good 

idea. And given the collapse, the absolute collapse of the 

lumber market in North America, the $100 million that your 

party pledged, one can only wonder where that investment 

would have gone today. 

 

I would say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, I would say 

to the member opposite, perhaps he would want to clarify on 

behalf of his members where you stand today, where that 

member stands and the NDP opposition stand. Would you have 

the Government of Saskatchewan invest $100 million given the 

current market conditions that exist? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says that the 

Crown sector should invest in quote “Saskatchewan first.” This 

is the same political party that decided just a year ago to tear up 

the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

plan to invest in the forestry industry in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if the Sask Party really believes 

that the Crown should invest in Saskatchewan first, why does it 

not apply that to the forestry industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

given the NDP’s track record in terms of investments, it should 

be no surprise that they’d want the Government of 

Saskatchewan investing in another money-losing venture 

because that’s what happened in terms of out-of-province 

investments. In Saskatchewan, absolutely we have an 

investment policy that says Saskatchewan first when it comes to 

electrical programs here in Saskatchewan, when it comes to cell 

telephone stations here in Saskatchewan. We are going to invest 

into the priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

But what I can say to the member opposite as well, Mr. 

Speaker, is this is a very troubled industry — there’s no 

question about it. But if we were to invest $100 million as the 

members opposite would have, one could only imagine where 

that investment would be today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Reuse of Syringes in Health Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s only because of the 

discovery of the reusing of syringes in Alberta hospitals that an 

investigation was launched into the practice in Saskatchewan. 

Since the discovery in Alberta, we’ve learned that syringes have 

been reused in the Prairie North and the Prince Albert health 

regions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister outline to the public today, 

through this Assembly, what steps he has taken to address this 

serious issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to say that patient safety and 

security is number one priority for this government. Mr. 

Speaker, we learned early last week that the Alberta Health 

Authority had some issues with reusing of syringes. At that time 

our Ministry of Health started to poll all the health regions 

within Saskatchewan to see what was happening in their 

particular health region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since that time, when we learned that there was a 

possibility of reusing syringes in Lloydminster and P.A., we 

sent an alert to all the health regions that this practice was to be 

stopped, that best practices should be conducted in our 

province. That is what we have done in a very short time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is in 

damage control mode. Across the province, a genuine sense of 

fear is growing in patients. They have the right to know the 

possible risk of being infected. 

 

Will the minister show some leadership today and outline the 

practices he is putting in place to notify Saskatchewan people 

who’ve been put at risk through the reuse of syringes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, 

on October 30 we put out an immediate alert to all the health 

regions that this practice was to stop, that patient safety and 

security was paramount, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a situation that we don’t want to see happen 

and will not be happening from now on in the province. It came 

to light in Alberta. We thought that in Saskatchewan that 

practice in most all hospitals is not conducted. But, Mr. 

Speaker, upon asking the health regions . . . And we’ll certainly 

commend the doctors for coming forward and saying this was a 

practice. We’ve corrected it, Mr. Speaker, last week. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I think the minister missed the question. I asked 

him what practices he is putting in place to notify Saskatchewan 

people who have been put at risk from the use of these syringes. 

 

He’s had no clue that the syringes were being reused in 

Saskatchewan hospitals. And he’s no idea how many patients 

are at risk for being possibly infected. What he does know, that 

he does need to go into damage control and try to convince 

Saskatchewan patients that the risk to them is extremely low. 

 

How long will it take to complete the investigation? Who’s 

going to do it? And will the results of the investigation be made 

public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is a practice that had 

been going on in the province for a number of years under — 

you could count how many — Health ministers from that side, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are tentative guidelines put in place a couple of years ago. 

They weren’t permanent guidelines or finalized guidelines, but 

under that NDP government, they enacted some temporary 

guidelines that they never followed through on, Mr. Speaker. 

We will be following through on guidelines that make sure that 

this type of medical equipment is only used once. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Notification 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing: how many reviews of prisoner 

handling are currently under way in his department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

thank the member opposite for the question. He wants to know 

how many reviews are ongoing for prisoner handling right now. 

Every day multiple inmates are handled and moved throughout 

our province, Mr. Speaker. If he wants to know the reviews that 

are going on right now for the incidents from August on, we 

have four, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Government of Saskatchewan news release dated August 26. 

“Effective immediately, if there is an escape from any 

provincial correctional . . . [facility], the public will be notified 

immediately through the media.” 

 

To the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing: is 

that the policy of the department as he understands it, or would 

he like to check his email first? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

the member opposite for the question. The member opposite 

wants to get into details today, Mr. Speaker. Well he wants to 

show his great concern about policy. Well I’ll tell you what, 

Mr. Speaker. When that member was a minister under this 

ministry, there was no policy, Mr. Speaker — none at all. 

 

Twenty-one escapes from 2002 to 2007, not one time did that 

government take on the responsibility of telling the public a 

dangerous offender was outside of their walls, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

tell you right now, Mr. Speaker, 16 years, Mr. Speaker, over 16 

years, we have to wonder how many other incidents took place 

that were never reported. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the escape, the policy was established from 

myself to the deputy minister to make sure that public 

notification takes place in concert with notification to the 

police, Mr. Speaker. That has taken place. We’re very happy 

with the new policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — So, Mr. Speaker, this news release says the 

public will be notified in the case of any escape. I would like to 

quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix from October 31. 

 

. . . a spokesperson for the Ministry of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing confirmed [that] a young offender 

escaped custody from a Prince Albert facility earlier this 

month. The minister was notified in a timely way, said the 

spokesperson. It was not deemed necessary to . . . [inform] 

the public . . . 

 

To the minister: how does that reconcile with the policy from 

the August government news release? Wait, let me guess. 

There’s going to be a review. Right, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, the policy statement from 

this government back in August was very clear: adult secure 

corrections facilities, those will be reported, Mr. Speaker. I will 

tell you very clearly, when it comes to young offenders, Mr. 

Speaker, we are ruled by legislation on releasing information. 

 

We have young offenders every day sentenced to open custody 

facilities in this province by our justice system. They are a low 

risk, Mr. Speaker, as deemed by the judges who issue the 

sentences. I will tell you now, the most dangerous offenders 

that escaped from secure custody facilities or are released 

inappropriately . . . Mr. Speaker, this government takes public 

safety very seriously. We will ensure that they are notified, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — So, Mr. Speaker, this news release said the 

public will be notified in the case of any escape, yet in 

Saturday’s paper we find out about even more escapes. I quote 

from that article: “Two males who escaped from a Regina youth 

facility were apprehended after a short foot chase in Saskatoon 

Friday afternoon.” Mr. Speaker, these youth are reported to 

have been carrying concealed weapons when apprehended. 

 

So two people broke out of a Regina facility and made it all the 

way to Saskatoon before being apprehended. And again there 

was no notice given to the public. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 

can he give us a single example of his policy working the way it 

was supposed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

concerned about public notification. And I think that 

considering we’ve heard a lot of questions today, I think there’s 

some answers that we deserve from the NDP on their policy of 

public notification. They’ve stood in this House 29 times and 

told us that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite, including the member who just asked that question, 

stood in this House 29 times and told us, told the public, and 

told Murdoch Carriere’s victims that they had fired him. That is 

absolutely not correct. We know from the settlement agreement 

that he resigned, Mr. Speaker. I think the NDP have to explain 

to us why they stood in this House and told us that they fired 

him when they did not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. The member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister is waiting on 

review, but the only review that this minister should be 

concerned about is the review of his performance. Now let me 

tell you, these reviews are in. The Globe and Mail quote: “. . . 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

chaos in Saskatchewan Corrections Ministry . . .” The 

StarPhoenix quote: a “string of . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — The StarPhoenix quote: a “string of 

embarrassments.” The Canadian Press quote: “Saskatchewan 

government officials . . . [were] red-faced . . .” But the 

Leader-Post sums it up, Mr. Speaker, quote: 

 

Hickie failed . . . He may have failed more miserably than 

any Saskatchewan cabinet minister in recent history. 

 

To the minister: why doesn’t he just accept these reviews and 

resign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 

people of this province did a performance review on the NDP 

last November and made their decision. And if we further 

review the NDP’s performance, perhaps they could explain to 

us why they paid Murdoch Carriere $275,000 for his pain and 

suffering. What about the pain and suffering of his victims? 

And perhaps they can also explain to us why the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, the opposition leader, and the member for 

Regina Lakeview actively hid this settlement agreement from 

the public last year when we asked for it through a freedom of 

information request. Perhaps they could explain that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Diplomatic Mission to Focus on Saskatchewan’s Economy 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 

me to rise today to announce not only a policy change for the 

province of Saskatchewan in terms of protocol, in terms of 

inviting and receiving guests and diplomats from other 

countries to our province, but also, Mr. Speaker, to confirm that 

something historic is under way in our province here today and 

will be happening for the next number of days. 

 

For the next three days, ambassadors and high commissioners 

from 23 countries have gathered in Regina. This is an historic 

occasion. It is the first such mission where a large group of 

diplomats has visited our province with their interest focused on 

the provincial economy. 

 

They will be learning about the dramatic economic 

transformation that is taking place in our Saskatchewan and 

about our government’s plans to ensure that that momentum 

continues, about our government’s plans to create what the 

noted author and columnist Thomas Friedman describes as an 

ecosystem of innovation. 

 

Delegates to this week’s diplomatic mission represent some of 

Saskatchewan’s most important and significant trading partners 

including France and Germany and the United States and 

Russia, to name but a few. 

 

Saskatchewan is a major player in the global marketplace. This 

fact was driven home just a few weeks ago when figures for the 

month of August showed the value of our international exports 

rose by a whopping 104 per cent compared to the previous 

August. That’s the highest percentage increase among 

provinces and more than 10 times the national average, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s also the biggest percentage increase since the 

province began tracking these statistics in 2001. The value of 

Saskatchewan’s exports in August totalled over $3 billion. 

 

We’re encouraged by that result, Mr. Speaker, but we know as a 

government and as a province, we have to do better. We know 

we have to forge direct links with other countries and with 

markets around the world. We know we need to diversify away 

from too great of a dependency on our trading relationship with 

the country immediately south of us. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, 

our government is going to be aggressively seeking 

opportunities like this to tell Saskatchewan’s story, to promote 

unique relationships with countries around the world. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that, in the past number of 

months even,  Alberta has been hosting numbers of these kinds 

of missions — 50-plus missions of this type — while over the 

last period of time we have only hosted one, Mr. Speaker. This 

has been an area of opportunity overlooked by governments in 

the past. The policy of this new government is that we will not 

overlook these opportunities. We’re going to use these 

opportunities, including in the area of protocol for the 

government, in the area of trade, to tell Saskatchewan’s very, 

very compelling story and to forge even stronger relationships 

with countries from around the world. 

 

I know that members on both sides of the house I’m sure will 

have a chance to meet with a number of the diplomats who are 

joining us in Saskatchewan over the next number of days. I 

hope they will warmly welcome them to our province, 

understanding that the friendship and the relationships that we 

continue to build with those countries means economic 

opportunity for the future of the province. It contributes to the 

diversity of our Saskatchewan — something that is welcomed, 

Mr. Speaker, in a new policy of the government that I believe 

will be well received by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, we’re very pleased to welcome all of the 

diplomats to Saskatchewan again. We were very pleased to host 

the diplomatic forum which included a strong economic part to 

it in 2004. I think there’s some of us have material that we 

received from that particular diplomatic event. 

 

I know that I was involved in a number of events that were 

there. And in that particular event a few years ago, there were 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

very many people who learned a lot about Saskatchewan. One 

of the reasons that they’ve come back — and in talking with 

some of the diplomats over the last couple of days — is how 

well received they were in 2004. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I believe I recognized the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So, Mr. Speaker, I think that Saskatchewan can 

be proud of the way that we have hosted diplomatic groups that 

have come to Saskatchewan over many, many years, and we 

know that this has happened over many times. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the economy in 

Saskatchewan and what’s happening, but it’s also important to 

learn from all of our guests what’s happening in their 

economies across the world. And I had the pleasure yesterday to 

be part of an event with the ambassador from Norway where he 

met with a lot of the Saskatchewan Norwegian and 

Scandinavian community. One of the things that he mentioned 

was the important investment made in Saskatchewan by one of 

Norway’s major companies, Yara, when they paid $1.6 billion 

for the Saskferco operation at Belle Plaine. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the members opposite know 

this, but Yara is a descendent company from Norsk Hydro. 

Norsk Hydro is the SaskPower of Norway. A Crown 

corporation and a private corporation work together, whereby 

government investment has allowed for things to go 

international. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we heard the member opposite’s policy 

earlier this week about retreating and having our companies 

collapsed into Saskatchewan, I think that the members opposite 

could learn a lot listening to the diplomats who are coming here 

this week. Mr. Speaker, we’re very happy to have them . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. For some reason there seems to be 

periods of time when all members want to get into debate while 

on the floor. We recognize one. Member from Regina Lakeview 

will wind up his comments. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very happy to have all of 

the diplomats here in Saskatchewan. We know that they’re 

going to see some of our most important investments that have 

taken place over the last number of years, and they’re also 

going to look at what’s the future for Saskatchewan. I also 

encourage the members opposite in their conversations with 

these diplomats to learn from them and about their countries 

and about investment. I think there’s a lot to learn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Recommendations of Community-Based 

Organizations Implemented 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when our government was elected, we made a promise to host a 

summit for Saskatchewan’s community-based organizations. 

CBOs play an important role in providing a variety of human 

services to some of the most vulnerable citizens in our province. 

These CBOs operate shelters, group homes, daycares, crisis 

units, and many other needed services. Our goal in hosting 

these summits was to listen to what our CBOs had to say about 

how we could better serve Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has once again kept our promise. 

Approximately 800 CBO representatives attended the five 

events spread across our province. I want to thank everyone 

who attended for their thoughts and ideas, for their enthusiasm, 

honesty, and passion. They provided us with a great deal of 

feedback, Mr. Speaker. The unedited feedback, comments, and 

evaluations we received at each of the summits is available on 

the Government of Saskatchewan Ministry of Social Services’ 

website. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they challenged us to respond, not with 

shiny reports to sit on a shelf, but rather with concrete action. 

Today I am pleased to report that our government has already 

begun to respond. Last Thursday’s announcement of a major 

initiative to address the wait-list faced by people with 

disabilities for services and our commitment to create a new 

income support program for people with disabilities were two 

recommendations heard loud and clear at the summits. 

Participants at the CBO summit stress the need to support 

Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable residents in dealing with some 

specific challenges currently being faced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result we are also pleased to announce that in 

response to the tax cuts announced by the Premier, any 2008 

income tax refund and any tax credit received through the 

Saskatchewan low-income tax credit will be excluded from all 

income calculations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, they will be excluded 

from all income calculations used in the Saskatchewan 

assistance program, the transitional employment allowance, and 

the new income support program for people with disabilities. 

As a result, all social assistance recipients will keep any 2008 

tax refund resulting from last week’s historical tax cuts. 

 

Effective October 1, 2008, the mileage rate under the 

Saskatchewan assistance program increased 5 cents per 

kilometre to address the rising fuel costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — In the future, Mr. Speaker, social 

assistance mileage rates will be reviewed semi-annually. On 

October 1, 2008, clients of the transitional employment 

allowance saw their home heating allowances increase by 20 

per cent in response to the higher utility rates. Effective 

November 1, 2008, they will see additional dollars to cover the 

basic monthly charge. 

 

Recipients of the Saskatchewan assistance program will 

continue to see their full actual utility costs paid. 

 

As a result of suggestions made at the summit, the Saskatoon 

United Way and the Saskatoon Food Bank & Learning Centre 

have partnered in a proposal to complete a full business plan to 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

develop this service. In response, the province is contributing 

$30,000 to assist them to develop a strategy to bring a 211 

phone service to Saskatchewan. This will help individuals and 

their families across our province to access human services that 

are available in their community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — A second element, Mr. Speaker, of 

their proposal is to develop a website directory of agencies and 

services in support of the call system. This project would afford 

significantly enhanced opportunities for CBOs to interact. It 

allows them to share best practices and work collaboratively in 

building stronger communities. Mr. Speaker, a common theme 

at the summits was the need for longer term, predictable 

funding for CBOs. In response, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

announce today that our government is committing to begin 

entering into long-term funding agreements with CBOs starting 

in the next budget year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as we discussed at the 

summits, we will continue to work, to review all of the 

feedback that we received, to find opportunities to make 

improvements, to respond to good ideas, and most of all to 

make things better for those most vulnerable in our province. 

Today’s announcement is just the beginning. Mr. Speaker, our 

government is committed to creating a better life and to 

ensuring all people share in the province’s prosperity. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and before 

I start my comments, I want to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we move forward, I will ask 

members to respect the individual on his feet. I have to admit in 

this position of independence sometimes it’s difficult as well. 

However I will recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre 

for their comments as well and recognize the . . . 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And before I start my 

comments, I want to thank the minister for sending over the 

copy of the comments so that I could be prepared. I too want to 

say that I attended the CBO summit and it was a great process. 

And it was great to see so many people out as we travelled 

throughout the province, getting an idea of what this very 

important sector had to say about where we are in 

Saskatchewan, what we can do to make things as best as we can 

for those who are vulnerable in our society. 

 

They often work in challenging circumstances, but they always 

step up to the plate and do the right thing, so I want to say thank 

you to them and this process. I want to say that many of these 

announcements have already been made, and as the opposition 

we are very supportive of many of these things. In our role as 

opposition, we will look to see how we can make these as best 

as they can, asking appropriate questions, but we want to make 

sure for the citizens of Saskatchewan they are the right policies. 

 

I want to say that I’m particularly excited about the 211 and the 

website initiative. I think this is a very creative initiative and a 

very worthwhile initiative, and I think this is a project that we 

should support. I look forward to more details on this. 

 

I do want to say though there are a couple of things I did hear. 

One thing I did hear in Saskatoon that I have yet to hear the 

minister talk about, clearly there was a call, I know, in 

Saskatoon — and it should be on the website because all the 

documents are on the website — a call for a poverty reduction 

strategy. 

 

What is the big plan here? We have a lot of these things 

happening. There is a lot of money, and it’s good thing to be 

doing, like the mileage. But we want to see an overarching 

vision about how we’re going to reduce poverty in this 

province. 

 

Also last week, Mr. Speaker, we did read in the paper three 

unions were out staging a little demonstration. They were very 

thankful about the wages that happened this summer, but they 

want to see that happen many times because there is such a 

catch-up that they have to do. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 

seeing more details on this and thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Agriculture Crown Lands Sale Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I’m announcing the agriculture Crown lands sale 

program. Many lessees have wanted to purchase the Crown 

land they have farmed for many years. Today’s announcement 

provides incentives that will help lessees make this a reality. 

 

The agriculture Crown lands sale program will begin November 

15 and will continue for the next five years, concluding at the 

end of 2013. We are offering a 10 per cent discount on the sale 

price of the land in the first year of this program. This discount 

will gradually decrease to 2 per cent in the fifth year of the 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture expects to sell 600,000 

acres of cultivated land and 1 million acres of grazing land 

throughout this program.  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — The government, Mr. Speaker, will 

still retain several million acres of agriculture Crown land. This 

includes land with conservation attributes, with important 

subsurface minerals, land located near major water bodies, or 

land without public or economic values beyond agriculture. 

Details of the program will be sent this week to all agriculture 

Crown land lessees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in December 2007 Throne Speech, we promised 

to create a plan for lasting and permanent economic growth. 

Today we are keeping that promise by returning the direction of 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

the economy to the hands of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, farmers and ranchers 

are the best stewards of the land. This program will help ensure 

a stronger Saskatchewan and a better life for farm and ranch 

families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to thank the minister for sending over his ministerial 

statement to the opposition earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand from the minister that he expects to 

sell approximately 1.6 million acres of cultivated land and 

grazing land. That’s not what his ministerial statement indicated 

to me. He’s indicated in the ministerial statement that I got that 

he estimates that there’s 1.6 million acres of land that’s eligible 

under the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we notice in his statement that there will be an 

incentive, a discount on the sale of agricultural and grazing 

land. The question that we have, which we think will need to be 

articulated by the minister, is this incentive only for those 

people who are presently leasing that land, or will this incentive 

also be available for those large investors that are now in the 

province assembling large tracts of land for sale at a later date 

on behalf of their investors? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know from speaking to farm families and 

ranching families from across the province that there are a 

number of holding companies that have come into the province, 

assembled large tracts of land, and that land is no longer farmed 

by the people who own that land. It’s farmed by basically tenant 

farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess the question will be, is this land only going to be 

available for those people who presently lease that land? Are 

farmers and ranchers on that land, or is this land going to be put 

into the open market for large holding companies to come in 

and buy Saskatchewan farm land? That’s the first question. 

 

And the second question, is this discount only for those people 

who farm and ranch that land presently, or will these discounts 

be available for the holders of these large holding companies 

that have assembled tens and tens of thousands of acres into a 

holding company? 

 

So those are the questions. I understand the details will be 

available later this week or shortly, and we’re looking forward 

to seeing what the details of this sell-off of Crown land are 

indeed, what they are. Mr. Speaker, I think the minister would 

have been very helpful if he could have put a little more detail 

into his ministerial statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — The member may state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think you are aware, 

Mr. Speaker, that prior to the 2007 election, members of the 

Saskatchewan Party or representatives of the Saskatchewan 

Party and representatives of the New Democratic Party met to 

discuss the rules of this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, the results of 

those meetings between the representatives of the party came to 

effect a number of changes to our rules. 

 

One of those rules, Mr. Speaker, is rule 19(3), which I read in 

its entirety here. It’s very short, Mr. Speaker. This is a new rule 

of the Assembly, rule 19(3), responses . . . This has to do with 

question period, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Responses shall be relevant to the question, but a Minister 

may decline to answer or may take notice of a question. 

Questions taken as notice may be answered at a 

subsequent Question Period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would argue under point of order today that 

during question period today questions directed to the minister 

of corrections, public service and policing relating to public 

safety, Mr. Speaker, were answered by the Minister of the 

Environment in a fashion that was irrelevant to the question 

asked. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Opposition House Leader has the 

floor. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I simply 

point this out to you with the request that the Speaker, who is 

here to enforce the rules, review the question period, and after 

review, instruct members of the government about what the rule 

19(3) means and ask the members of the government to respect 

the rules negotiated by members of this Chamber. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to respond using Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 

6th Edition. On page 123, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make 

note that replies to oral questions, point no. 418, states that 

“The Government decides who will answer.” And again in 420: 

 

The Speaker has stated, “Of course, the Chair will allow a 

question to be put to a certain Minister; but it cannot insist 

that that Minister rather than another should answer it.” 

 

So I would like the Speaker to take that into consideration when 

he rules on this point of order. The opposition cannot insist on 

which minister answers the questions. 

 

The Speaker: — I want to thank the member for his point of 

order and . . . Order. Order. And the Government Deputy House 

Leader for the response. And I want to also acknowledge that I 

was actually in the rule book, and I did miss some of the 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

comments. And I will be making a comment tomorrow in 

regards to a couple other things I heard that I wasn’t quite sure 

of. But I will certainly take time to review Hansard to indeed 

make the appropriate comment in regards to the point of order. 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1 through 7. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1 through 7 tabled. Question no. 8 

has been ordered for return. The Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Question no. 8 ordered, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Question no. 8’s been ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 9 through 39. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 9 through 39 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, 40 through 52 are ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 40 through 52 ordered. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 53 to 73. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 53 to 73 tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin, I 

would ask the House special leave that if I cannot remain 

standing due to the surgery I had that I can finish my speech 

while I’m sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to be able to 

sit down should he not be able to continue to stand. Is that 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleagues for the honour to respond to the magnificent Speech 

from the Throne. I would also like to thank again the people of 

Batoche for their honour and privilege of speaking on their 

behalf in this esteemed House. 

 

Due to a recent surgery, I have found myself temporary relying 

on the use of a wheelchair, and now I more fully understand the 

challenges faced daily by people confined to wheelchairs. I 

think of the old adage, don’t judge a man until you’ve walked a 

mile in his shoes — or in this case, wheelchair. I salute these 

people with a new-found respect and admiration. 

 

I would also like to publicly thank my wife who is seated up in 

the west gallery, who has dedicated countless hours to enable 

me to be here to do my job at the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — And, Mr. Speaker, I’m thrilled to proudly 

announce that this past Saturday, November 1, was our 33rd 

wedding anniversary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — I would also like to take the opportunity to 

thank my CA [constituency assistant] Mary Anne Telfer. Her 

loyalty, dedication, and friendship are second to none, and in 

my mind, she is undoubtedly the best CA in the province. 

 

Today and until November 11, we wear the poppy. Let us not 

forget what it stands for. Wear it with pride and dignity for the 

men and women of yesterday and the men and women of today 

who toil on the battlefields around the world. Their causes are 

still the same — freedom of the oppressed. God bless our 

troops, wherever they may be serving. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And now I enter into the debate of the 

Throne Speech. Before we get too deep into what this Throne 

Speech has accomplished for this province, we must look at 

where we have come from. 

 

In 1905 when Saskatchewan was born, we were ahead of 

Alberta and had so much, if not more, potential than any other 

province in Canada. By 2005, our centennial year, our 

population was declining, our resources were relatively 

untouched, and our province was in debt to a tune of almost $7 

billion. Our greatest export was our children. And our then 

premier referred to us as the wee province that would always be 

in and out of equalization. 

 

In that same time frame, Alberta, our sister province, grew to be 

a powerful province of over 3 million people with surplus 

money in the bank. In short, they were a have province and we 

were a have-not province. What went wrong in Saskatchewan? 

 

Saskatchewan was conducting an experiment, an experiment in 

socialism. For the last 60 years, left wing governments tried to 

control every aspect of life in this province. They tried to build 

walls to keep out competition. They tried to build walls to 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

protect government companies. They even went as far as taking 

away the potash mines from private corporations to fulfill their 

socialistic dreams. 

 

In order to try and bolster the sagging economy, they started 

making absurd investments both within and out of the province. 

I am referring to dot-com companies, potato companies, bingo 

companies, and many, many more. The total money lost by 

some is estimated as much as $2 billion. 

 

At the time of the 2007 election, the highest taxed poor people 

in all of Canada was here in Saskatchewan, by a party that had 

claimed to be the protector of the little guy and the caretaker of 

the old and infirm. Yet the seniors of this province had not seen 

an increase in provincial government assistance since 1992. 

 

The only shining light the NDP could hold up in its birth is 

medicare although, at the rate of decline they were in, with 800 

nurse shortages, doctor shortages, hospital beds closing, rural 

hospitals being closed, waiting lists getting longer, the NDP 

soon would’ve been known for the death of medicare. And 

now, Mr. Speaker, these same people whose party is 

responsible for so many of Saskatchewan failures now stand in 

opposition and ridicule this magnificent Throne Speech that 

does so much for all the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in listening to the speeches from the left, two main 

themes keep coming through: no. 1, they oppose the Throne 

Speech; no. 2, they claim the ideas were theirs. Mr. Speaker, 

they can’t have it both ways. If the ideas were theirs, why not 

support them? 

 

[14:45] 

 

They floundered around for 16 years and didn’t get any of their 

four-term tenures completed with these tasks. Even in baseball, 

you only get three strikes and you’re out. Yet they had four 

chances, all because they hit a foul, and that foul sadly enough 

was a disgusting campaign of fear. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

people have spoken out. They are out. 

 

So what is the job of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition? Is it to 

oppose everything just for the sake of opposing? Is it the 

opposition’s job to condemn anything and everything the 

government brings forward or has the job of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition changed to oppose anything contrary to the 

socialistic rhetoric of the Regina manifest? 

 

The people of this province expect more from the opposition 

than just opposing. They want someone to support what is right 

for the children of this province, for the working class of this 

province, and for the seniors of this province. 

 

Things have changed in Saskatchewan over the past year. There 

is a new attitude in Saskatchewan. In order to be a success, you 

have to have the right attitude just like our beloved 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. Like our Roughriders over the past 

decade, Saskatchewan has floundered. The people of 

Saskatchewan have had the ability, but they didn’t have the 

leadership. We kept coming up short on third downs. Also like 

our Roughriders, you have to have a game plan and work hard. 

A wise man once said, the harder we work, the luckier we get. 

 

The people of this great province once again feel that they are 

back on track. This province is going to move to the forefront of 

this great country of Canada. People can now see a future that is 

filled with hope and opportunity for them and for their children. 

This Throne Speech is the gateway to that future. 

 

This Throne Speech provides the largest income tax cut in all of 

Saskatchewan history. It removes 80,000 people from paying 

provincial tax. It also gives income tax credit to all low-income 

earners. This historic tax break comes from what the NDP call a 

right wing government. If that is the case, Mr. Speaker, it 

proves that you don’t have to vote for socialism to get social 

justice. In just one year, our Saskatchewan Party has provided 

more social justice than the past government did in its entire 16 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — That bears repeating. In just one year, our 

Saskatchewan Party government has provided more social 

justice than the past government did in its entire 16 years. How 

can any socialist vote against this Throne Speech if they’re truly 

the advocate of social reform? 

 

In the same time frame, we are making the largest investment in 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan’s history. In order to shore up 

the crumbling highways, schools, and hospitals left by years of 

NDP neglect and mismanagement, we will invest $1 billion this 

year, and $1.5 billion next year into Saskatchewan’s 

infrastructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — We still have many, many miles of rural 

highways in disrepair, but at least, Mr. Speaker, we have made 

a start and mile by mile they will be repaired. Already this year, 

1,500 miles of highway have been repaired. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the world looks at a looming economic crisis. Our 

government is well aware of the perils of such a downturn; 

therefore we are holding in reserve $2 billion to see us through 

these tough economic times. The difference between the 

Saskatchewan Party’s Growth and Financial Security Fund and 

the former NDP’s rainy day fund is this: ours has real money in 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — It’s not just another loan on paper. This is a 

very wise and prudent move that will provide much confidence 

in Saskatchewan, and carry us through the future. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the heaviest burdens Saskatchewan 

carries on its back of every citizen is that crushing debt load 

which is a debt of almost $7 billion. The NDP continually 

blame Grant Devine’s government for that debt, but what did 

they do in 16 years, Mr. Speaker? They didn’t shrink that debt. 

They grew it and grew it until it reached the staggering amount. 

Our government in one year has struck the debt by a 

tremendous — may I repeat that — a tremendous 40 per cent 

which is unprecedented in Canadian financial history, perhaps 

even the world. 

 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

Mr. Speaker, the member from the other side thinks he’s a wit, 

but he’s only half right. Mr. Speaker, this paydown of the debt 

reduces the burden on the Saskatchewan taxpayer by $5,000 a 

minute, $5,000 a minute — phenomenal, isn’t it? It almost 

makes you giddy, and you just bubble with pride and 

excitement to think of what the Saskatchewan Party 

government has accomplished in just one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my address before this House, I referred to the 

parallels between the new Saskatchewan Party and a sailing 

vessel embarking on a new voyage of discovery. I mentioned 

that the good ship Saskatchewan would be besieged by pirates 

of the left. Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech, the good ship 

Saskatchewan is in full sail, and our course has been set. Our 

navigation is true, and our captain is at the helm. The winds are 

blowing fair, and sure enough, Mr. Speaker, here come the 

pirates of the left. 

 

They are trying to use the old weapon of fear to blow our ship 

off course. They’re firing broadsides against this Throne Speech 

but to no avail. The good ship Saskatchewan will not be 

deterred. We will bring home this Throne Speech for the people 

of this province so all can share in the bright future of this great 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is giving more to the average 

man and woman on the street than any Throne Speech in the 

history of this province. With the record of this new 

Saskatchewan Party government, they not only promise, they 

will deliver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will soon be voting on this Throne Speech and 

my question is, how will Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition vote? 

Will they vote for what is good and right for the people of this 

province? Or will they stand there and vote nay like a bunch of 

socialist puppets with little or no concern for the people of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride I 

will definitely be supporting this magnificent and historic 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 

the outset of my remarks I want to just take a moment to 

congratulate the member for Cumberland for his election to this 

Legislative Assembly. The member for Cumberland, as we 

know, has a distinguished record of service in and to the people 

of the North, and that is a record of service that will stand him 

in good stead as he now serves all the people of Saskatchewan. 

And we look forward to his contributions to public dialogue and 

to public policy in the many years to come. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome you back for another 

term in this Legislative Assembly. We know that your 

experience in this House will stand you in good stand, stand all 

of us in good stead as you seek to continue to provide 

leadership and stewardship for the members of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the Throne Speech, I was — how 

shall I put this? — profoundly disappointed. It started off well 

enough — the rhetoric was there — but the Throne Speech 

failed in my view to address in any coherent or concrete way 

what should be an urgent priority for all of the people of 

Saskatchewan and certainly for the members of this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And that priority, Mr. Speaker, is a plan to broaden the base of 

Saskatchewan’s economy. A plan that will reduce 

Saskatchewan’s dependence on non-renewal resource activity to 

create jobs in our economy, a plan that will reduce 

Saskatchewan’s budgetary dependence on non-renewal resource 

activities. 

 

A plan that will ensure that we will become a true have 

province in the Canadian federation based on more than 

non-renewal resource activity and non-renewal resource 

revenues. A plan that will give hope to the people of 

Saskatchewan that our young people will always have 

opportunities for meaningful employment here in their 

province. 

 

The reality is that Saskatchewan’s economy is doing very well 

at this time, and contrary to the comments of the previous 

member where he would leave the impression that somehow 

Saskatchewan’s economy began to really boom and take off 

with the election of the Sask Party government a year ago . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And they may profoundly believe that, 

Mr. Speaker. The fact is that the current economic renaissance 

— can we call it that? — began under the NDP; the population 

growth began under the NDP; the economic growth and the 

increase in jobs in this province began under the NDP. That is a 

situation that has been inherited by the previous government. 

But yet that member and many members believe it’s something 

that began with them and is a result of the things that they have 

done in government, Mr. Speaker, which calls to mind that old 

baseball metaphor, Mr. Speaker, about the guy who was born 

on second base but thought he hit a double. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is we are doing very well in Saskatchewan 

because of activity in our non-renewable resource sector. We 

are doing well because of activity in oil. We are doing well 

because of activity in the natural gas area. We are doing well 

because of expansion in potash. We are doing well because of 

increased interest and activity in uranium mining. 

 

And it hasn’t always been the case that the demand for 

Saskatchewan non-renewable resource was that strong, Mr. 

Speaker. Oil prices haven’t always been that high, and the same 

for natural gas. And the same holds true for potash, and the 

same holds true for uranium. 

 

And chances are that relatively speaking, Mr. Speaker, chances 

are that relatively speaking that oil prices will go down. Mr. 

Speaker, already oil prices I think, if I remember correctly from 

Friday’s close, are trading in the area of about 65 to $70 a barrel 

— let’s say high sixties dollars per barrel — contrasted with the 

$119.78 a barrel that the government has now booked into its 

budget in which the current budget is now based, Mr. Speaker, 

based on first quarter results. 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

So already we’ve seen a tremendous swing in oil prices, Mr. 

Speaker, in the course of a few months. And chances are that 

other commodity prices will also cycle lower. And we know 

that for Saskatchewan, that given our dependence on 

commodities, given our dependence on commodities, Mr. 

Speaker, that as commodity prices go down, economic 

performance for Saskatchewan will go down, Mr. Speaker. That 

is the reality. 

 

Economic cycles, notwithstanding all protestation by the 

members opposite, economic cycles are a fact of life. And I 

know it doesn’t sort of fit well with their sort of wholly 

optimistic view of our world, Mr. Speaker, but the fact is, the 

reality is we’ve seen it in the past; we’ll see it again in the 

future. Economic cycles are a fact of life. 

 

I see with interest, Mr. Speaker, that David Clayton Thomas, 

who’s a well-known Canadian singer — and I refer to him also 

as a well-known Canadian philosopher — is going to be in 

Regina I believe later this month, performing at the casino show 

lounge. And it’s Mr. David Clayton Thomas who so famously 

observed that what goes up must come down. The spinning 

wheel goes round and round, Mr. Speaker. And so it is with 

economic performance, Mr. Speaker. And the members would 

deny history, the members would deny history, if they say that 

this will never happen again in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, the question is, what exactly does 

the Throne Speech say about a plan, a plan to position 

Saskatchewan to have a strong economy when the 

non-renewable resource sector is not strong, Mr. Speaker? 

Where is that vision in the Throne Speech? Where is that plan 

in the Throne Speech? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had expected more from the government, more 

from a party that prides itself, prides itself on its ties to the 

business community and prides itself on its so-called 

understanding of the economy. We had expected that upon 

election, in their first Throne Speech, they would have outlined 

that vision because again that is the single greatest challenge 

that Saskatchewan faces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we are one year later, two Throne Speeches later — 

no plan, no vision, no nothing, Mr. Speaker. And this is the 

right time to be asking this question, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan government has the surplus funds to invest in a 

vision. They have the surplus funds to invest in a plan to 

diversify our economy. But first we need a plan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whatever criticisms . . . And we’ve certainly heard 

criticisms from the members opposite, although somewhat were 

overblown, and they hearken back to a speech by the now 

Premier that he made in 2002 in his speech in reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. Whatever criticisms there were of the 

previous NDP government, no one doubted that they had a plan, 

Mr. Speaker: a plan to position Saskatchewan’s economy to 

take on the future, a plan to build up those sectors of the 

economy that we will need to lessen our dependence on oil, Mr. 

Speaker, to lessen our dependence on non-renewable resource 

activities. At least the NDP had a plan to do that and invested in 

that plan over the years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Early on the NDP cleaned up a huge financial mess so that 

business and industry could have stability in provincial finances 

when making investment decisions. And contrary to what the 

member opposite says, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 

member says about debt going up under the NDP, there’s not a 

person outside of that caucus who believes anything like that, 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan. Not one person, not one sane 

person would believe anything like that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, not even the credit rating agencies believed anything 

like that about Saskatchewan. It was under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP took over, they took over an economy, 

they took over a fiscal house that had the NDP, at least at one 

point, reverting to junk bond status in terms of its credit rating 

by at least one of the credit rating agencies, Mr. Speaker. But 

over their time, because it was able to . . . [inaudible] . . . its 

resources in a prudent way and to use it to lower debt, under the 

NDP, the Government of Saskatchewan was able to increase its 

credit rating, Mr. Speaker, and to increase it in a hugely 

significant way — something that we haven’t seen lately, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, early on the NDP cleaned up a huge 

financial mess, contrary to what their member said. 

 

Early on, early on the NDP made major changes to taxation for 

industries involved in manufacturing and processing. Since then 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Because we understood that 

manufacturing and processing, if we are to diversify the 

economy, we needed to invest in manufacturing and processing. 

Since then, manufacturing output in Saskatchewan has outpaced 

all the other provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That is because 

of a conscious decision by the NDP government to support that 

sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP also invested massively in our universities. Mr. 

Speaker, we have not seen a building boom in our universities 

the likes of what we’ve seen these last 10, 15 years, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen massive expansion that is obvious to all of 

the people in Saskatchewan, massive expansion at our 

universities. 

 

The NDP also invested massively in research and development. 

The NDP invested in the synchrotron in Saskatoon. The NDP 

invested in the Petroleum Research Centre in Regina and the 

forestry research centre in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker — all 

investments made by an NDP that wasn’t booking in budgets at 

$119 per barrel, Mr. Speaker. More like $20 per barrel, Mr. 

Speaker. So far less in resources but nonetheless seeing it 

important to make those kinds of investments. 

 

The NDP understood that these were the kinds of investments 

needed to build a knowledge-based economy. If we’re looking 

at expanding our economy, Mr. Speaker, to diversifying 

economy, surely we have to make those kinds of investments in 

a knowledge-based economy. We’re not seeing anything from 

the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government, one year 

later, is still talking. Still talking, no action. Two Throne 

Speeches to articulate a vision, opportunities lost, Mr. Speaker. 

Why is the Saskatchewan government so slow off the mark, the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker? The 

government gives the impression that its strategy is, simply put, 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

let the good times roll, and that’s the total extent of their 

economic strategy and their economic plan going forward. As 

long as the oil revenue is coming in, why worry about anything 

else? But we know that the single largest real challenge that 

faces us is to lessen our dependence on oil, lessen our 

dependence on non-renewable resource activities. 

 

Has there been an internal conflict in their approach, we ask 

ourselves, Mr. Speaker? We know that the Premier’s only 

approach has been lower taxation — a belief that if taxes are 

low enough across the board, that economic growth will follow. 

Others may have pointed out to him that’s not how it solely 

works in the real world. To be sure, Mr. Speaker, as the NDP 

also made sure, taxation policy is a consideration in economic 

development, but there are many other factors. 

 

Alberta in the ’60s and ’70s — and the member fondly talking 

of Alberta in the ’60s and ’70s when it sought to transform its 

economy — did not rely solely on taxation, Mr. Speaker. 

Alberta used its resource wealth, made investments in sectoral 

growth. Whether it’s irrigation in southern Alberta, a 

petrochemical industry in Red Deer, or encouraging the move 

of the meat processing sector from Winnipeg to Edmonton, Mr. 

Speaker, Alberta had a sectoral strategy. A sectoral strategy to 

transform its economy to lessen dependence on non-renewable 

resource activity. 

 

Today Alberta’s economy has diversified and grown to such an 

extent that, even if oil and natural gas were to collapse 

tomorrow, Alberta would still not require equalization. And 

when will we be able to say that about Saskatchewan? When 

will we be able to say that about Saskatchewan, and how will 

we get there? That is the real question that I am posing today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I note with interest that Alberta is changing its tune with respect 

to direct investment. Having used that approach to help it to 

diversify and grow its economy, it is now signalling through 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

that it wants to discontinue that approach, and that provinces 

should only rely on low taxes to stimulate economic activity. 

That’s kind of like using one set of rules to get ahead of the 

competitors, and then saying, let’s change the rules of the game 

now that we’ve achieved that. Well they must be laughing 

themselves silly in Edmonton, Mr. Speaker, to see it’s 

Saskatchewan Party Premier and government that agrees with 

them on those new rules going forward. 

 

I note however that, pending the adoption of TILMA, the 

Alberta government continues to make sectoral investments, 

whether it’s in the health research field — significantly, the 

Alberta government is doing that — and also note that Alberta 

continues to invest massively to support its livestock industry. 

Saskatchewan livestock producers, on the other hand, have a 

Premier and a government that does not support such an 

approach, leaving Saskatchewan producers to compete on what 

I’d see as an uneven playing field, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Perhaps the announcement of Innovation Saskatchewan is a 

sign that practical thinking in cabinet has finally prevailed over 

the Premier’s rigid, ideological approach. But we will have to 

watch this new approach because again it’s one in which the 

politicians will be making the investment decision, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I close I just want to point out that one of 

the sectors the Sask Party government will not be investing in is 

the Crown sector, Mr. Speaker. To absolutely no one’s surprise, 

the Saskatchewan Party is now engaged in a 

shrink-the-Crown-sector strategy. Having swallowed, having 

swallowed their deeply held convictions of strong dislike of 

Crown corporations and promising to never sell the Crowns in 

order to ensure their election, the Saskatchewan Party outlined a 

strategy that will start the process of gutting the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? We expected it. We expected it. 

The wolf is back. The wolf in sheep’s clothing is back, Mr. 

Speaker. The sheep’s clothing in this case is an innocuous 

sounding Saskatchewan-first for the Crowns policy. But the 

public should not doubt for a moment, Mr. Speaker, as to what 

is taking place here. The Saskatchewan Party government is 

engaged in a campaign to shrink Crown corporations. Why else 

would the government take steps to sell off profitable, 

money-making subsidiaries’ profitable assets? Is the 

government short on liquid assets? I don’t think so — not with 

$2 billion in the bank, Mr. Speaker. We all know that in this 

they are running true to form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, we expected no less. We were 

deluded in thinking that they would save the Crowns. Selling 

the Crowns is one thing which they promised to not do; saving 

them, Mr. Speaker, is something else. The wolf is back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to indicate it’s a shame that the 

Sask Party government has not been able to articulate a clear 

plan, a clear vision to transform Saskatchewan’s economy. The 

means to do so are at hand, and the massive resources required 

to do so successfully will not come our way that often, Mr. 

Speaker. The opportunities don’t come our way that often. 

 

In opposition they led the public to believe they had a clear plan 

to grow our economy, not just simply to coast along on 

non-renewable resource activity and non-renewable resource 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. In government they are dithering. And 

that is why the Throne Speech is such a huge disappointment, 

and I will not be supporting it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 

rise in the House today to voice my support for the 2008 Speech 

from the Throne. Like my colleagues and my constituents, I am 

so impressed by the strength and promise of the programs that 

this speech outlined. It makes me proud to be part of this 

government and to be representing the great people of Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

This is truly a transformative time for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. All forecasts now are for sunny conditions with an 

abundance of fresh air. The doom and gloom we endured for 

such a very long time is now gone. The Throne Speech gave us 

that refreshing and positive feeling, and what is really and 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

actually happening in Saskatchewan reinforces this. I have since 

spoken to many people about it — my family, my friends, my 

constituents. They were all impressed, not only with its 

ambitious agenda, but also with the compassionate social stance 

it takes. 

 

They also said to me that they were surprised and pleased when 

they were actually asked to voice their opinions last summer on 

how to make the best use of this unprecedented surplus. They 

are not accustomed to being consulted or listened to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Throne Speech gave my constituents a feeling of optimism 

and of security in the midst of uncertain times around us. They 

approved of our prudent handling of the revenue surplus and 

our promise to maintain fiscal stability with our growth and 

financial security fund. 

 

They also responded to another commitment that we made 

clear. We are committed to ensuring that our new prosperity 

will reach everyone in the province. We want everyone to 

participate in the benefits of our strong economy, especially the 

more vulnerable people in our province — the ones at the 

less-fortunate end of the economic ladder, the low-income 

individuals and families. We will make sure that they feel the 

benefits. 

 

We have already heard announcements in the opening days of 

this session that are part of a plan to fulfill those commitments. 

A few days ago the Minister of Social Services announced that 

the seniors’ income plan benefit would be more than doubled, 

from $90 to $190 per month. It’s really hard to believe that this 

is the first increase these folks have seen since 1992, Mr. 

Speaker. The Minister of Social Services also announced a $76 

million investment in a new income plan for people with 

intellectual disabilities which will help improve their lives. 

 

But the benefit that will affect most families in the province is 

coming to them in the most practical form — tax relief. Taking 

decisive action, our Premier raised the tax exemption amount 

from 8,945 to 12,945 per year. This is the largest ever, 

single-year tax cut in the history of our province. This plan 

gives the most help to the people who most need it and gives 

them the freedom to chose how to use the money they save. 

 

The tax change means that 80,000 people are now no longer 

paying income tax which they simply could not afford to do. 

These are the best, most-generous tax advantages in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many people commented that they were reassured to see the 

large payment toward reducing our provincial debt. By doing 

this, we are saving 900 million in interest payments over five 

years — 900 million that can be used to repair roads, build 

schools, and add possibly more hospital beds. 

 

Under The Growth and Financial Security Act, one-half of our 

surplus will be dedicated each year to paying down the debt. 

We put $2.6 billion or over 40 per cent of the total toward that 

debt this year alone, Mr. Speaker. With current economic 

conditions continuing, it is entirely possible that we could be 

debt free by the end of our first mandate. 

 

We are painfully aware of the infrastructure deficit that we 

inherited and now must attend to. Again this government is 

showing leadership in taking the kind of strong, decisive action 

that our province has long been waiting for. To respond to the 

infrastructure needs, we have committed $1.5 billion towards 

rebuilding our roads, hospitals, and our schools. 

 

In the past few days we have heard my colleagues tell us 

situations that went disregarded for 16 years and have already 

— in one year, Mr. Speaker — begun to improve. My 

colleagues in the House have been telling us about roads that 

were allowed to totally disintegrate for 16 years and are now 

seeing a paving machine for the very first time. 

 

In June my ministry announced further funding towards the 

much-needed facility upgrade of IPSCO Place. Facility 

improvements must be done if we expect to compete with other 

centres in hosting events, events which attract visitors and bring 

revenue into our city and into our province. The actions our 

government is taking will build a stronger, fiscally sound 

Saskatchewan and will have a profound benefit on us and on 

our next generation. 

 

But the Throne Speech also spoke of a better life, and I’d like to 

address that aspect of it. An important function of the Ministry 

of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport is to focus on quality of 

life issues and on building pride in our great province. That 

pride, Mr. Speaker, sadly needs to be built up, to be restored 

from the beating it has experienced over the last 16 years. We 

used to be a province of apologists, Mr. Speaker, hanging our 

heads because we were a have-not province. Well no longer, 

Mr. Speaker. We are now leading the nation in so many areas, 

and we need to raise our expectations, to encourage people to 

dream a little about the things that make community life more 

enjoyable and more attractive. 

 

I frequently say that economic success will bring more people 

to our province. I don’t think that’s in dispute, but it will be the 

quality of life that makes them want to stay right here. How do 

you measure quality of life? It needs to be measured in more 

than concrete numbers, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly tied to 

economic success, but it goes beyond that. It is measured in the 

enjoyment of cultural and social amenities such as art, music, 

dance, theatre, sport and recreation, music, museums, and films 

— all the things which give meaning and joy to our lives. 

 

A province which cannot offer a range of artistic and cultural 

activities is a stale, barren place to live, Mr. Speaker. That is 

why my ministry is concentrating on bringing new structure and 

strength to our arts and cultural sector. We recently announced 

the release of a cultural policy framework which will give 

much-needed structure for funding and program delivery to the 

sector. 

 

We are offering predictability, support, and new confidence to 

our arts and culture community so that artists and performers 

can thrive and find success right here at home. We are in fact 

telling the province, we believe in a vibrant, cultural, arts, and 

heritage sector. 

 

We will also be introducing the arts professions Act which will 

require written contracts between engagers and artists and will 

protect the intellectual rights of artists. 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

Quality of life is also enhanced when one can enjoy the natural 

beauty around us, and we in Saskatchewan are truly blessed 

with many gorgeous parks and lakes. I have to report, however, 

that some of our parks are in a state of considerable disrepair 

from years of neglect, and one such park being Blackstrap— the 

park the NDP forgot. 

 

To improve infrastructure and services in our provincial parks, 

we have budgeted $20 million over four years. Last spring we 

committed to creating an additional 1,000 electrified campsites 

over a four-year period. And we already have 442 done, almost 

half the total number well under way. 

 

Quality of life also means taking pride in the character and 

distinctiveness of our communities, our heritage and history, 

and our culture. In this regard, we have been working with other 

partners, such as the regional tourism authorities and Aboriginal 

Tourism Association to ensure that we highlight the 125th 

anniversary of the 1885 North-west Resistance rebellion, a very 

important piece of our history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have doubled the funding to the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Foundation, allowing them to increase the number of grants to 

worthy heritage projects. 

 

We have begun consultations with rural and urban 

municipalities to develop new tourism, sport, culture, and 

recreational infrastructure programs. 

 

At the same time, we are promoting our province to the new 

West. We are excited to be working on the cultural Olympiad 

for the 2010 Olympics and Paralympic Games, and we will 

ensure that Saskatchewan has a strong presence. And we will 

showcase the true Saskatchewan to the world. 

 

We also place great importance on offering sport and cultural 

activities to raise healthy, well-rounded children, so we 

introduced the active families benefit. Beginning in January 

2009, families will receive a $150 tax benefit to help them with 

the cost of enrolling their children in sports, recreational, or 

cultural activities. We anticipate that this will apply to about 

120,000 children with a tax savings to families of 

approximately 18 million. 

 

My own constituency, which takes in communities of White 

City, Balgonie, and Pilot Butte, is undergoing phenomenal 

growth these days. There are more and more young families 

moving into the area. And young families want their kids to be 

able to participate in hockey, dance, swimming lessons, soccer 

teams, basketball — you name it, Mr. Speaker. They have told 

me how much they appreciate this benefit. 

 

There is new life, new vibrancy out there, not the same old, 

tired defeatism. Instead of apologizing, Mr. Speaker, we are 

looking to be the best — the leaders. And we’re saying, come to 

Saskatchewan. See what we have to offer. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan does have a lot to offer. 

 

We are looking to the future, and we are seeing exciting times 

ahead. The creation of Innovation Saskatchewan demonstrates 

our desire to be at the forefront in the energy sector, in securing 

the knowledge economy of the future, and in undertaking 

programs toward a greener environment. 

These are indeed exciting times, Mr. Speaker, and my 

constituents feel the momentum. They gave us a solid mandate 

in November last year, and they remain absolutely confident 

that a Saskatchewan Party government is the right choice to 

lead us into the great times ahead. Mr. Speaker, I do not support 

the amendment, however I proudly support the 2008 

Saskatchewan Speech from the Throne. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it truly is a pleasure to rise and join in the debate on 

the Speech from the Throne. And before I really get started on 

my comments, I’d really like to pass along, first and foremost, a 

thank you to my constituents in Moose Jaw Wakamow for their 

input, their advice, and their wonderful support over this past 

year. 

 

And I’d also like to pass along a huge thank you to my staff in 

the constituency office in Moose Jaw, Stacey and Charlene, 

who do a wonderful job and work hard providing information 

and good advice and direction to the constituents in Moose Jaw. 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I have to say they give a fair bit of good 

advice and direction to the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] also, which is always appreciated. 

 

And most importantly I’d like to thank my family. And I think 

there isn’t one of us in this Assembly who will dispute the fact 

that without the patience and the understanding of family, none 

of us would be able to do the job we do and represent our 

constituencies. So a huge thank you to family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whenever we have a Throne Speech, a budget, or 

a piece of legislation that comes into the Assembly, my first 

thoughts are always to my constituents. I think of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and the people that live there, and I always ask the 

question, how will any of these new proposals or initiatives 

affect them? Will these new initiatives being proposed, will it 

benefit the people that live in Moose Jaw Wakamow? And how 

will these new initiatives that are being proposed or announced 

improve their lives? 

 

And with the Speech from the Throne and this past week— 

which is continuing, by the looks of it, this week — of an 

announcement a day, these same questions have crossed my 

mind numerous times. And while there’s no shortage of 

comments that could be made as to the priorities and the areas 

that this government has chosen to focus on, today I’d really 

like to make a number of comments and give thoughts to the 

answers to those questions that run through my mind. 

 

First and foremost, over the summer I think all of us spent time 

talking to constituents, attending community events. And I have 

to say, Mr. Speaker, not once throughout the summer did I hear 

the call for lower income tax. 

 

People have spoken often of property tax and the overreliance 

on property tax for education funding. People expressed their 

concerns that they have for the lack of funding for our school 

division, Prairie South, that they receive from the provincial 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

government, but not once has income tax been raised as an 

issue. 

 

Many believed that the government’s focus on property tax 

while in opposition and in their first Throne Speech would 

translate into quick, substantial action. A number of folks asked 

me why the flip-flop from government. Was property tax not an 

issue any more? And as I explained to them, that this 

government is purely on a political timetable, and we won’t see 

any permanent solution to education financing and an end to the 

overreliance on property tax until the year of the next provincial 

election in 2011. 

 

This government has decided to study the issue even though 

they complained many times that it had been studied to death 

and it was action that they wanted to see. But they decided to 

study the issue one more time, and give themselves purely an 

excuse to delay any permanent solution. Even though they 

wanted changes made while in opposition, and even though 

there are options ready to address the issue, they are delaying 

making a decision on this issue and have instead focused on 

income tax. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, income tax, which I 

might add is more in line with the right wing political parties 

who believe lower income tax is a panacea for all ills. 

 

Will my constituents feel some relief from the changes to 

income taxes? They more than likely will, but it won’t be until 

next spring when they fill out their income tax and maybe, just 

maybe, it will be enough to help pay property tax. But definitely 

it’s not at all what was hoped for by either residents or 

businesses in my community of Moose Jaw. 

 

Now the new announcement for increased infrastructure 

funding has been met with some skepticism in my community, 

and rightly so. Last year the minister used the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital project as an example in the budget speech 

when he was announcing infrastructure funding but, Mr. 

Speaker, there has never been an announcement made to say 

that our project received any of the funding that was announced 

last year. I guess Moose Jaw Union Hospital project was purely 

an example and nothing more. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The member from Moose Jaw North said in the local newspaper 

that, and I quote, “Capital was in place for the Moose Jaw 

project,” but there has been no clear answers from the Ministry 

of Health and no concrete signs of any advancement of the 

project in our community. So the jury is still out as to whether 

this announcement will improve the lives of Moose Jaw and 

area residents, and we’ll just have to wait for details to be 

released and continue asking questions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that the announcements made 

this past week concerning the seniors’ income plan, the 

disability funding, and CBO funding are all very welcome. 

These are areas that needed attention and are appropriate 

investments to be made when the government is sitting on huge 

resources that are calculated in the billions of dollars. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I do appreciate and I do applaud those announcements. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, over this past summer in the events that I’ve 

attended, other comments that I received have reflected poorly 

on this government’s lack of action in our provincial 

agricultural sector and the lack of support for producers across 

the province. For a government who believes they are the only 

ones that understand rural Saskatchewan, they seem to be 

totally ignoring — and worse yet, taking for granted — the 

folks they believe are their main support. 

 

I’ve heard issues raised over the vague nature of the crop 

insurance review. I’ve heard concerns raised over the lack of 

proactive programming for water conservation and storage. And 

this is especially in areas that are suffering from no spring 

runoff and drought. I’ve also heard concerns from 

Saskatchewan livestock producers that they’ve been left to 

struggle through some tough market situations while producers 

in other provinces have received program support from their 

provincial government. 

 

Commodities are down, prices have been dropping all summer, 

and inputs are climbing at a staggering rate. Fuel, fertilizer, and 

natural gas costs are all up, and with electricity soon to follow 

and, Mr. Speaker, not a word from the minister. 

 

This government expects farm families and producers to be 

happy with an increase to their personal exemption when they 

calculate their taxes next spring. Despite a year of good crops 

and many, many difficulties, despite the year of good crops, Mr. 

Speaker, many difficult issues are knocking on producers’ 

doors. 

 

The minister who, and I quote, “said just about anything” while 

in opposition, is now strangely quiet, saying and doing nothing. 

There is absolutely nothing in the Speech from the Throne that I 

can see that improves the lives of my constituents in the rural 

area of Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another area where there has been a sad lack 

of action is on the housing file. The government is quite happy 

to cut ribbons and to take part in photo opportunities on projects 

that were begun and funded by the previous government. But 

what initiatives have they started to address the wait-lists that 

are right across the province? Well the answer is easy. It’s easy 

to remember but not easy to take. It’s zero. $3.1 billion in 

surplus and not one project has been begun to address the issue 

of wait-lists. Wait-lists for seniors, wait-lists for affordable 

family housing, and wait-lists for low-income housing are 

growing across the province, but we’ve only seen a limited 

response from this government. 

 

The few initiatives that have been announced only affected the 

major cities. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen and a couple of 

months ago the government come out and made a huge 

response to the affordability of housing across the province. It 

sounded like a good announcement until we actually started to 

look at the details and realized that there was nothing in the 

shelter allowance for families struggling in Moose Jaw. There 

was nothing in the shelter allowance for citizens struggling in 

Swift Current, nothing in the shelter allowance for families 

struggling in Estevan. There was nothing in the shelter 

allowance for families struggling in Weyburn and nothing for 

families in Yorkton. 

 

It’s a travesty, Mr. Speaker, that this government sits on the 

surplus that it is — $3.1 billion — and families across the 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

province can’t find or can’t afford a decent place to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most common comments that I’ve heard 

recently, just probably over the past few days, have without a 

doubt been over the Sask-first policy imposed on our Crown 

corporations. Restricting the Crowns’ ability to operate as a 

business really devalues an asset that belongs to the people of 

the province. The Crowns are an investment made by the people 

of Saskatchewan, an investment that has seen Saskatchewan at 

the leading edge in providing high-quality, low-cost service all 

across this province, and an investment that has returned 

dividends to the people of this province. 

 

The Crown corporations will now with this policy be expected 

to operate in competitive markets, handcuffed by a right wing 

political ideology and the heavy hand of the Saskatchewan 

Party government. Resources have been stripped from the 

Crowns already. Now profitable subsidiaries are flagged for 

sale, and core responsibilities are being peeled off in the guise 

of working with partners. Many media reports express concern 

over the policy, and citizens, Mr. Speaker, citizens need to be 

extremely concerned and vocal in opposing what is the 

beginning of the privatized utilities in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is some good things that come out of the 

Throne Speech, though. I’ve mentioned a couple. And the 

province, as we’ve all seen, has accumulated some huge 

surpluses over this past year, and I was very pleased to see the 

government designate the funding using a formula that was 

established by the previous government that has three basic 

pillars: debt paydown — which is always good, paying less 

interest — tax reduction, and programming. This has been a 

basic policy that has been used for many years, and I’m pleased 

that the Saskatchewan Party has again decided that this is the 

best use of a surplus. 

 

Previously though, with this large of an increase in spending 

and the week of announcements that has followed and looks 

like it’s continuing, we would expect to see some projections, a 

four-year projection of revenue for the province. These 

projections really would address any concerns that we have for 

the sustainable nature of the announcements and would show in 

fact that the books are in order and that there’s proper planning 

in place. But, Mr. Speaker, there has been no projections for 

revenues forthcoming. And an unsettling part of the 

announcement that was made on tax reduction was the 

comments and the admission that revenue numbers had, and I 

quote, “not yet been nailed down” and a comment that they 

would be released later. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how do you make long-term tax reductions 

and hope that they are sustainable without clear and concrete 

projections on your revenues? They go hand in hand. And to 

make your announcements and do a week or so of good news 

announcements, it’s all fine, but what’s the sustainability of all 

of the programming and the tax reductions that have been 

announced? We have to wait to see until they have nailed down 

the revenue numbers. 

 

And it’s also a little more unsettling when we see the economic 

conditions across the world, because Saskatchewan is not an 

island. We are not without influences from outside forces, and 

when we see concerns in economies across the world, there are 

concerns for what happens here in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we will just have to wait and see. 

 

But I have to say it is a concern, and making announcements 

before we see any of the four-year projections for revenues is 

kind of like putting the cart before the horse, and it’s so bad that 

we’re not sure if the cart even has wheels or not, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, only time will tell. 

 

And I know the member from Indian Head would love to get up 

and speak. I wish he would wait till it’s his turn if he has so 

many comments to make, but he doesn’t like the comments I’m 

making. He doesn’t like the comments I’m making, and I 

wonder why. Have we hit too close to home when we have 

concerns over the four-year revenue projections? 

 

Mr. Speaker, time will tell. But for now there are way too many 

gaps and unanswered questions in this Speech from the Throne, 

and I most definitely will be supporting the amendment. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education, the 

member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour and a privilege to stand in 

the Legislative Assembly again to reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canora-Pelly constituency is a great 

constituency, and I want to begin by thanking all of the 

constituents right across from Hudson Bay to Yorkton, because 

that’s the extent of the constituency, for continually offering 

their advice, offering their help, and offering the advice and 

suggestions, Mr. Speaker, to be able to move the province of 

Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have lived in or near the Canora-Pelly 

constituency all my life, but I haven’t really moved from the 

place that I lived for all of my life, Mr. Speaker. And the reason 

for that is, and I want people to understand, that in 1995 when I 

was elected, the community of Invermay was in the 

Canora-Pelly constituency. But when the NDP did their 

redrawing of boundaries, of course that area was moved out of 

the Canora-Pelly constituency. But I’ve been fortunate that the 

people of Canora-Pelly recognize that the hard work that I put 

in, that I try to put in, is for their benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to extend my appreciation also to my 

staff. Mr. Bob Blahay has been with me for well on to 12 years, 

Mr. Speaker, as my constituency assistant. He comes from the 

community of Preeceville and travels daily to my office in 

Canora and understands the many communities — we have 

about 19 urban communities in our constituency — and he 

understands the activities. He understands the makeup of 

councils whether they be urban councils or rural councils, and 

he has the ability to pick up the phone or to do an email to so 

many of my constituents. 

 

I also want to extend my appreciation to two of my part-time 

staff, Carol Sleeva and Brandi Zavislak, who do just an 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

outstanding job. Carol also works for me here as a ministerial 

assistant part-time, and is providing that link between the 

constituency and the job that I now have as Minister of 

Education. 

 

I also want to, you know, maybe apologize to a bit of a degree 

to the people of Canora-Pelly because now as a minister in the 

government it’s more difficult to get back into the constituency 

for events on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday. So 

the fact that I have not been present physically as much as I 

would like to be is of concern, and we’re going to try to work 

on that. 

 

I also want to extend my appreciation to my family. As many of 

my colleagues know, my spouse, my wife Gail, has recently 

superannuated as a teacher in this province after having taught 

for nearly 36 years as both a teacher and a principal. So while 

her education career has ended, now we have the opportunity of 

course to do many more things together that were put on hold 

before. 

 

I want to extend my appreciation to my children as well. My 

son, Bryce, and his wife, Olivia, and our little granddaughter, 

Willow, will have now taken up residency in Yorkton. And 

Bryce’s move as a teacher from Strasbourg to Churchbridge, 

while difficult, of course he’s looking forward to the future as 

well. And I wish them well. And of course I want to extend my 

appreciation to Lindsay, our daughter in Calgary, who does 

email me and calls me to ensure that I’m listening to her as 

well. 

 

Canora-Pelly constituency relies on agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

And this year the agricultural community, especially in the 

grain sector, we have had a phenomenal harvest. There have 

been examples, of course, of hail storms and other situations, 

but the overall return for farmers, the yields, the quality has 

been outstanding . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I have had the comment from many of our farmers 

in the Canora-Pelly constituency who said, after dozens and 

dozens of years of farming, that in fact this year was the best 

year ever. And it will allow farmers the opportunity to catch up 

on some bills, to deal with some of the conditions — the high 

input costs — and maybe even make a dollar or two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to also mention that the Canora-Pelly 

constituency is in the centre of some very interesting 

developments. We now have two different companies who are 

exploring for shale gas in the constituency. A company referred 

to as Nordic Oil and Gas Ltd. has recently, through drilling for 

shale gas, discovered oil just north of Preeceville. And of 

course, the oil has been discovered but we’re not sure yet, and 

they’re doing testing as to see whether or not this has 

commercial viability. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned in the Assembly 

before, Panterra resources has been drilling wells, test wells for 

a great number of months now — in fact it’s I believe over a 

year and a half — and they have exploration wells. They have 

continued with a fracture process so that they can determine 

whether or not these gas wells indeed are going to be able to 

supply a much needed natural resource, Mr. Speaker. So those 

are exciting developments. 

 

But one of the other developments regarding agriculture and our 

reliance in Canora-Pelly on things that go on in other parts of 

the province are the examples of the canola crushing plants that 

are going to be built in the city of Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, the 

Canora-Pelly area grows a lot of canola and with the possibility 

of two canola crushing plants, the opportunity to ensure that 

there’s a market will indeed be profitable for those farmers as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin on the full context of my remarks, I 

do want to extend my congratulations to the member for 

Cumberland. The member for Cumberland recently elected in a 

by-election and having served on the Board of Education of the 

Northern Lights School Division as its Chair — I know it 

means now that the board of course is going to be filling that 

vacancy — but he does come with a strong commitment to 

community, a strong commitment to ensuring that the students 

in the Cumberland constituency and in the Northern Lights 

School Division . . . So I wish him well in his tenure here as the 

member of the Legislative Assembly for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to outline a number of actions 

my government is taking to ensure a stronger Saskatchewan and 

a better life for all through investments in education. 

 

In the 2008 Speech from the Throne we promised that efforts to 

engage First Nations and Métis students will extend throughout 

the education system. As you know, in Saskatchewan we have a 

young and growing First Nations and Métis population. We 

have committed to ensuring that instruction on the history and 

content of the treaties is mandatory in the provincial 

kindergarten to grade 12 system, and we are moving forward on 

this commitment. 

 

We are working closely with the Office of the Treaty 

Commissioner and have recently released new treaty education 

materials to be field tested in schools throughout the province 

as one way to help students achieve a better understanding of 

treaties. As well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s renewed 

provincial curriculum will place First Nations and Métis 

content, perspectives, and ways of knowing throughout the 

curriculum. 

 

I am pleased to report that Saskatchewan will also be leading 

the Aboriginal Education Summit in 2009. This summit will 

bring together education ministers and officials from across 

Canada, as well as national Aboriginal leaders. An invitation 

will also be extended to federal government representatives. 

 

We value the strong relationships with First Nations and Métis 

partners that focus on improved outcomes and achievements for 

all learners. Part of this includes our work with all of our 

education partners through the Provincial Panel on Student 

Achievement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, improving and maintaining our province’s 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

infrastructure is closely linked with growing our economy, 

improving our quality of life, and taking pride in where we live. 

I am pleased to report that this government has already made 

significant progress in addressing the infrastructure deficit 

created by years of neglect in the education system. So far over 

$117 million has been committed in the budget to new 

construction and refurbishing existing schools. This includes 

moving forward school capital projects in Maple Creek, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Oxbow, Duck Lake, 

Humboldt, Porcupine Plain, and La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to those projects announced 

already we also announced approval in principle of another $60 

million which are projects that will start in 2009. These 

projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, include Elrose comprehensive, 

Hafford Central, Regina’s Arcola Community School, Regina’s 

Douglas Park Elementary School, and Campbell Collegiate, 

Saskatoon’s St. Mary Community School, and the Weyburn 

Comprehensive School. My colleague from Weyburn will 

appreciate that announcement, Mr. Speaker. Funding was also 

committed to support Humboldt Elementary and Turnor Lake in 

2010-11, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Our government has made a commitment to take a 

forward-looking approach to any government surpluses, using 

half to pay down debt and investing half in our province’s 

infrastructure. This is the first year of a three-year development 

and implementation plan for a comprehensive school facilities 

strategy. This strategy will help ensure high quality, right size 

schools where they are needed that support students in learning 

for their futures. 

 

Under the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under their watch, there 

was very little done to address school capital. That’s why we 

are facing a $1.2 billion school infrastructure deficit crisis. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the major capital list for 2008 to 2012 is 

published during the summer. And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the projects that are listed here, there are 96 

projects, and the School Boards Association is looking at in fact 

even a larger number than what we have indicated but that is 

nearing $1 billion or, as the School Boards Association has 

said, $1.2 billion of infrastructure deficit that that NDP 

government left behind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the commitment we have demonstrated and 

the investment we have put forward in the first year of our 

mandate, the Saskatchewan School Boards Association states, 

and I quote, “. . . [it] is encouraged by the government’s 

commitment to provide a long-range facility planning 

framework.” Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Dianne 

Woloschuk said, and I quote, “When was the last time K-12 

education has seen such increases.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to continuing to 

move forward with new capital projects. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the number of projects moved forward thus far demonstrates 

that our government understands the importance school 

infrastructure plays in supporting continued economic growth in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 16 years under the NDP 

there was no economic growth so they did not have to deal with 

overcrowding issues. 

 

In the 2008 Speech from the Throne, we also noted that we 

would soon be making an announcement that would benefit the 

technological infrastructure of schools and libraries. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Monday, October 27, to kick off 

Education Week 2008, I had the pleasure of announcing $10 

million in funding for technology improvements for 

Saskatchewan schools, public libraries, and regional colleges. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, by investing in 

technology infrastructure, our government wants to ensure that 

all citizens have access to information, resources, and learning 

opportunities that prepare them for the future. The province is 

investing $5.2 million over four years to implement a single 

integrated library system, or SILS. This includes $1.3 million 

for purchasing local branch library computers. 

 

SILS is a cost-effective, sustainable computer platform that 

allows the 317 local public library branches in the province’s 10 

public library systems to share their resources. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m just going to mention the public libraries within 

my constituency that will now have the opportunity to upgrade 

their hardware and ensure that they can take part within SILS 

— Pelly, Norquay, Preeceville, Sturgis, Canora, Kamsack, 

Togo, Springside, and Buchanan. And I know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, right across the government, and including some of the 

members opposite, they will have the opportunity to see the 

investment of this government actually helping the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new system 

will allow for easier and equally accessible library services for 

the province’s 500,000 registered users. That’s right, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There are 500,000 users of the public libraries 

within this province, and they are going to be able to benefit 

from this announcement. 

 

Allan Johnson, director of the Southeast Regional Library, 

characterizes this announcement as the most significant since 

1967 when regional libraries were first developed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That’s how important it is to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The education technology infrastructure 

funding of more than $4 million will benefit three primary 

infrastructure components: the live satellite network, 

CommunityNet, and the blackboard learning management 

system. 

 

The live satellite network will now provide audio and video 

conferencing interactive broadcasts and will be expanded so all 

pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] schools can 

participate in education programming delivered through the 

network. CommunityNet connections across the province will 

be upgraded in many locations and made available in all 

schools, public libraries, and regional colleges. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, also the Blackboard Learning Management System 

will be available to more students and teachers and will offer 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

new features such as collaborative tools, courses, and resources.  

 

Ernie Cychmistruk, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association said, and I quote: 

 

Our association is particularly pleased with the expansion 

of the LIVE Satellite Network. The fact that the satellite 

hardware and supports will soon be in every Saskatchewan 

school — rural and urban — holds a great deal of promise 

for enhancing learning opportunities for our students. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see the reaction right across the 

province, from all of the 10 public library boards, from the 317 

individual libraries, from our partners in the school system, and 

who will be ensuring now that we can provide the same 

equitable resources to all students, no matter where they live in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our youngest citizens and their parents 

also need our continued support. More and more families are 

recognizing the benefits of quality early learning and child care. 

The growth in our economy is increasing the need for child care 

spaces. In the 2008-09 year, we have invested 500 new child 

care spaces that are now opening up in communities across the 

province. The total number of licensed child care spaces is now 

10,400, reflecting the 2008-09 increase of 1.7 million. This will 

allow more parents to work or further their education and 

participate in our province’s economy.  

 

I am pleased to report that we have also increased the number of 

pre-kindergartens in the province by 38. That’s 38 new 

programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This means that there are now 

193 pre-kindergarten programs across the province serving over 

3,000 children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our commitments to early 

learning and child care are works in progress, and this is work 

that will continue. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, an important priority of government 

is our promise to reduce the education portion of property tax. 

Our commitment to reducing the education portion of property 

taxes by doubling rebates over the next four years is on track. 

This year the agricultural property tax credit was increased from 

38 per cent to 47 per cent, and the commercial and residential 

property tax credit was increased from 10 per cent to 12 per 

cent. In the 2009-10 budget, these credits will be increased to 

56 per cent and 15 per cent respectively, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

That’s a promise that we made during our election campaign, 

and that’s a promise we intend to keep, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — While this is a tremendous first step, 

and I recall the former premier of the NDP when he said at a 

convention that . . . And I believe it was about four years ago 

when he said status quo was not acceptable to the NDP. And 

they did nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are getting around to 

it now and we’re going to deal with this on a permanent basis, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — This is a good first step in shifting the 

tax burden from property owners to the provincial government. 

As you know, my colleague, the Legislative Secretary and 

Rosetown MLA has been tasked with conducting the review of 

the current Saskatchewan K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

education funding program and property taxation regimes. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that he has been hard at work, 

unlike what some of the members opposite are suggesting. My 

colleague has consulted with over 30 different groups from 

across the province as well as Alberta and Manitoba, including 

school divisions, education stakeholders, business groups, 

municipal organizations, and government officials from other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a request for written submission from 

Saskatchewan citizens was also made in early summer. A final 

report will be delivered to me in early 2009. We expect that this 

report will form the basis for reforming the education tax 

system and reducing the education portion of property taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are a few of 

the things that have been highlighted in the Throne Speech. 

They’ve been highlighted last spring. They are the first steps of 

a government that isn’t even one year old yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we have a number of incentives and programs 

within education that I’m so very proud of. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my mandate letter from the Premier, 

one of the first things that the Premier pointed out to me was, he 

said that the following initiative must be undertaken. And it was 

to revise The Education Act to improve the consultation and 

assessment process before significant changes are made to 

school facilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

And I’ve said this already a couple of times, but you have to 

ensure that everyone hears about it because not everyone 

watches the legislative channel or reads articles that are in the 

Leader-Post. The School Review Handbook was worked on by 

all stakeholders in the province of Saskatchewan: the Teachers’ 

Federation; the School Boards Association; the League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 

And they have worked diligently to come up with, I believe, a 

handbook that will assist. It will assist a number of 

communities, and it will help. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are four paragraphs in the 

opening page that I want to put on the record so that everyone 

in the province of Saskatchewan — whether they be a student, 

whether they be a teacher, whether they be a parent, whether 

they be just a taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan — 

understands the handbook and the reason for it. And I quote 

from the handbook, and it says this: 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy and population are growing and 

along with this growth comes hope and optimism for the 

future. 

 

However, in some parts of Saskatchewan, demographic 

shifts and decreasing birthrates have resulted in declining 

enrollments. With very small student numbers, it becomes 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

difficult to provide a complete educational program that 

responds to the needs of all students, to provide elective 

courses, and to attract administrators and specialist 

teachers. In some situations, aging school structures are an 

additional factor that must be considered. 

 

As a result, boards of education must make decisions 

about the viability of schools in some communities. In 

order to maintain the quality of educational programming, 

it is sometimes necessary to close schools with very small 

enrollments or reduce the number of grades or years 

offered. When grade or year reduction occurs, it is 

typically high school or middle years programs that are 

discontinued. 

 

This handbook was developed to provide information to 

communities, boards of education, school community 

councils and schools that may be facing the review of a 

school. This handbook describes the school review 

process, addresses practical matters associated with 

closing a school, defines a school of opportunity, and 

outlines the process that may lead to designation as a 

school of opportunity. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those few paragraphs, I think, tell 

the people of Saskatchewan that there is a process in place, that 

there are numbers, there are enrolment numbers where the 

ministry believes . . . that are needed to deliver a quality 

education program. There is also a consideration of distance, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that we can ensure that students, 

especially at the very young age, are not travelling huge 

distances by school bus to attend a school. And that is why we 

have instituted schools of necessity funding for those 

communities that are more than 40 kilometres away, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, from the next school. 

 

But we also have put in place a handbook, so that people 

understand that when an enrolment declines, when an enrolment 

of a particular school this year — that ended last year, at the end 

of June 2008 — the enrolment I believe was about 35 students 

in a K to 9 school. And the opening enrolment of that school 

this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is nine. Now the school board 

with that particular school within its school division boundaries 

is going to have to make a decision. And they have placed that 

school under review because The Education Act and the 

changes that we made clearly have extended the length of time 

that the board has to take to inform the public, to make its 

decision about school closure. 

 

One of the decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that by October 

15 — after the enrolment numbers are known, which is the 

September 30 numbers — by October 15 the board of education 

must decide to either place the school under review or not. And 

again it is the purview of the board to make that decision. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan there are four school divisions 

who have placed schools under review. That doesn’t mean that 

those schools are necessarily closing, but the board now will be 

following a process outlined in this document where now they 

will be able to communicate with the public. They will be 

establishing a committee, a review committee with members of 

the municipal councils as part of that review committee, to 

ensure that the public has an opportunity to describe what they 

see as the potential school for their community. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that we have helped. We 

have helped the rural communities, especially, understand what 

is needed to have a school that will be providing quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many things that have 

happened in this province in the education communities — the 

great things that have happened with community schools, the 

nutrition program, the child care spaces, the pre-kindergarten. I 

can go on and on. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can see . . . I think you can see that 

I’m very excited and very pleased with the Throne Speech that 

has been delivered by our Premier on behalf of this government. 

And I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Industry 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly my pleasure to enter the Throne 

Speech debate and speak about the priorities of our government 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Clearly the three priorities that were outlined in the Throne 

Speech, the major ones at least, were tax cuts, debt paydown, 

and infrastructure. Very important initiatives on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Clearly the tax cuts were historic 

in nature, the largest tax cut in the history of our province. Each 

and every person in Saskatchewan will benefit from these tax 

cuts. There will certainly be a great opportunity for people now 

to make priorities within their own lives and households, 

businesses, etc. in terms of the priorities that they have for 

themselves and their families. 

 

Debt paydown, of course very historic in that regard as well. 

We are moving, albeit gradually, but moving in a very positive 

way towards retiring the debt of the province of Saskatchewan 

— some 40 per cent of the debt paid down in one year in office. 

I think it’s a pretty good track record, I would say, for the 

province of Saskatchewan to see that kind of thing going 

forward. We’ve got a ways to go yet, but this government is 

clearly . . . puts that as a priority moving forward, to eliminate 

the debt here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In terms of infrastructure, we see a tremendous amount of 

resources being dedicated towards infrastructure, whether it’s 

highways, education facilities, health care facilities, the kinds of 

things that the people of Saskatchewan have been calling for, 

for some time.  

 

And I look towards the colleagues on the other side of the 

House and you look at the infrastructure deficit. I think the 

departments have looked at it, and it’s something in the 

magnitude of $15 billion of infrastructure deficit that there is in 

Saskatchewan just in highways, health care, education. 

 

And I couldn’t help but note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when 

the NDP were speaking about the Throne Speech, each and 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

every one of them that has spoke so far talked about how if only 

the people of Saskatchewan knew what all of the good things 

that the NDP had done for them, that they’d still be in office.  

 

And the fact of the matter is, is the people of Saskatchewan last 

year in November judged that administration, it judged them as 

wanting. It judged them clearly and said that the direction that 

they were taking for the province of Saskatchewan was the 

wrong direction, that the people of Saskatchewan wanted a new 

future in this province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan were tired of an administration 

that said things like we are the wee province. We are constantly 

going to be in and out of equalization. We are a province that, 

you know, simply cannot compete with other places in the 

world or indeed even in Canada. The fact of the matter is, is 

people are tired of that kind of attitude. And that’s why, 

members opposite, that you sit right where you are today. 

 

People want to see some optimism. People want to see a future 

that they can look towards for themselves and their families as a 

positive place to be, and that is exactly what they are seeing. 

 

In Saskatchewan, all across this province, we see a level of 

optimism that we haven’t seen probably in our lifetimes. People 

are looking at Saskatchewan in a much different way. And all 

you have to do is talk to some people from outside of the 

province. We have a huge group of ambassadors and high 

commissioners from around the world in Saskatchewan today 

and in the next few days, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they are 

saying that to us. In talking to them last night and this morning 

— at the reception last night and the event this morning — 

they’re saying that they are seeing a very definite change in 

Saskatchewan, a change in attitude, a level of confidence that 

they haven’t seen in Saskatchewan in a long, long time, if ever. 

 

They are looking at Saskatchewan and saying, this looks like a 

great place to invest. This looks like a great place to do 

business. This looks like a great place to work and be 

employed. And clearly that’s the message that they are seeing, 

and we are seeing, coming in from across the world. 

 

People are, in an unprecedented fashion, investing in 

Saskatchewan. In the area of cabinet responsibility that I have, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — the energy and resource sector — again 

we are seeing that same kind of unprecedented growth. One 

billion dollars in land sales this year so far. We still have one 

more land sale in this calendar year and two more land sales in 

this fiscal year. And the previous record, I think, was in 2005 — 

$200 million. We’re $800 million over that right now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And we’ll have another, at least one more in 

the calendar year and two more in the fiscal year. And we will 

continue to see that kind of growth. 

 

In addition to that, we are seeing in Saskatchewan about $1 

billion of extra resources coming in from the potash sector 

alone. And it’s interesting — when the NDP talk about the 

resource sector, they are very close to now saying that the 

province of Saskatchewan should be doing what Alberta did in 

terms of changing royalty structures. And I would caution 

members opposite, if you want to stifle the kind of growth that 

we are seeing in Saskatchewan, embark upon that trail because 

that’s exactly what happened in Alberta. 

It’s not where we want to go as an administration in 

Saskatchewan. We want to see that growth continue. We want 

to see that growth that we’re seeing all across Saskatchewan in 

the resource sector. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s certainly 

the direction that this government is going to take. We’ve just 

barely got it started here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our resource sector is very small in comparison to Alberta’s 

resource sector. But we’ve got the pump primed now, Mr. 

Speaker. The companies are coming in in an unprecedented 

fashion. We see, as I said, $1 billion worth of land sales so far. 

The multiplier effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of land 

sales, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers 

estimate that the multiplier effect from land sales is about seven 

or eight times. Because naturally the companies don’t just buy 

the land, because they clearly want to have producing wells on 

that land in order to get back their return on investment. So they 

get to work and do the exploration and then production and then 

obviously, you know, start paying back the land sale costs that 

they’ve encountered. So clearly we are going to see more and 

more growth in this sector for some time to come. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In the potash areas in our province, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing 

again unprecedented growth. And the companies, I believe it’s 

something in the magnitude of eight to eight and a half billion 

dollars worth of announced expansions in the potash industry. 

Tremendous activity again, once again for our province — 

employment opportunities, business activity — and a 

tremendous investment and an investment into the economy. 

And clearly they have a confidence level in Saskatchewan that 

we haven’t seen in a long time. 

 

In the resource sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would know 

that the NDP never anticipated any kind of growth in this area. 

And evidence of that is really quite clear that when it came to 

the opportunity for a new mine in Saskatchewan, a new potash 

mine, the NDP never anticipated that, and so the royalty 

structure is this sliding formula that doesn’t make any sense to 

almost anyone. The companies are taxed at different levels, 

which seems bizarre in itself. And they simply didn’t anticipate 

the fact that we would see any kind of growth or any kind of 

opportunity for a new greenfield mine, a new mining operation 

in Saskatchewan. So the resource tax on that is set at zero. If 

there is a new mine constructed, the resource tax is set at zero. 

So that’s something that as a government we’re going to have to 

deal with. 

 

We’re talking to the potash companies about that, what would 

be a fair and equitable system, what would be the appropriate 

levels of taxation for a new and emerging mining interest here 

in Saskatchewan. And we want to make sure that we get this 

right because we want to ensure that the companies look at 

Saskatchewan, as they have been, as a great place to invest 

rather than as a place that’s going to tax them out of existence 

as has happened in the past by the NDP administrations 

opposite. 

 

Last year in legislation we passed the potash repeal Act to 

repeal the legislation that was put in place in the ’70s and 

nationalized the industry. And the members opposite, it was 

interesting their reaction to that, kind of not wanting to really go 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

there. There was a few members — I can see them across the 

way from locally here in Regina — that were very, very 

defensive of the nationalization of the potash industry. 

Coronation Park comes to mind as one of them that was very, 

very adamant that they’d made all of the right decisions with 

respect to that. As a member of the NDP and someone that 

firmly believes in the Regina Manifesto, it’s no surprise to me 

that he’d be in support of that. The fact of the matter is, is the 

world has passed the members opposite by in many, many 

ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can think of again in the Throne Speech debate, we’ve 

heard a lot about the Crown corporations here in Saskatchewan. 

We have made the commitment that we’re not going to 

privatize the Crown corporations. And somehow out of those 

kinds of statements in the legislature and outside of the 

legislature, the NDP have concluded that somehow we’re going 

to just watch them wither away and work towards the 

elimination of them in a backdoor fashion. It couldn’t be further 

from the truth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could not be further from 

the truth. 

 

I remember in speeches over the years, listening to members 

opposite about Crown corporations, and I have to admit it made 

a little bit of sense. They were saying that, you know, there isn’t 

that much in terms of low-hanging fruit in terms of investments 

in Saskatchewan; maybe we have to go outside of 

Saskatchewan as Crown corporations and invest. And they 

assured the people of this province that they were going to be 

very, very prudent in those investments. 

 

They were going to go across the world, and they were going to 

critically assess these things. Due diligence was the buzzwords 

that I heard from every single member of the NDP opposite. 

They were saying that they were going to make sure that they 

made these investments in a very prudent fashion. And they 

were going to go into these other jurisdictions and make these 

investments and bring home money to invest in turn into 

Saskatchewan, thereby strengthening the Crown corporations 

and thereby building a better future for Saskatchewan people. 

And it made some sense, you have to admit. It made some sense 

that that would be a good investment strategy if you were good 

at making investments. 

 

The fact of the matter was, is that these so-called captains of 

industry opposite — the boys that are sitting at the back of the 

room there — were largely responsible. I think the gentleman 

on the left extreme, in many ways on the left extreme over 

there, was one of the ones that would go across the world, take 

a flight out of Regina, and head off down to Chile or other 

places in the world. And they would sit down and they’d do that 

critical assessment of these industries that they were going to 

invest in. And they would come back and they would say, 

we’ve found another one. We’ve found another great 

investment for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And what was the track record after that was all done? Out of 

26 investments, you have an absolutely perfect record — a loser 

in every occasion. A loser in every occasion, and that’s the part 

that is just so galling to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, was 

they were sold a bill of goods. They were told by these people, 

by the NDP opposite, that they were going to invest taxpayers’ 

hard-earned dollars and they were going to make a tremendous 

rate of return for them — 15 per cent rate of return. That was 

what the benchmark was going to be. 

 

You know, when you’re going to make an investment you sit 

down, you critically assess it. You say, here’s all of the 

benchmarks that we have to meet in order for this to be a 

successful investment, just as any investor would do — whether 

they’re investing in a mutual fund, whether they’re investing in 

a business, whether investing in any type of any investment 

opportunity that might present itself. 

 

So the NDP went through all of that due diligence and 

everything else. And then they came back and at the end of the 

day come back with losing 22 per cent. So a negative return, a 

negative return to the people of Saskatchewan — some $500 

million invested and that’s the rate of return that they came 

back with. And members opposite still say, they still say from 

their seats and they still say in their speeches in the legislature 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this was the right investment 

strategy. 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that anybody that would invest 

those kinds of dollars on behalf of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan and come up with that negative rate of return, it’s 

been an absolutely colossal failure on behalf of the taxpayers of 

this province. It is shameful. It was the wrong thing to do, your 

assessment in terms of all of these things. I can only imagine 

the projects that you invested in across the world on behalf of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. They must have been laughing at you 

as you left the building. They must have been thinking to 

themselves, we were finally able to find a sucker to unload this 

business opportunity on, and it came in the form of the former 

premier sitting over there. That was the type of thing that we 

saw in Saskatchewan. 

 

So what did we did do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We’ve taken the 

initiative to assess these investments. We’ve taken the 

opportunity to sit down. We’ve invited in a nationally 

recognized accounting firm to do an assessment of them. 

They’ve come back to us and said, here’s the track record. The 

numbers don’t lie. The numbers speak for themselves. 

 

If you’d have made the 15 per cent rate of return, if you’d have 

made the 15 per cent rate of return that you said you were going 

to, then you could say this was a successful investment strategy. 

But if you were an investment manager, I can tell you that the 

difference between private sector investment and the kinds of 

investment that you guys made as a government on behalf of 

taxpayers, if you were a private sector investment fund 

manager, you would’ve got fired after the very first one. You 

wouldn’t have had the opportunity to invest time after time after 

time after time. 

 

And I can see the member from North Battleford shaking his 

head and saying, that isn’t the case. Well I don’t know what is 

the case then. I don’t know what is the case then. You know, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when people pay their taxes, I 

think when they see on their cheque that there’s been a 

deduction to the provincial government, I think what they think 

is going to happen with those resources is, first of all it’s going 

to be invested in services here in Saskatchewan, whether it’s 

health care, whether it’s education, whether it’s highways, 

whether it is any other of a myriad of functions that government 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

provide. Those are the types of things that they, I believe, think 

that they . . . You know, they look at their cheque and they say, 

well as long it’s going to these areas, I can agree with that. 

 

But when you have a government opposite that decides that 

they’re going to all of a sudden become investment fund 

managers on behalf of them, I think that’s a very, very different 

situation, Mr. Speaker. I think they look at it and say . . . I think 

that people of Saskatchewan are very, very prudent in terms of 

those kinds of things, very, very cautious, very, very small “c” 

conservative in terms of these. They’re saying, all right, as long 

as you’ve got the investment criteria down as you have said, 

you know — 15 per cent rate of return — as long as you’re 

going to very critically assess these ventures, as long as they’re 

going to be for the benefit of Saskatchewan, I can go along with 

it. 

 

But the fact of the matter was, is that, as I’ve said earlier, it’s 

resulted in a colossal failure, a tremendous loss of resources for 

the people of Saskatchewan. And you look at the kinds of 

opportunities that that $500 million of investment would have 

had for Saskatchewan. We’d have seen things like a children’s 

hospital. We’d have seen much better highways in 

Saskatchewan. We’d have seen a much larger investment in 

educational institutions here in Saskatchewan. All of those 

kinds of things. And you know what drove that whole 

philosophy was that they felt that they were smarter than the 

average investor out there. 

 

They had that level of confidence in themselves that was 

unerring, and the NDP can do no wrong, Mr. Speaker. And we 

have heard that time and time and time. That comes through as 

a common thread in all of their speeches — the NDP can do no 

wrong. After all if the people of Saskatchewan would have only 

been paying closer attention, we wouldn’t be sitting on the 

opposition benches: that’s what you hear from them. 

 

And they’re saying that the ensuing good fortune that 

Saskatchewan has gone through in the last year since the 

election has had nothing to do with government policy. It has 

everything to do with what they did in the past. 

 

Well it’s a very, very sad commentary. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

what it says to the people of Saskatchewan is, essentially what 

it says to the people of Saskatchewan is, if you were only smart 

enough to understand what we were trying to do, you would’ve 

probably re-elected us. And the fact of the matter is that the 

people of Saskatchewan were much smarter than they thought 

they were, than the NDP gave them credit for. They took a look 

at some of these kinds of things and said no, we don’t want to 

be a part of that any longer. We want a change in attitude here 

in Saskatchewan. We want to see a government that takes the 

steps necessary and puts in place the building blocks to build a 

much stronger Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would argue that this Throne Speech does exactly that. 

 

And the reviews across the province are clear with respect to 

the Throne Speech and other initiatives that the government has 

put in place. All you have to do is read the editorial content 

from paper after paper after paper in Saskatchewan and sense to 

the people of this province that this is the right direction for 

government to move in, that we are moving in the right 

direction for the first time in a long time — that the old, tired 

NDP philosophy of the past was a failed philosophy. It’s a 

philosophy that has resulted in a stagnant economy for years 

and years and years. It’s resulted in the young people of this 

province leaving our province in droves to places like Alberta. 

 

And it’s interesting when you’re out there talking with people, 

many of the people are friends that I grew up and went to 

school with through the years that have now moved on and 

made tremendous careers for themselves outside of 

Saskatchewan. They may have left 25, 30 years ago, but when 

you talk to them, they say to you something that’s a very 

important fact that we should never forget. They say to you, you 

know, I still think of Saskatchewan as home. Even though they 

haven’t lived here in 25 years, they still call Saskatchewan 

home. They still do things like they cheer for the Riders. You 

know they’re very, very conscious of the political activity here 

in Saskatchewan. And now, what we are seeing is, is those 

people are saying there’s opportunity in Saskatchewan; they’re 

coming back home. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other things that’s a very 

interesting phenomena is that we see in Saskatchewan today is, 

when you look at . . . many of us, if not all of us, opposition 

members included, get opportunity to attend graduation 

ceremonies. I remember very distinctly in my constituency for 

years and years and years, and the members opposite if they 

were truthful with themselves, they would have heard this also. 

They would know that many of the young people would say 

that they, unfortunately in the past, can’t see an opportunity in 

Saskatchewan. They see their opportunity in Alberta, British 

Columbia, or other jurisdictions. Used to be something in the 

magnitude of 95 per cent of any graduating class would look at 

it and say, I’m moving out of this province as soon as I’ve got 

my education completed. 

 

Now we see that reversing trend, Mr. Speaker, where you’re 

talking to these school groups and graduating classes, and 

they’re saying the exact opposite. Saskatchewan is where I want 

to stay. Saskatchewan is where I want to build a career. 

Saskatchewan is where I want to be employed. Here’s where I 

want to build a life for myself and my family. That’s the kind of 

thing that we’re hearing across Saskatchewan, and that’s the 

kind of optimism, the unprecedented level of optimism that 

we’ve seen in Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:30] 

 

It’s also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s built on a level of trust. The 

people of Saskatchewan, yes, have voted the NDP in on a 

number of occasions. But in recent years, we’ve seen in a party, 

a political party that’s lost its way in many, many ways, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think this most recent situation in terms of the 

Murdoch Carriere incident is probably one of the most damning 

that I can ever imagine that a political party has to go through. 

 

And when you look at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here was an 

individual, here was an individual that abused some fellow 

employees in a horrendous fashion. Here were people that were 

. . . And then when it was found out to be the situation, the NDP 

did everything in its power to cover it up, right up to and 

including telling the people of Saskatchewan — after it became 

a full-blown public affair after that — that they fired Murdoch 

Carriere. 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Well the fact of the matter is, is that every single one of the 

members opposite know that that isn’t the case, and they took 

all kinds of steps to ensure that the people of this province did 

not know what the truth was. It’s only recently, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the people of this province are starting to see the 

true NDP for what they really are. The fact of the matter is, is 

they covered it up. The fact of the matter is, is they told the 

people of Saskatchewan something that was clearly not the truth 

in terms of whether this individual was fired or whether this 

individual actually resigned. 

 

So people in Saskatchewan now are seeing the NDP for what 

they are, Mr. Speaker. And what they are, parliamentary 

language does not allow for me to say what they really are. But 

the fact of the matter is, is people are looking at it and saying 

they were not told the truth by the NDP opposite, and I think 

this is going to be a very, very difficult time for the NDP 

opposite to explain this to the people of Saskatchewan for the 

next number of years about how you were not . . . You were not 

accurate in your assessment of all this I think would the most 

charitable way of putting it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this brings me back to the Throne Speech 

debate. The people of Saskatchewan have seen the type of 

priorities of this new administration. They like those priorities. 

They like those priorities here in Saskatchewan. We are very 

proud of what has happened in the last year in this province. We 

are very excited about the potential of our province for the first 

time in a long time. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be, along 

with my colleagues here, voting very much in favour of the 

Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great privilege 

for me to stand in this House and speak on behalf of the 

residents of Regina Lakeview, and I will have a number of 

comments, I think, from the residents of the whole of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I especially want to congratulate the member from 

Cumberland as he has taken his place here in this legislature. 

He follows in a long line of very capable members from that 

particular constituency. And by what we’ve seen so far, he’s 

showed the same kind of diligence and mettle and good 

judgment, and we look forward to working with him for many 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the residents of Regina 

Lakeview that there are many issues and positive things that 

come in this particular Throne Speech, but there are a number 

of difficulties as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many years ago I was a student of history, and one 

of my favourite topics when I was studying history at university 

was a subject called historiography. And many people don’t 

know what the definition of historiography is, but basically it’s 

the history of history. And the important thing about 

historiography, when you study that particular subject, is that 

you can see how the story changes depending on the time and 

the decade. And, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that the 

things that I’ve heard over the last number of days . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Lakeview 

has been given the floor. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that the things 

that I’ve heard over the last number of days describing the 

situation in our province and how things have been done remind 

me of that particular course, where you were continually 

looking out for the revisionist historians, and your job was to go 

and see who was telling the story and why they were saying 

things and why they were emphasizing particular points. 

 

And I think the speaker who just spoke to the House, the 

member from Kindersley, is a good example of somebody who 

has been around this particular place for a long time, but his 

perspective seems to shift. There are many kinds of things that 

we remember from the time that his party was in government 

and even from the time when he was leading that crew that . . . 

Well the stories kind of shift. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan have 

understood that basic perspective. I always say that the voters in 

Saskatchewan are very careful, and they look and they make 

some decisions about what should happen. They also recognize 

that everybody should have a chance. 

 

One of the things that I heard after the election just about a year 

ago was that, well we kind of voted with our fingers crossed 

this time. We’re going to give these guys a chance to see how it 

works. And I’d have to say that when I travelled in southeast 

Saskatchewan with the member from Rosemont and the 

member from Douglas Park, right into the heart of the 

constituencies of a number of the members including the 

Speaker, that we ended up hearing from many people that, well 

we’re watching very carefully. And the sense that I got in 

talking with people was that they’re still watching very 

carefully. And I think that the members opposite need to be 

very careful. 

 

Now what I would say is that this Throne Speech has a number 

of very careful policies in it that build on the work that was 

done over the last 30 years. And those kind of policies are good. 

And I talk about some of the things that happened in the 

highways and transportation. The members opposite have taken 

the good work that’s gone over the last number of years of the 

NDP government and expanded on that. Mr. Speaker, I think 

that in education we just . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that when 

some new members are in this House, they forget what it is that 

we’re elected to do. And so I think part of it is, you know, to 

listen to the ideas that are exchanged in this place. And so I 

think that we should proceed that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of the things that were set out by the 

Minister of Education today reflected a building on things that 

had happened over a number of years. Clearly there are more 

opportunities to do things this particular year because of the 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

revenues. We know that that can go up and down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also say that within the Health portfolio, 

there’s been many things that are being done that are building 

on the previous work, and I commend that. But I think that the 

people of Saskatchewan are watching very carefully because the 

key message is, we took a chance to see whether this new crew 

had the ability to move forward. We’re still holding judgment 

on that, and we’re watching every year. The one year 

anniversary will come up very soon. I think there are a number 

of people who are really questioning whether they did the right 

thing. And so we will continue to do that. 

 

Now there are some areas, Mr. Speaker, where there’s some 

problems that have arisen. One of those areas relates to the 

whole issue of how the new government seems to deal with the 

world. And it basically is this perspective that somehow we in 

Saskatchewan are our own entity. And, Mr. Speaker, I get the 

impression from a number of the statements made by some of 

the members opposite that they don’t recognize how much 

we’ve become a global community. 

 

I often remind my colleagues that when I was elected in 1995 

— and some of them were elected in ’91 as part of the new 

government — I was enthusiastic, and I was convinced there 

were many things that we could do. What I learned over many 

years as a minister of the Crown, working within our caucus 

and within our cabinet in developing policy, is that each year 

we had less ability to influence what was happening here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that the ability to make decisions that 

reflect what happens in Saskatchewan is less today than it was a 

year ago or so when these guys across were elected. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, if you don’t take that into account when you look 

at your long-term policies, you will get into major trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Douglas Park earlier today was 

talking about some of the policies around the Crowns. We know 

that the policy that was announced last week has already been 

panned by both the Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix. I wasn’t 

surprised, Mr. Speaker, but I think that the members opposite 

were very surprised. They saw this as a new, sort of, bright 

perspective. 

 

But I know from talking to my neighbours, talking to the people 

that I know within the Crowns and within the provincial 

government that when you start retreating into yourself, like a 

hermit crab retreats into its shell, you start losing a perspective 

on what’s happening. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there are a 

number of policies that this government is getting itself into — 

which are included in this Throne Speech — which reflect that 

kind of a perspective of retreat. And that’s exactly the wrong 

thing to do for a province like Saskatchewan which relies on 

incredible connections around the world. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that if I have any word of advice for 

the members opposite is that they need to go and see what’s 

happening in other places. When people come here to visit, 

listen to them carefully about how things are organized because 

some of the things and some of the perspective that they’ve 

presented are so inward-looking that they’re going to stunt the 

economic growth of Saskatchewan in ways that are quite 

incredible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when one looks at a corporation that you want to 

operate in a business-like fashion and you tell them that there’s 

no opportunity for growth or that the growth is going to happen 

in a place where they can’t see that that’s going to be a major 

revenue changer, you end up eliminating the possibilities and 

therefore eliminating the hope of building. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are a whole number of 

policies that have been set out and that are included in the 

Throne Speech but are set out other places that are not fully 

thought through. And I know that unfortunately some of the 

senior policy people who can provide some good, strong advice 

are no longer in the provincial government. I’m not sure. 

Hopefully there are some new people that have been hired that 

can provide that good, solid, independent advice, but what I’ve 

seen so far raises a lot of concerns for me. 

 

And I guess what I would say is, when you’re looking at the 

policies in Enterprise Saskatchewan, when you’re looking at 

how you step into working with business that you don’t throw 

out all of the things that we learned as a government about how 

you do some of these things. Frankly, people don’t believe it 

when ministers of the Crown now stand up and say we did this 

or we paid down that or we did this. They always come and 

they say, well we know where this really came. It was all of us 

working together and that the economic situation has presented 

some really good opportunities for the new government. So I 

encourage the members opposite, when they’re going forward 

and looking and developing this, that they actually build on 

some of the things that we’ve already done. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now another aspect that causes some concern for me relates to 

some of the responses around the climate change file. Very 

quickly the government took away close to a $300 million 

resource which was allocated for working on the climate change 

file. We haven’t seen much yet. We’re hoping that something is 

going to be coming. But, Mr. Speaker, there were some plans 

and some things that were set out where the resources have 

been removed and put into some other places. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite interesting that the Minister of 

Environment has lots of things to say from her seat. We would 

prefer if she set out her plan and what she’s going to do. 

 

I think what happens is there’s a whole number of areas in this 

Throne Speech where there are some clear plans that need to be 

laid out, but they’re not being laid out. The public knows that 

and they’re asking questions, and they do need resources to do 

some of those things. 

 

Another area that comes up no matter where I travel in the 

province relates to housing, and this is a challenge that is there 

in every community. When we were in Estevan — well I think 

it’s about a month or so ago — one of the points that they made 

was that there were close to 1,000 jobs in that area. People 

would come in from other places because they’d heard about 

this, but when they couldn’t find a place to live, they had to 

move on. I’ve heard that in other communities. We see that in 

the paper on a regular basis. And that is a serious issue that 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

requires a co-operative government response, and we haven’t 

really seen anything yet that is going to deal with that particular 

issue. So you will hear from us that, as opposition, we’ll be 

reflecting what we hear from our constituents in that whole 

housing area, because you can’t build a community without 

having decent places for people to live and to make a 

commitment to being part of the community. 

 

Another part of this Throne Speech that seems to have some 

real difficulties relates to some of the discussions around one of 

the most challenging aspects of the future of Saskatchewan, and 

that’s the area that’s been described in working with First 

Nations and Métis people around the duty to consult, dealing 

with resources, and how we allocate resources to make sure that 

many of the people who have been left behind in our 

community are included. 

 

This is a complicated area that’s not going to be solved in any 

simple fashion. It’s going to take a lot of work and co-operation 

from the federal government, provincial government, local 

municipalities, RMs, and cities, but it’s going to take some 

leadership from within this legislature, within this place. There 

are some very clear signs of hope. But I think there are also 

some great misunderstandings, and there are some frustrations 

or dashing of hopes that have taken place over the last year 

where we need to make sure we get a little different perspective 

that allows for a solution. 

 

And I’m not certain, Mr. Speaker, where and how one gets the 

answer, but I’m convinced that it will come through 

co-operation and working together with all people, including 

many of us on this side of the House who have many years of 

experience in trying to solve some of these particular problems. 

And so there’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of where you can say 

words, but basically it’s going to come down to what are the 

relationships and how they build . 

 

And that brings me on to another area where I think that this 

particular Throne Speech glosses over or doesn’t reflect a major 

concern of many people in Saskatchewan. And that relates to 

this government’s relationship with working people and with 

labour. And, Mr. Speaker, it serves no good purpose to be at 

war with working people’s representative agencies, because it 

causes difficulties on a whole number of levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may be that it’s time for some new leadership 

within some of those files or some new perspective within how 

this happens, but it is a time where there needs to be some 

discussion and some change in attitude, because the province 

will not grow as long as people are fighting or feel like there’s a 

threat to some of the things that they’ve worked very hard to 

develop. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s an area which is obviously one where 

there aren’t the skill, or maybe the will, to try to sort out some 

of these problems. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that one of the 

things that should be part of the agenda of the government as 

we move forward is to figure out another way to deal with a 

number of the issues that they’ve raised in the whole area of 

labour, because what they’re doing so far is not getting a 

solution that is of benefit to the people of the province. 

 

And ultimately everything that’s done by a government relates 

to, what will the ultimate benefit be for the people of the 

province? And that’s one area where you can have your strong 

positions, but you need to develop relationships that can work 

over the longer term. And so far it’s been just stick your finger 

in the eye or trade another problem or ignore some very 

legitimate concerns, and not deal with some of the real issues. 

So that’s not necessarily directly in this Throne Speech, but it is 

an underlying theme that causes problems in a whole number of 

other areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you’ve spent a number of years 

around the government and around the legislature, you have the 

option of becoming very cynical or you have the option of 

becoming somebody who believes in the structures and the way 

we solve problems. I think that my colleagues on this side of the 

House are all people who believe that the legislature, whether 

you’re in government or in opposition, there are roles that you 

have which are of benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

know for myself, but I know also for my colleagues, we are 

continuing to raise the issues that we see. We’ll be putting 

forward ideas and suggestions. We’ll be asking hard questions 

about a number of the policies that are being developed in this 

Throne Speech. And I think that it’s probably a good idea that 

— especially some of the newer members opposite but all 

members — that they would listen carefully to what we say, 

because we’re not saying this in some fashion to get at a 

particular person or to deal with a particular relationship. We’re 

talking about what’s going to be of benefit for the province in 

the long term. And, Mr. Speaker, if the listening can happen in 

that context, I think that we’ll all be better for it. 

 

Now the public’s watching, as I said before. They’ve said to the 

present government, we’ll give you a chance. It’s been almost a 

year. They’re kind of on the theme so far of that they haven’t 

messed it up totally, and I think the message in the long term is, 

don’t mess it up. 

 

Now the judgment will be pretty harsh if in fact they get that 

impression, and clearly we’ll be identifying those areas where 

they haven’t met the mark. But ultimately it will be the people 

of Saskatchewan who say, hey, you came in with some 

trepidation, with some hope, but you haven’t sort of met what’s 

going on. 

 

That’s what I’m still hearing, that people are waiting. They’re 

holding their judgment. I think they’ll be holding their 

judgment for another couple of years. And I think that 

practically we’ll all look back and as historiographers, as people 

who look at the history of history, we will look at what kinds of 

messages have been sent in this year. We’ll look at what the 

long-term results have been of many of the policy decisions that 

were made over the last 30 years, but we’ll also look at the 

kinds of changes and the kinds of missteps that have been made 

and some of the positive steps. But all of those things will be 

judged in the context of the results for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have difficulty being in favour of the Throne 

Speech as presented because of a number of the deficiencies 

that I’ve outlined. I am in favour of the amendment that’s been 

proposed, and I hope to vote accordingly later today. So thank 

you very much. 

 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Firstly I would like 

to welcome our newest member to the legislature from 

Cumberland. And welcome to the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — It’s an honour to have the opportunity to 

speak to the Speech from the Throne and with the theme being 

“A Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” We members of this 

Assembly have each of us come to this place under different 

circumstances, faced different challenges, and had different life 

experiences. But I truly believe that what brings us all here is 

the commitment to leave this Assembly having made this 

province a better place; a better place to live, to prosper, to 

enjoy — and not for ourselves, but for all of the people of this 

province and for our children and our grandchildren. 

 

I cannot speak to the circumstances and the challenges or the 

life experiences of other members, but I would like to take this 

opportunity — and this is certainly not intended to be about me, 

but — to speak a little bit about how I came to this place. I wish 

to take a few moments to just show how time has played this 

out in relation to this, to the time, that time when I became 

interested, and this time now, 2008. 

 

Going back a little, my great-grandfather immigrated from the 

United States in 1904 and settled in the Maidstone area. In fact 

our original homestead is now under the twinned yellow 

highway, No. 16. He obviously had dreams for the territory 

which would take another year to become a province. He had 

dreams not so much about himself, but for a better life for his 

children and his grandchildren — dreams about opportunity, 

education, religious freedom, democracy, a better life — and 

here in Saskatchewan, a better life. And with the hardships that 

endured — prairie fires, severe weather, devastating hailstorms, 

disease — they did prosper. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 p.m., the Assembly will 

recess until 7 this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1497 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1497 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1498 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2008 Family Physician of the Year Award 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 

 Multi-Faith Plaque Unveiled at Craik 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 

 Share the Warmth Program Receives National Recognition 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 

 Murdoch Carriere 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1499 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1499 

 Celebration of 68 Years of Service by Municipal Employee  

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1499 

 Saskatoon Indian and Métis Friendship Centre 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Availability of Shelter and Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1500 

 Decline of the Forestry Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1501 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 

 Reuse of Syringes in Health Care Facilities 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1503 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1503 

 Public Notification 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1503 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1504 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Diplomatic Mission to Focus on Saskatchewan’s Economy 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

 Recommendations of Community-Based Organizations Implemented 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1506 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 

 Agriculture Crown Lands Sale Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1507 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1508 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1508 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 



 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1528 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


