




















































Hansard: April 09, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 23A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 9, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 725 

 April 9, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present petitions to 

the Legislative Assembly on behalf of citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan, concerning the withdrawal of proposed 

essential services legislation and the withdrawal of the proposed 

amendments to The Trade Union Act. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Sedley, Gerald, 

Grayson, Springside, Tisdale, Nipawin, Meadow Lake, 

Rouleau, Elston, Aberdeen, North Portal, Invermay, Odessa, 

Midale, Qu’Appelle, Coronach, Grenfell, Elstow, Tuffnell, 

Riverhurst, Shell Lake, Cut Knife, Maymont, Oungre, Earl 

Grey, Mossbank, Southey, Archerwill, Lumsden, Balcarres, 

Lebret, Kronau, Craven, Dilke, Pense, Coppersands, Edenwold, 

Balgonie, Silton, Buena Vista, Togo, Davidson, Melville, 

Langenburg, Saskatoon, Spiritwood, Estevan, Lucky Lake, 

Herschel, Oxbow, Martensville, Regina, Weyburn, La Ronge, 

Spruce Home, Prince Albert, Langham, Biggar, Perdue . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member has the 

right to present his petition. Other members will have an 

opportunity in a moment. The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Abbey, Yorkton, Esterhazy, Young, Duval, 

Imperial, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Kamsack, Wroxton, Canora, 

Hendon, Stenen, Rhein, Veregin, Air Ronge, Hagen, 

Lloydminster, Kindersley, North Battleford, Holbein, Pilger, 

Humboldt, Lanigan, Buffalo Narrows, Bienfait, Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present pages from 

petitions from concerned citizens in Saskatoon about the 

cancellation of the province’s support for Station 20 and the 

taking back of the $8 million that was set aside for that project. 

I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

I so do present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to present a petition that addresses the shabby 

way that the employees and the constituents of Moose Jaw were 

treated with this government’s political decision to close the 

liquor store. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Vimy Ridge Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, today is Vimy Ridge Day. On 

July 1 we celebrate the achievement of a group of politicians, 

the pilots of Confederation, who in 1867 constructed the 

framework of a federal state — the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Today is the day we honour the thousands of Canadian farmers 

and workers turned soldier who, through their sacrifice in 1917, 

gave birth to the nation, Canada. With innovative tactics, 

determination, and courage, Canadians succeeded where others 

had failed in the taking of Vimy Ridge. And Canada took its 

proud place among the nations of the world — a leader in the 

causes of human freedom, justice, and peace. 

 

Purporting to represent no one but myself and appreciating the 

arguments to the contrary, I believe that, on this day, our 

national flag should be lowered to half-mast on federal 

buildings. 

 

Also speaking as an individual member of this Assembly, I 

believe that the practice of lowering the flag to half-mast when 

a Canadian soldier dies in a theatre of conflict should be 

reinstated. Mr. Speaker, a sacrifice not acknowledged is a 

sacrifice not honoured. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today, April 9, is the 91st anniversary of the beginning of the 

Battle of Vimy Ridge, where the combined Canadian corps 

captured the German-held high ground that had frustrated allied 

commanders. 

 

The battle has become a national symbol of sacrifice and 

bravery, and it truly stands as a timeless memorial to the 

strength of the Canadian nation. Over 97,000 Canadian soldiers 

formed the core of a fighting force that launched the assault 91 

years ago today. Four battalions engaged in this battle hailed 

from Saskatchewan. 

 

The actions of these soldiers defined the character of Canada 

and brought this nation out from under the shadow of the 

British Empire, allowing its citizens to forge their own image. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of being stationed in Europe 

as a member of the Canadian Forces and actually visiting Vimy 

Ridge. I can also say it brings me great pride to remember the 

extraordinary achievement and sacrifice of our forefathers in 

this fight for freedom. 

 

As our sons and daughters are currently serving in many 

capacities around the world in both peacekeeping operations 

and in NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]-led 

missions such as in Afghanistan, it is crucial that we note that 

they are just the latest to wear the uniform of the Canadian 

Forces. They are writing the newest chapter in the history of 

Armed Forces, and what a glorious history it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as several of my colleagues have 

said, today is Vimy Ridge Day, a time to remember all those 

who fought to preserve our way of life. This is a debt we as 

Canadians can never repay, so we remember instead. I feel 

honoured to speak today on this special day. 

 

My constituency office is across the street from the Royal 

Canadian Legion, Nutana Branch No. 362. As a member of the 

legion, I feel fortunate to have had the opportunity to meet 

many of the men and women who have served this country in 

our Armed Forces. I want to publicly thank them and their 

families for the sacrifices they have made on our behalf. 

 

The Nutana Legion currently has 1,250 members. Their facility 

is air conditioned, wheelchair accessible, and has a huge free 

parking lot. The legion, in partnership with the ladies’ auxiliary, 

offers many activities in the community. They also issue 

newsletters, maintain a museum and a website. As you can see, 

their service to us continues at home. 

 

It is fitting that we take time to remember those men and 

women who have fought for the privileges and freedoms we 

enjoy. The son of a close friend of mine is currently serving 

abroad. My heart and my prayers go out to her and all the other 

families who have sons and daughters serving our country. 

These young men and women are laying their lives on the line 

every day. Those of us at home do not make this daily sacrifice, 

but we can honour those who do by living our lives in a way 

that makes us worth fighting for. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Leader’s Dinner 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, enthusiasm and excitement are 

just two of the words being used to describe an event I had the 

pleasure of attending last night in Saskatoon. More than 1,200 

people gathered at TCU Place for the annual leader’s dinner. 

The atmosphere was electric, Mr. Speaker, as the enthusiastic 

audience cheered along with the greatest hits video from the 

election campaign. When it was time to introduce . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest to place his statement. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — See, Mr. Speaker, even they’re excited. When 

it was time to introduce the leader, former Saskatoon Northwest 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] Ted Merriman, 

now Co-Chair of the affordable housing task force, did so with 

heartfelt warmth. Premier Brad Wall spoke with humility, 

confidence, and enthusiasm. In his energized and hopeful 

speech he spoke of Saskatchewan with its eyes firmly set on the 

future of a great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, attending events such as these are always such a 

great experience. It is truly then that you realize that this 

Saskatchewan Party government is taking the right steps. The 

growth agenda we have set for this province is supported, Mr. 

Speaker, and supported by the broadest cross-section of people 

this province has ever seen. The crowd at TCU Place, Mr. 

Speaker, told us they were ready for growth and we will do 

everything in our power to accommodate them. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I would just like to caution members about 

the fact that we refer to individuals by their constituency or 

their position, not by their individual name, under the rules. 

Thank you. The member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Congratulations to Oskayak High School 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Oskayak High School, located 

on Broadway Avenue in Saskatoon Nutana, is a unique school 

serving First Nations and Métis students in Saskatoon and 

surrounding communities. The school offers credits in both 

traditional courses and in four academies designed to appeal to 

the preferences of students who have interest in hockey, drama, 

cultural arts, and Cree language. First Nations and Métis 

students can find support and cultural reinforcement in these 

programs. 

 

Oskayak, which means young people, provides a network of 

trained support staff, counsellors, social workers, psychologists, 

daycare providers, and physicians to help young students face 

challenges both in and outside of the school environment. 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

Oskayak’s philosophy is bound to the Aboriginal medicine 

wheel, and works toward achieving balance in students’ mental, 

emotional, spiritual, and physical lives. Throughout the year, 

school elders Simon Kytwayhat and Mary Lee lead both 

students and staff in many cultural and spiritual activities such 

as sweats, smudges, and powwows. 

 

Oskayak is working to build relationships between the school, 

students, and the surrounding business community. The school 

principal hopes to develop a job shadowing program to pair 

students with successful businesses in the Broadway area near 

the school so students can learn about the world of work and 

entrepreneurship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Oskayak school for their 

dynamic programs, and I would ask my colleagues to join me in 

wishing the staff and students well as they strive for a creative 

and productive future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Return of Spring 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I love this time of year. Spring 

is in the air. The sights and sounds of renewal are everywhere. 

As I drive between home and the legislature, you can see the 

evidence. Snow is disappearing from the ditches. The farmers 

are almost in the fields. Kids have traded their winter boots for 

the ones of the rubber variety. It is, Mr. Speaker, a time of 

renewal but there are forces at work, Mr. Speaker, who would 

deny Saskatchewan that renewal. They sit across this House 

from us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the past 48 hours, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have held the 

people of Saskatchewan hostage, paralyzing the ability of this 

House to do the work that we’ve been hired to get done. With 

both eyes firmly on the rear-view mirror, Mr. Speaker, they 

have quoted James Madison, Plato, Winston Churchill — 

names stretching back 2,500 years — in a show of partisanship 

utterly disrespectful of the choice the Saskatchewan voters 

made on November 7, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, not to worry. The members on this side of 

the House remain committed to our growth agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. We will ensure that the people of this province get the 

spring that they have so long been denied by people on that side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Quick Moves 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, who says government can’t move 

fast? Yesterday I stood in my place and pointed out that though 

the government had cut the Aboriginal Career Connections 

program, they had forgot to mention it to the people who run 

their website. 

 

In fact as of yesterday the website was still loaded with glowing 

testimonials from people who have benefited from the program. 

And I took the opportunity to quote a couple of them, things 

like “My experience in the ACC program has been incredible” 

and “As I begin my new career . . . I know that the ACC 

program was the best career decision I ever made” — which I 

guess, Mr. Speaker, is when the government leapt into action. I 

think those testimonials were gone from the website before I sat 

down. 

 

Well that’s just the latest example of the lightning quickness in 

which the Saskatchewan Party can move. Witness how quickly 

they cut the ties with their old friend Kate McMillan when her 

nasty open letter to the residents of the inner city of Saskatoon 

embarrassed them. 

 

If the Saskatchewan Party moved half as quickly on reinstating 

the funding for Station 20, on getting the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

mill opened, or on addressing the issues of affordable housing -- 

if the Saskatchewan Party moved half as quickly to benefit the 

people of Saskatchewan as they move to protect themselves — 

then they might actually accomplish something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Station 20 West 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand from press reports that the Premier this morning met 

with the community and the organizers of Station 20 in 

Saskatoon. And if the press reports are correct, he has made a 

decision to stick with this ill-advised, short-sighted, and 

mean-spirited cut to the inner city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 2,000 people rallied last weekend demanding 

this government listen to their voices. On the Facebook site — 

the Friends of Station 20 — over 4,500 people have joined that 

site. The unprecedented thing has happened with the Saskatoon 

Star Phoenix where they cannot print all of the letters that have 

come to the newspaper, and we have no idea how many letters 

and emails has been delivered to the Premier and this 

government. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is this, my question is this: why will 

this Premier, why will this government not listen to the voice of 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to answer that question on behalf of 

this government. Mr. Speaker, the leader is right. The Premier 

and the Minister of Health met this morning with a group of 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

individuals representing Station 20. There was a good 

discussion. We as a government . . . And the Premier has 

expressed this that these people are there with tremendous 

passion. They believe in the same types of issues that this 

government believes in and that we need to address within inner 

cities, within those particular regions. 

 

We understand that the model that has been proposed by that 

previous government addressed some of the concerns. And we 

have committed to ensuring that we will move forward and that 

we will move forward with a different model. But the goals that 

we wish to attain will still be the same for those people in inner 

city Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to again remind members 

of this government, that the concept of Station 20, the genesis 

of this concept and project came not from government; it came 

from the community. It came from people who live in the 

community, who work in the community. They’ve been joined 

by the academic expertise of the colleges of medicine and 

dentistry at the University of Saskatchewan. This was a project 

born in the community. They don’t need the paternalistic plans 

delivered upon them by the Sask Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — They need, Mr. Speaker, they need, Mr. 

Speaker, to be able to retain the money that had been placed in 

their hands to build their dream. Again I say to this government: 

why would they not listen to the voice of people, the voice of 

the community? Why will they not reverse — as the Minister of 

Social Services was quick to reverse her decision — why will 

they now not reverse this ill-advised, mean-spirited decision to 

rob from the community of the inner city of Saskatoon these $8 

million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we do want to make investments in inner city Saskatoon and in 

other cities, and we want to achieve the goals and aspirations of 

many. We have stated very, very publicly that we will work 

with initiatives like the Saskatoon Food Bank. We’ll work with 

community schools like St. Mary’s School which is going to 

deliver a nutrition program. An additional $500,000 has been 

provided for dealing with that, nutrition within the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that the investments that are 

provided to the area are in people and services unlike when that 

opposition was in government. We want to ensure that people 

and services are the number one priority of this government. 

We will work with our partners to establish a model that will 

deliver on those services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again to this government, how do 

they justify the hypocrisy? They say that they’re delivering a 

budget that will provide infrastructure for the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s their theme of the budget that’s now 

under debate in this House, but that does not apply apparently 

to the poor in the inner city. They don’t deserve infrastructure. 

They don’t deserve infrastructure. 

 

I’ve got a question, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t know who wants 

to answer it. I don’t know who’s capable of answering it, but is 

this going to be a government that’s going to govern for all the 

people? Are they going to govern just for some? Are they only 

going to govern for their friends, or are they going to govern for 

all of the people of Saskatchewan? Are they going to govern for 

the people who have dreams and visions, who live in poor 

neighbourhoods of this province, or are they going to inflict 

their own philosophies and their own plans regardless of what, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are telling them? Have 

they grown in five months, Mr. Speaker, in five months have 

they grown so deaf that they will not listen to the people of the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

very obvious what this government intends to do. We have 

provided for the first time, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. And I don’t need help from the 

benches on the floor. Order. Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked 

a question about what we’re providing to the entire province. 

We’re providing $1 billion worth of infrastructure construction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — One billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, that 

leader allowed this province to crumble, Mr. Speaker. We see 

examples of health care facilities. We see examples of school 

facilities. We see examples of highways that are crumbling in 

this province, and that government led by that premier were in 

office for 16 years. Mr. Speaker, they did not deliver. We will 

deliver based on the fact that we’re providing dollars, we’re 

providing initiatives, and we will achieve what the people of 

inner-city Saskatoon also want to achieve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start with a very simple 

question for the government. We heard from the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation last week, and I quote “. . . 

negotiations are going on to reopen that plant and . . . we’re not 

far away from some sort of an announcement . . .” The very 

next day the Minister of Energy and Resources threw cold 

water onto his colleague’s statements, calling them, quote, “not 

helpful.” Well I think that makes two of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the government: are they close to an agreement or aren’t 

they? Who’s right, the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation, 

the Minister of Energy and Resources, or neither of them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there are ongoing discussions. We’ve described them as 

productive and constructive. We have said that there are 

shareholder rights that have to be respected here, and as a result 

of that, the discussions are confidential in nature. And that 

would only be natural given the fact that we’re talking about a 

publicly traded company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been almost a month now 

since the government’s been sitting on Domtar’s counter-offer. 

In that month not only has another plant been indefinitely 

closed, but the government’s story continues to change. Let’s 

not forget, when he was in opposition, the leader of that party 

said, and I quote — and he couldn’t have been any clearer, Mr. 

Speaker — “Anything less than a timetable for reopening the 

Prince Albert mill will amount to a failure . . .” 

 

To the minister: what is his timetable? What is his plan? And if 

he doesn’t give us one, will he admit, by his own leader’s 

definition, that he is an utter and complete failure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the negotiations 

are ongoing. There will be continued negotiations for some 

period of time. The timeline is unknown at this particular time. 

We have to make sure that there is a deal that is proper for the 

company involved as well as the forest management agreement 

as well as all other players associated with the mills associated 

in the area. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By the previous 

administration’s own admission, it took them some 18 months 

to put together a deal that resulted in putting the taxpayers of 

this province on the hook for some $100 million. 

 

We’ve made it clear that that is not something that we’re 

prepared to do with taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, and as a 

result of that the people of Saskatchewan gave us overwhelming 

support in the last election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, either it took 18 months, or 

it was a last minute deal like they purport. They can’t have it 

both ways, Mr. Speaker. They finally admit that they’re a 

failure — welcome news for the people of Prince Albert, I’m 

sure. 

 

Let’s review for the people of Prince Albert and area the 

absolute mismanagement on this file. The member from 

Batoche chaired a task force with no findings. The Premier 

three times was in Prince Albert to announce that they had a 

plan to reopen the mill. There was no plan. The member from 

Prince Albert Carlton took out an ad in the newspaper that said 

a vote for him was a vote for the mill open and people working 

— truly not the case. The Minister of Energy and Resources 

claimed to have had discussions with Domtar when clearly no 

discussions have taken place. And now the Minister of Energy 

and Resources, the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation can’t 

get their stories straight. 

 

To the minister: why on earth would families in forestry 

communities have any faith in his failed leadership on this file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the reason why the people of 

Saskatchewan have faith is because there was an election in 

November of last year. The people of Saskatchewan spoke. The 

people of Saskatchewan spoke and at that time they said that 

this was a flawed deal for the people of this province. This was 

a deal that resulted in $100 million of taxpayers’ money being 

put at risk, and it simply was a deal that the people of 

Saskatchewan were not prepared to agree with. And as a result 

of that, that administration was summarily bounced out of 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour is 

pretty good at sticking on message and repeating catch phrases 

ad nauseam. When he’s not talking about how capable, 

confident, and qualified Ken Love is, chances are he’s talking 

about how balanced his new labour Bills are. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister’s entire justification for Bill 5 is to bring Saskatchewan 

to the, quote, “national norm.” 

 

To the Minister of Labour: is it still his contention that this 

government’s labour legislation, particularly his essential 

services legislation, is moderate in comparison to other 

jurisdictions in Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question and 

I think the people of Saskatchewan do. I think the key question 

here, Mr. Speaker, is as we look across the country we see that 

every province either has or has tabled essential service 

legislation. Saskatchewan is simply moving in that direction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The key here is to ensure that there’s a balance between the 

right to strike, Mr. Speaker, and public safety, Mr. Speaker. 

And in fact I think it’s been well regarded that this is 

middle-of-the-road legislation. It’s meant to ensure public 

safety is balanced with the right to strike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the question remains — and we’ve yet to 

hear from the members opposite — will they be supporting 

essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker? That’s the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now table some 

very interesting Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

documents provided to me by a private citizen who submitted 

an FOI [freedom of information] request on the government’s 

essential services legislation. The first is a hand-written 

ministry document saying, and I quote, “This is likely the 

broadest application in Canada.” The second calls the 

legislation, quote, “quite broad,” and raises the possibility of 

just about anybody being included under the regulations, 

including CBOs [community-based organization]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t have it both ways. Either the 

Bills are moderate, as he claims, or it is the broadest in Canada, 

as his ministry claims. To the Minister of Labour: who’s right? 

Who should the people trust — him or his officials? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, once again I 

appreciate the question. Mr. Speaker, obviously I’ll wait for the 

document to be tabled and then that way I can have a look at it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, really they’re 

interested in one key element. Why is it that Saskatchewan 

doesn’t have essential service legislation? Why is it that during 

the recent CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] strike 

at the University of Saskatchewan, 400 people per day were 

being turned away from receiving medical treatment and care 

that they needed? Why? Why is that the case, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the reason and the case that we don’t have 

essential services in place. That’s why we’re moving forward 

this piece of legislation. It’s a moderate piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this is amazing. Mr. Speaker, 

while the part-time Minister of Labour was reassuring members 

of the public that his legislation is moderate and balanced, his 

very own department was warning that his legislation was, and 

again and I’ll quote, “likely the broadest application in 

Canada.” 

 

Among what’s already been tabled today are some other 

interesting documents which speak to the minister’s inability or 

unwillingness to communicate. The first cites a need to give the 

minister an opportunity to explain his legislation in, quote, “a 

controlled environment such as streaming videos.” The second 

estimates the cost of shooting such videos as up to $12,000. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: can he please explain to the 

taxpayers of this province why they’re on the hook for his own 

inability to answer questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the question about cost is 

actually about the cost of not having essential service legislation 

in place, Mr. Speaker. That’s the cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is members 

opposite who were more than happy to legislate nurses back to 

work in 1999, Mr. Speaker. What they’re not willing to do is 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

move forward with essential service legislation that will help to 

protect the safety and security of the people of Saskatchewan 

while balancing the right to strike, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 

see. And all I can say is the member opposite seems to be lost in 

missing the big question. The big question is, will you be 

supporting essential service legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it seems quite clear perhaps 

the minister needs his teleprompter in here, if possible. But let’s 

review, Mr. Speaker. There were miscommunications as to 

whether essential services would be legislated by this 

government. There were miscommunications as to who was 

consulted prior to this legislation being introduced in the House. 

And there were miscommunications as to whether this 

legislation was moderate or not. The Premier of the province, 

the director of communications, and the minister all agree he is 

not a very good communicator. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: why didn’t he just answer the 

questions in the first place, cut out the middle man, and save the 

taxpayers time and money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to once again to return to the question of essential services in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, every province either has in place 

or has tabled essential service legislation. We’re moving 

forward in this fashion to ensure that the people of this province 

are protected, the public safety of this province is protected. 

That way when we see labour . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m having difficulty. There’s a couple 

members on my left that . . . second and last warning. Member 

for Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the main point here is, I 

can’t believe that the questions relate to the process. The 

questions really relate to, how is it that we cannot have, to date, 

essential services in Saskatchewan? That’s the question. And 

the question remains, will the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Moose Jaw will 

allow the member, the minister to respond. Minister of 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The question remains, will the members 

opposite be supporting essential service legislation in 

Saskatchewan or not? That’s the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Legal Fees and Services 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned that the 

Minister of Labour certainly is a high maintenance minister. It’s 

obvious that he has to have a $10,000 teleprompter paid for by 

the taxpayers. Well that’s not all we learned, Mr. Speaker. We 

learned yesterday that by the end of January the minister’s 

private lawyer had earned over $50,000, and there’s nowhere to 

go but up in terms of that bill. Now that taxpayers have actually 

had to pay Kevin Wilson, can the minister finally tell us what 

we’ve been paying for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate and I 

know the people of Saskatchewan appreciate this question. That 

is it’s common practice, Mr. Speaker, that governments of all 

stripes hire people from outside to help, offer advice and 

research. Mr. Speaker, in fact, in fact what we see, Mr. Speaker, 

from 2003 to 2007, we see from the same said law firm, a bill 

for almost $5 million, Mr. Speaker, from that government. So, 

Mr. Speaker, it is common practice. In fact what we’ve also 

seen is a rationale offered on May 1, 2007, by a former member 

of this House who would have been sitting on that side and that 

is, we paid Mr. Waller based on fees of a senior lawyer in the 

province would receive for a similar kind of work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s called the 

Milgaard inquiry and that’s why MacPherson Leslie & 

Tyerman was paid that amount of money. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

what is so unusual about Mr. Wilson’s services is that normally 

cabinet ministers rely upon the Ministry of Justice and their 

lawyers to provide them legal advice. 

 

My question to the member is this: why didn’t you rely upon 

the Ministry of Justice legal officials to provide you advice? 

What did Mr. Wilson do? Did he draft the legislation which was 

then given to the Ministry of Justice officials? Why over 

$50,000? And, Mr. Speaker, that just gets us to the end of 

January. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to offer this House 

and the people of the province every reassurance that it was the 

Ministry of Justice that drafted the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

And we’ve gone through what Mr. Wilson has been doing. He’s 

been offering us, especially advice, and offering some research 

during the early days of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s curious, Mr. Speaker, is that perhaps the 

former minister of Finance can answer that she also sought 

some outside advice to the tune of $291,000, Mr. Speaker, in 

her 2006-2007 Public Accounts volume 2. So, Mr. Speaker, as 

she knows well, it’s not infrequent that outside advisers are 

offered for their advice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what’s infrequent is that this 

member fails to answer questions in this House. Can he please 

advise the House what precisely did Mr. Wilson offer? Was it 

legal advice? Can he provide any written documents? Have we 

got anything to show, that the minister can provide this House 

in writing, that is worth over $50,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we can say is the 

people of Saskatchewan are being very well served by Premier 

Brad Wall, by the Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just to remind members to refer 

to members by their responsibility or their constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: —The people of this province are being very 

well served. While the members opposite are driving in reverse 

through the rear-view mirror, we’re moving forward — 14,000 

new full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker. Year over year what we see, 

Mr. Speaker, is people pouring back into the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Regarding the specific question, the answer is that obviously 

during times of transition we draw on expert legal advice and 

outside advice. I did that through the ministry and, Mr. Speaker, 

what we can say is we’re moving forward on our agenda and 

meeting our promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday sure was a 

good day for Saskatchewan Party lawyers, but it wasn’t such a 

good day for Saskatchewan taxpayers — $125,000 to be 

precise, Mr. Speaker. That’s how much this Sask Party 

government is giving its good old political friends for helping 

them gut the public service and draft its legislation. 

We learned about this payment just hours after hearing about a 

mean-spirited cut to the Public Service Commission program to 

assist Aboriginal people and disabled people join the public 

service. But we also learned it just days after thousands of 

people on the streets of Saskatoon demanded that the 

Government of Saskatchewan restore its funding to Station 20. 

 

So I guess to the Premier or to the Deputy Premier: how on the 

one hand can they plead poverty when it comes to valuable 

programs and services and, on the other hand, give all of this 

money to their political friends, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

The question really relates to the fine document that the 

Minister of Finance has tabled recently. That’s the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within the ministry I have the honour of serving, 

$761 million, Mr. Speaker . . . We see over 5,500 new training 

opportunities. We see $5 million going to community-based 

organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we see, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity to actually 

achieve the promises and fulfill the agenda that we spoke to 

during the election and move forward with the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move Bill No. 22, The Irrigation Amendment Act be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 22, The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Government has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 23, The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 24, The 

Trade Union Act, 2008 (No. 2) now be introduced and read for 

the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour that Bill 24, The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Environment that first reading of Bill No. 25, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act be now read a first time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Private Bills to present its first 

report. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to rule 98, private Bill 901 

is deemed to have been read a first time and is ordered for 

second reading on the next private members’ day. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Prior to orders of the day, a couple of 

questions were brought to the Speaker’s attention. A couple of 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

evenings ago, in the evening sitting, a point of order was raised 

to which I will respond. During the evening sitting of April 7, 

2008, the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order 

regarding certain remarks made by the member from Kindersley 

from his seat. 

 

I’ve now had a chance to carefully review the Hansard for the 

evening of April 7. I find there is nothing on the record 

regarding any remarks by the member from Kindersley. 

However I would like to take this opportunity to caution all 

members that inflammatory language incites disorder and 

interferes with the proper functioning of the Assembly. I would 

like to remind members of a ruling of a former Speaker made 

during a similar circumstance. On April 15, 1999, Speaker 

Hagel reminded members that shouting across the floor does 

not contribute to the proper conduct of debate and does nothing 

to preserve the dignity of this Assembly. 

 

Ruling Regarding Question of Privilege 

and Application of Closure 

 

The Speaker: — Also it was brought to my attention yesterday 

by the Opposition House Leader, who gave notice of a question 

of privilege concerning the government’s decision to invoke 

closure on the motion to extend the sessional sitting hours. I 

thank the member for raising this matter by the proper means 

and providing me with the advantage of a day’s notice in which 

to consider it. 

 

Under the rules of this Assembly, my role as Speaker, when 

presented with a question of privilege, is restricted to 

determining whether a prima facia case of privilege has been 

established. If I am satisfied that that threshold has been met, 

the question is put before the Assembly for it to decide whether 

or not a breach of privilege has been committed. In order for a 

prima facia case of privilege to be found, the actions 

complained of must amount to an impediment to a member’s 

ability to carry out his or her functions as a member. It must be 

clearly demonstrated that a member has been obstructed and 

interfered with in his or her parliamentary work. 

 

It is the submission of the Opposition House Leader that 

changes to the rules or standing orders of parliaments are 

traditionally only implemented after opposition parties have 

been consulted and their consent obtained, and after a lengthy 

parliamentary debate. In his opinion the government’s decision 

to unilaterally move to extend the sitting hours and to curtail 

debate on the motion after two days debate unduly limits the 

ability and opportunity of opposition members to consult with 

their constituencies and to develop and offer alternatives 

 

A further consideration raised by the Opposition House Leader 

is whether the application of closure is within the spirit of this 

Assembly’s rules and practices. It was his assertion that the 

impact of proposed sessional sitting hours would permit the 

government majority to in effect impose closure on specified 

bills in contravention of rule 66(2). 

 

Let me begin with the closure rule itself. The purpose of the 

closure rule is to give the government a procedural device to 

bring debate on a question to a close. The rule is only available 

to ministers but has been rarely used despite having been part of 

the rules of this Assembly since 1917. It has been invoked only 

seven times. 

 

The rule was first used in 1999 and hasn’t been applied since 

1993. An observation by the Speaker of the Canadian House of 

Commons on June 29, 1987, captures the nuances of its use. 

Closure is not a standing order, even if only frequently used. 

This present situation is not without precedent. Closure has 

been used by all parties while in government. It has been used 

after much and after very little debate. It remains to this day a 

procedural avenue available to the government. By and large 

the timing of its use becomes a political issue, but some debate 

clearly must have taken place. Thus the timing of closure in 

debate is clearly not a procedural matter. 

 

My decision on this question of probate must rest on whether 

the government’s actions are an impediment to members’ 

ability to perform their parliamentary duties. To this question I 

must consider the matter in the context of the rules and the 

procedures that members themselves have put in place and have 

a continuing ability to modify as they see fit. 

 

When the new rules for a parliamentary calendar were put into 

place, the closure rule was retained, except that it could not be 

applied to specified Bills. The application in this instance is not 

on a specified Bill, nor does the motion under notice of closure 

attempt to curtail debate on the proposed Bills. 

 

I should also point out that the rules contain many other 

examples where this Assembly has imposed limitations on 

debate through its standing orders. In these instances where 

members themselves have established limitations on debate or 

means to curtail debate, the Speaker has no discretionary 

authority to intervene as a matter of privilege. 

 

The issues the Opposition House Leader has raised are properly 

questions of order and not privilege. In this instance, the closure 

rule has been applied properly. I do not agree that its impact 

would amount to an infringement on any member’s freedom of 

speech beyond what is already made acceptable by the rules. 

 

Accordingly I find that the application of the closure rule on the 

motion to extend the sessional sitting hours does not meet the 

threshold required to establish a prima facie breach of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion before 

orders of the day. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Closure of Debate 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has the floor 

to move a motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 

is called for resuming debate on item 10, the proposed sessional 

order for the revision of sitting times, pursuant to rule 66(1) I 

move: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding the revision of 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

sessional sitting times and on any amendments or 

subamendments proposed thereto be not further adjourned. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It has been moved by the 

Government House Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding the revision of 

sessional sitting times and on any amendments or 

subamendments proposed thereto be not further adjourned. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:25 until 14:35.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Government House Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding the revision of 

sessional sitting times and on any amendments or 

subamendments proposed theretofore be not further 

adjourned. 

 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 33] 

 

Stewart Elhard Bjornerud 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles D’Autremont Hickie 

Cheveldayoff Heppner Tell 

Gantefoer Harpauer Morgan 

Hutchinson Huyghebaert Brkich 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Forbes Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 33; those 

opposed, 18. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Why is the member on her 

feet? 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. The member from 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you, I would like to introduce Dr. Lorna 

Butler. She’s the dean of nursing at the University of 

Saskatchewan. And along with her is Dr. Marlene Smadu, 

associate dean of nursing at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

I had the pleasure of . . . Dr. Butler accompanied us to the 

Philippines when as the education portion of the nursing 

recruitment drive. And we appreciated and really enjoyed the 

educational aspect that she was able to bring to that trip. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome our 

guests in the gallery, Dr. Smadu and Dr. Butler. I have had a 

long association with Dr. Smadu. Many iterations of our lives 

have crossed paths, and I certainly respect her. 

 

And I would welcome her here to the legislature and . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Dr. Butler. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

night I made some brief remarks on the motion now before us, 

Mr. Speaker. And I need to return to those to conclude my 

thoughts in respect to this matter. And on occasion, I think more 

than once, pretty sure more than once, Mr. Speaker, I quoted the 

Government House Leader on their alternative to trampling on 

the privileges of this House, trampling on the privileges of its 

members, and trampling on the rights of the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Government House Leader’s alternative, as 

we understand, the alternative as we understand as is quoted in 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker, I think from April 7, 2007, when he 

made the motion. 

 

His alternative was for the opposition to surrender, Mr. 

Speaker. His alternative was for the opposition to debate Bills 

that they are entitled to debate for 20 hours — or members of 

this House, to put it more accurately, Mr. Speaker, members of 

this House both government and opposition are entitled to 

debate for 20 hours — the opposition to debate any one of those 

Bills for an hour at the most, Mr. Speaker, an hour at the most, 

perhaps 20 minutes, or maybe some shorter period of time, Mr. 

Speaker. That was his suggestion. That’s in the record. 

 

But what did the Government House Leader think about these 

rules that he now has no respect for; that he would disregard so 

lightly, that he finds an impediment to a majority government’s 

legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker? What did the Government 

House Leader think when he was in opposition and negotiating 

these rules, Mr. Speaker? What did he think of these rules then, 

Mr. Speaker, when he cared, when he cared about the rights of 

opposition, Mr. Speaker? What did he think back then? Well on 

May 17, 2007, he said in this Legislative Assembly, he said 

within this Chamber, the following, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

. . . I believe this is the first full session where we’ve 

operated under the new rules of the Assembly that have 

been established and developed. And I think that in 

balance we have been very successful in bringing our 

Saskatchewan legislature to the forefront of parliamentary 

process, not in this province, but also in this entire 

country. And I think that we can all be rightly proud of all 

of the work that we’ve done to accomplish these changes. 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, are for the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan firstly. And I think that the fact 

that there is more predictability also, in particular, benefits 

our constituents and the people, in addition to the people 

of the province generally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what the Government House Leader 

believed about these rules. I think this is what the Government 

House Leader still believes about these rules but now, Mr. 

Speaker, these rules are inconvenient. These rules are 

inconvenient to the agenda of the government, not because they 

allow the opposition to unfairly impede the work of government 

— they do not. The former government accepted these rules and 

they did not impede the work of the former government. 

 

The hon. Government House Leader at the time, when he was 

in opposition, speaking after a full session where the rules had 

been in place, where the government and the opposition found 

that the rules worked for both parties. No, the House Leader has 

changed his view on these rules because of the Government 

House Leader’s mismanagement and the mismanagement by his 

government of their legislative agenda, their ability to get their 

legislative agenda through this House despite rules to which 

they agreed, which they certainly understood, which they 

praised — which they praised — when they were in opposition, 

Mr. Speaker, despite having a two-thirds majority in the House. 

 

Because of their own laziness, complacency, and arrogance, Mr. 

Speaker, they cannot get their legislative agenda through under 

rules which they supported — not only supported, Mr. Speaker, 

but as you have heard from May 17, 2007 supported 

wholeheartedly and enthusiastically. Nobody from the 

government side of the House in that day when we were in 

government, Mr. Speaker, was holding a gun to the head of who 

is now the Government House Leader, the member for Melfort, 

requiring him to say these things. He volunteered to say them, 

Mr. Speaker. He volunteered to say them and he was right when 

he said them. But they are just as right today as they were when 

he said them, Mr. Speaker, and that makes what is being done 

here, Mr. Speaker, just as wrong today as if it had been done 

then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party’s attempts to unilaterally change the 

rules of the Legislative Assembly is nothing more than an 

attempt to cover up for their own inability to manage the House 

and to manage the House, Mr. Speaker, in a case where we have 

a majority government, a government at least for the time being 

which has the confidence of a majority of members of this 

House. 

 

A basic function of any government is to have legislation 

written, presented to the Assembly, and then passed. The Sask 

Party is incompetent to the point that they have failed to be able 

to carry out this basic function, this basic function even though 

again, Mr. Speaker, a majority government working with rules 

that they negotiated, that they researched, that they helped 

develop, Mr. Speaker, that they understood, that they have 

worked under and having worked under them when they were 

in opposition, found them worthy and praised them. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And the member who is now the Government House Leader 

went out of his way to speak highly of the rules which he now 

attacks. Five weeks, five weeks sitting as government, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Government House Leader reverses himself on 

his view of the rules of this House. It did not take very long, 

Mr. Speaker, for them to stop concerning themselves about 

rules and laws and fairness and equity and minority rights, and 

start concerning themselves with the exercise of power and the 

tyranny of the majority’s ability to oppress the minority in this 

legislature. 

 

Because of their own incompetence and mismanagement of the 

House, the Sask Party now needs to unilaterally change the 

rules of the Assembly or jeopardize their legislative agenda. 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

This 11th-hour rule change is nothing more than an attempt to 

cover up their own mismanagement and incompetence, and 

ensure that individual pieces of legislation require the required 

amount of debate in order to be passed in this House. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, negotiated these rules in 

2006 when they were in opposition. Are they admitting, are 

they admitting, Mr. Speaker, that they are so incompetent they 

did not understand implications of the very rules they 

negotiated? Are they admitting that they are so incompetent 

they didn’t understand the implication of the rules that now 

Government House Leader praised when he was in opposition 

on May 17, 2007? 

 

The Sask Party government is attempting to pass 20 pieces of 

legislation. The rules of the Legislative Assembly — rules that 

the Saskatchewan Party negotiated — clearly state, and I quote, 

“. . . no less than 20 hours of debate” on Bills that have been 

introduced in the fall period, end quote. Is the government so 

incompetent that they cannot do simple mathematics? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not accusing the government members of 

not being able to add to 20. We are not making such an 

accusation. The accusation we are making, Mr. Speaker, is that 

they cannot multiply 20 by 6. That is the problem they clearly 

had. They could not understand, well we have six, we have six 

Bills, almost all of which are symbolic, certainly symbolic to 

get them passed in the spring; almost all of which, if not all of 

which could have waited; some of which should wait and 

receive public hearings, public consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if they wanted to have these Bills — as they clearly do — if 

they wanted to have these Bills passed May 15 in order to say to 

some part of their party, to some interest groups, see what we 

have accomplished, then they knew how to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. They knew how to do that because they asked officials 

how to do that. 

 

The Minister of Labour admitted that he might have a math 

problem, Mr. Speaker, and went to his officials and said, what 

do we need to do? What do we need to do to pass six Bills, and 

particularly two Bills for which I am responsible as Minister of 

Labour? What do I need to do to pass these Bills? And the 

Minister of Labour, we have learned, received a calendar, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s got big numbers on it — real big numbers on it — 

and the calendar and the notes to the calendar make it very clear 

that all the government wants to do is quite achievable under 

the rules, quite achievable with the government majority that 

they have. All they had to do, having decided they didn’t want 

to sit nights in December, all they had to do was start on March 

3, Mr. Speaker. And that was the plan. I think we’ve seen 

sessional calendars with those dates shaded in, Mr. Speaker. 

And then we heard a rumour that no, no, we weren’t coming 

back on March 3; we’re coming back on March 4, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are changes in when we begin that were made by a 

government that wanted to blame this motion, Mr. Speaker, on 

the laziness of the opposition. That’s the absurdity of it, Mr. 

Speaker, or part of the absurdity of it in any case. The 

government decided that they didn’t want to sit March 3, March 

4, March 5, March 6, even though they had been advised — 

even though they had been advised — that to guarantee that 

their legislative agenda would pass while they complied with 

the rules, they would need to sit on those four days. 

 

The planning calendar actually has second reading debates and 

second reading speeches on March 3, March 4, March 5. Sitting 

those dates and sitting in the evenings on those weeks and the 

week following when they’re able to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

doing that would have allowed them time to pass their entire 

legislative agenda, all their priority Bills, Mr. Speaker. And 

they knew that, and they chose to ignore that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they chose to ignore that and then say, well it’s the 

opposition that doesn’t want to work. Mr. Speaker, I think the 

amendment makes it clear that the opposition is quite willing to 

put in the hours necessary to do what has to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not the issue at all. 

 

What’s clear is that the government didn’t want to work. A new 

government, a fresh government, a government that wanted to 

change the face of Saskatchewan didn’t really want to work in 

December, Mr. Speaker. It certainly didn’t want to go to the 

public and discuss its priorities in January and February, Mr. 

Speaker. As a matter of fact it didn’t really want to go back 

after spring break, Mr. Speaker, and played hooky for another 

week. The government played hooky. March 3 is the week that 

never was, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re in the situation that 

we’re in. 

 

It was the Premier and his government who chose to delay the 

opening of the spring session fearing that it would be difficult. 

Having done that, Mr. Speaker, to pass all the proposed pieces 

of legislation, the part-time Minister of Labour sought the 

advice of his department, received the advice of his department. 

It’s not clear he read the advice of his department, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not clear that he does do that. But in any case it was ignored 

whether it was read or not. 

 

And it was the Sask Party who chose not to have evening 

sittings in December or evening sittings in March. 

 

And then it was not till we were into the budget debate, I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that the government suddenly realized that they 

once again dropped the ball and now they’re in a panic. Their 

own incompetence and mismanagement of the House has 

caused them to attempt to unilaterally impose an eleventh hour 

rule change. This rule change is nothing more than a feeble 

attempt to cover up their stunning incompetence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that I bored some members opposite, 

some of the government members, last night with some of the 

historical discussion. The members opposite look forward to 

being doomed to repeat history, Mr. Speaker, because they’re 

not interested in learning it, I would say, with the exception — I 

have to be fair; I have to be fair, Mr. Speaker — with the 

exception of the member of Weyburn-Big Muddy. With the 

exception of the member, the government member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, who says he wasn’t all that 

bored . . . As a matter of fact, no. I have to be fair. The member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy told me that he enjoyed the speech, 

and that he thought it was a good speech and was interested in 

some of the historical discussion in my speech. I have to be fair 

to the member and I thank the member for his comments. It was 

very kind. 

 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

Over the last two decades, numerous parliaments have been 

modernized, Mr. Speaker. The goal was to make parliament 

work more efficiently and effectively. A common feature of 

modernization is the parliamentary calendar. The House of 

Commons in Ottawa adopted a parliamentary calendar in 1982, 

and I quote, “in order to make the sitting and non-sitting times 

predictable.” 

 

The United Kingdom instituted a parliamentary calendar in 

1992 as part of, and I quote, “a more sweeping modernization 

agenda.” Parliamentary calendars have been instituted in 

Alberta in 1993; Manitoba, 1996, and British Columbia in 

2002. On May 15, 2006 the Standing Committee on House 

Services appointed a subcommittee study delegation whose 

purpose it was to, and I quote, “study and make 

recommendations on the adoption of a legislative calendar and 

revisions to sitting times.” 

 

The subcommittee was made up of the Speaker of the House 

and opposition House leader and government House leader. It 

was a joint co-operative and collaborative effort between the 

government and the opposition. On October 16, the Standing 

Committee on House Services which was made up of members 

from the government and opposition unanimously adopted the 

recommendations of the subcommittee. The recommendations 

of the subcommittee were based on, quote, “the experience of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan with an informal 

parliamentary calendar.” 

 

The informal calendar was based on an agreement made in May 

2004 between the government and the opposition. That 

agreement expired in the spring of 2006. The recommendations 

to the subcommittee were also based on the reviews and 

observations of parliamentary calendars being used in other 

provinces. The subcommittee found the use of parliamentary 

calendars resulted in greater co-operation amongst members, 

and it was found that when parliamentary calendars are properly 

instituted, with fixed beginning and end dates, there are less 

days devoted to partisan manoeuvring. 

 

The subcommittee also found that a fixed calendar . . . a more 

efficient use of staff resources. There were numerous 

advantages to the fixed calendar, Mr. Speaker, and the 

underlying message the subcommittee reported was that, and I 

quote, “parliamentary sessions should not be treated as if they 

take place in a vacuum.” 

 

This was a co-operative, collaborative effort of creating a set of 

rules for the Legislative Assembly that would allow the 

Assembly to function in a more productive, efficient, and 

effective manner. 

 

The Sask Party was not only a part of the creation of the new 

rules; they were in favour of the new rules. And as we have 

heard the member from Melfort — who is now the Government 

House Leader — when he was in opposition, after a sitting in 

which the rules had been in place, praised the rules, the same 

rules that after five weeks in government, the Government 

House Leader now sees a necessity to change. 

 

On May 17, 2007, the member stood in the House and said, as I 

have quoted previously, “. . . in balance we have been very 

successful in bringing our Saskatchewan legislature to the 

forefront of parliamentary process, not [only] in this province 

but also in this entire country.” Improving the way the 

Legislative Assembly works, he said, “bringing our 

Saskatchewan legislature to the forefront of the parliamentary 

process . . .” 

 

Changes that are for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan 

and pride in the work that went into accomplishing the 

Legislative Assembly rule changes are all being thrown in a 

ditch along the road by the Sask Party because they want to 

save face, because they made a mistake — all the work of the 

subcommittee, all the negotiation between government and 

opposition that resulted in rules to end abuses that the member 

from Kindersley complained about last night from his seat, all 

that being thrown in the ditch five weeks into the first spring 

sitting of this government because they were unable to manage 

their own legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It can’t be, if you look at the larger issues, it can’t be worth it, 

Mr. Speaker. It can’t be worth it. I will not again review, as I 

have done and the member from Regina Dewdney has done, 

this less-than-imposing legislative agenda of the priority Bills 

of this government. I will not review again, as the member from 

Regina Dewdney and I have both done, the absolute lack of 

urgency to this legislative agenda. 

 

It is not worth, it is not worth the integrity and the character and 

the reputation of the Government House Leader to march away 

from what he said in May 17, 2007. That is not worth the attack 

on the institution. It’s not worth the attack on the opposition. 

It’s not worth the member from Melfort, the Government House 

Leader, having to eat those words, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply not 

worth it, and I can’t believe that he wants to do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t want to help him do it, Mr. Speaker. I oppose the 

motion, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the Assembly for their 

patience and consideration and courtesy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

government finds itself in a mess. The question is, how have we 

arrived? How has this government arrived in but a few short 

weeks of this session, in only months after achieving a majority 

status in this legislature — a significant majority — how have 

we come in five weeks, in five months to a situation where a 

government is now using the most heavy-handed tool that is 

available to any government in the British parliamentary 

system? 

 

So how have we come to a situation within five months of 

being elected with a big majority, five weeks of this session, 

that now they are unilaterally changing the rules and, to boot, 

imposing closure. How in the world have we come to this 

situation, Mr. Speaker? Because my understanding of the 

British parliamentary system, closure motions when they are 

used or unilateral rule changes when they are imposed will 

usually occur only after what has been a very long and 

protracted debate or when there is a very, very significant 

public issue at stake. 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

[15:00] 

 

What do we see here in the case of this government, five 

months after winning a big majority, not just five weeks into the 

session? And, Mr. Speaker, introducing the closure motion after 

only one day of debate, there is something, Mr. Speaker, that is 

relatively unprecedented about this. 

 

The only memory that I have that comes close is some activity 

of the Devine government, the Devine Conservative 

government in the 1980s, when they acted in a similar fashion 

soon after the 1986 election. But to be fair, Mr. Speaker, at least 

they’d already been in government four years. These folks have 

been in government five months. We’ve been in this session 

five weeks, and here we are with the heaviest hand that 

government can use, in our system, being applied — unilateral 

rule changes and closure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the question is, how have we got in this mess? 

How has the government got us in this mess? I mean, it has to 

be an embarrassment. It has to be an embarrassment to this 

government. They’ve got a big majority. They’ve just won a 

substantial election majority. And here we are five months in, 

and they can’t manage their legislative agenda without using 

these hammers of unilateral rule changes and closure. 

 

Well let’s try and think about this, Mr. Speaker. Now some 

might say, well you know, it’s a relatively new government, and 

they are having to, they are having to learn. Well I tell you 

what, Mr. Speaker, this is not a relatively new group of men and 

women to the legislative procedures. Some members have been 

here since the 1980s. We have the member from Kindersley. He 

served as the leader of the Conservative Party. He sat in this 

House many years. The member from Cannington has sat in this 

House many years. He has served as House leader. There is a 

wealth of experience on the government benches. This cannot 

be described as the problem of inexperience. Inexperience 

cannot be the excuse for the mess they’re in. 

 

Some might say that you would use closure or you would use 

unilateral rule changes because you have such a heavy 

legislative agenda, that the agenda’s so heavy that you can’t get 

it done, simply because of the weight of the agenda. 

 

Well what do we have, Mr. Speaker, what do we have in the 

legislative agenda of this government? Well I think by latest 

count today we’re up to 25 Bills — 25 Bills. Now typically, Mr. 

Speaker, in this legislature during the course of a session we’ll 

deal with 60 to 70 Bills. That’s been typical over many years. 

The last session of our government, I’m sure there were about 

70 Bills. Well they’ve got a legislative load of — what? — a 

legislative load of now 25 Bills. And for those of us who have 

had the opportunity to listen particularly to the member from 

Dewdney who has described this legislative agenda very 

carefully, it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the use of closure and 

unilateral rule changes cannot be excused because of the 

legislative load. 

 

What have we got here? Well as the member from Dewdney 

pointed out and the member from Meewasin last evening, 

number one, we’ve got two Bills here that in effect break 

commitments that they made before the election. We’ve got a 

Bill that says we’re going to establish a growth stabilization 

fund. Even before the election, they were saying there’s no need 

for such a thing, and they were going to get rid of the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And we’ve got a Bill that imposes essential 

services legislation, which again before the election they said 

they wouldn’t do. So we’ve got two Bills, two Bills, doing what 

they said they wouldn’t do. 

 

Then we have, Mr. Speaker, a host of pieces of legislation on 

this legislative calendar that were in fact legislation drafted and 

worked on by the former government, by our party when we 

were in government. About 10, 12 of the Bills were handed to 

them from the former government. We see those in the 

legislative agenda. To be fair, Mr. Speaker, there are one or two 

pieces on this agenda that are new and do reflect things they 

said in the campaign: a fixed election date situation, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. There are one or two pieces that no one has ever 

heard of — this Bill that will create the circumstance of 

double-dipping, where people can be paid full salary while 

they’re receiving full pension from government. It’ll be 

interesting to see how the people of Saskatchewan, when they 

learn of this Bill, how they react to a government paying 

someone twice for doing the same job. We’ve got that piece of 

legislation. 

 

None of the legislation, as has been described by the member 

from Dewdney and by the member from Meewasin, has any 

particular requirements in terms of timelines to have it passed in 

this session. No family is going to wake up in Saskatchewan at 

the close of this session and feel a significant difference in their 

lives if this legislation passes or doesn’t. 

 

So it cannot be that we’re in this mess or the government’s in 

this mess because of the heavy legislative load that they’ve put 

on, that they’ve put on themselves or this legislature. 

 

And for sure, Mr. Speaker, for sure, in this case they cannot put 

the blame for the mess they’re in on the public service. They’ve 

tried this on other files when they’ve found themselves in a spot 

of trouble. When the Minister of Social Services found herself 

in trouble, her first reaction was of course to blame the public 

service, that they either don’t understand or didn’t get it 

straight. Well they cannot blame the public service for the mess 

they’re in today because it was made very clear to the Minister 

of Labour, very clear to the Minister of Labour, the legislative 

calendar that must be adhered to, to achieve passage of the 

labour Bills which he is so keen to pass, so keen to pass. 

 

He was provided by the officials a very clear timetable. And 

what did that timetable say, Mr. Speaker? Well he was told — 

and I would have expected him to share that with his cabinet 

colleagues like the member from Thunder Creek — that this 

session needed to begin on March 3. The public service, the 

officials, when asked to provide a legislative calendar to ensure 

the passage of these Bills, told the minister, part-time Minister 

of Labour, that this session needed to start on March 3. That 

was the advice from the public service. We have copies of that 

advice. We have seen it and we’ve shared it with the press. 

 

What did this government do? Well no, they decided we’d 

come back on March 10. For over a year, Mr. Speaker, or 

thereabouts, we’ve had March 3 as the opening date of this 

spring session, spring sitting. For some reason the government 

opposite decides we’re going to come back on March 10. They 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

waste an entire week, an entire week, and they cannot blame 

this, Mr. Speaker, they cannot blame this on the public service. 

The public service told them what they needed to do. If only 

they would have listened, we might not be in, they might not be 

in the mess we’re in today. They might not have to be using the 

most heavy-handed tool that belongs to any majority 

government in the British parliamentary system. But here they 

are using it. 

 

Or is the excuse, they don’t have the political staff in the 

ministers’ offices to steer them clear on these issues? Well that 

obviously or apparently, according to the government, cannot 

be the reason because we’re told they’ve provided all these 

significant salary increases to political staff; because they’re 

hiring all this expertise in the ministers’ offices. They’re paying 

all this money to their political staff so they can have the 

expertise in the political offices. Well I don’t know what their 

political staff was telling them — all this new expertise they’ve 

surrounded themselves with — but either they weren’t getting 

good advice or they weren’t listening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they’re into the mess they’re in, five months after achieving 

a majority government. Five weeks into the session, they all of 

a sudden have to say to each other: Houston, we’ve got a 

problem. We’ve got a problem, and the problem is we cannot 

get our legislation passed because we didn’t observe the rules 

established by this legislature not much more than a year ago — 

rules by the way, Mr. Speaker, rules by the way that were 

developed together by members on both sides, rules that were 

agreed by all members, and in fact have received the praise of 

members including — as we heard today — praise from the 

Government House Leader. So the rules were well known. 

Their legislative intentions I expect were well known, but 

they’ve got themselves into a big mess. 

 

So what’s the solution? What’s the solution? The 

sledgehammer, the tyranny of the majority. What’s the 

solution? Not negotiation, not discussion, not a response to 

opportunities to sit down House Leader to House Leader, or 

Deputy House Leader to Deputy House Leader, or Whip to 

Whip, or Leader to Leader — not that solution, but the 

knee-jerk reaction after only five weeks in this session; the 

knee-jerk reaction, well we’ll impose our will through that tool, 

those tools, which are available to a majority government, the 

tools of unilateral rule change and closure because we’re not 

going to stand debate on the rule changes. 

 

The question remains, Mr. Speaker, how did this government 

get itself in this mess? Well I think there are two, there are two 

reasons, two explanations, and the first is simple incompetence. 

It is simply incompetence — incompetence at the highest level; 

incompetence from members who have sat in this legislature for 

years, who know the rules, who were part of the rules. And, Mr. 

Speaker, these members have known these rules, I would 

suggest, better even than members on this side of the House 

because in opposition they were fully apprised of the rules and 

used them to their best advantage. It is simply incompetence 

that they’ve got themselves in this mess, incompetence that’s 

got us in a situation where now they have to, they have to use 

the heavy-handed tools of unilateral rule changes and closure. 

 

It is incompetence, Mr. Speaker. And this only follows in the 

pattern that we have seen, particularly since the beginning of 

this sitting and in fact from the day they were sworn in. I mean 

it was hardly competent on the day they were sworn in that the 

Premier of the province stood up and said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the financial situation in this province is stark. 

That was hardly a competent assessment of where we’re at in 

terms of the finances of the province. It was hardly competent 

the way they attacked the Labour Relations Board. I mean firing 

the whole board in the midst of a hearing, leaving 30 cases 

outstanding; hardly competent that they’ve done away with an 

existing Labour Relations Board, firing them without cause, and 

of course foisting on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan severance 

costs that are going to result in — when you look at all the 

severance they’re going to have to pay — millions of dollars. 

 

This is hardly competent, Mr. Speaker. It’s hardly competent 

when you hire . . . you don’t hire; you appoint a new Chair of 

the Labour Relations Board without a competitive process that 

was in place. 

 

We look at the demonstration of incompetency that surrounded 

the Minister of Social Services in the handling of her 

department. She sits on the caucus benches. She sits on the 

Treasury Board. She sits on the cabinet. She approves a plan for 

her department. She has it placed in the budget. We all read it 

right in the budget. And the day after, she said well that wasn’t 

what I wanted done, and she unilaterally changes the budget. 

Doesn’t speak to the Minister of Finance, she just goes out and 

says, well I was wrong, and we’re just going to change that. 

That’s hardly competent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was hardly competent when the Premier came out, the Deputy 

Premier, and said we’re going to rid the province of the wheat 

sheaf symbol, and then under some public pressure, they 

reverse . . . [inaudible] . . . on that. That was hardly a competent 

process. 

 

And maybe the height of incompetence, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen in the whole debate around Station 20 in Saskatoon where 

they axed this funding that was in the hands of the community. 

Every minister that’s asked to respond gives a different reason. 

The Premier’s got a different reason. They’re misinformed. But 

now they simply have dug in their heels and apparently won’t 

listen to reason or won’t listen to the community. Mr. Speaker, 

this is, this is a demonstration of incompetence. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is not the conclusion of the Leader of 

the Opposition alone or the opposition members, not just the 

conclusion of their political opponents. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

conclusion of the editorial board of The StarPhoenix. I don’t 

recall an editorial like this for years and years appearing in any 

paper, where a government, again, Mr. Speaker, a government 

that’s only five months into its mandate, a government that’s 

only five months into its mandate, only five weeks into its first 

session, and here’s what the editorial boards are saying. Quote: 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the public 

purse, Premier Brad Wall’s team has been extravagant in 

its spending, ham-handed in its communication strategy 

and incompetent [incompetent] in its delivery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in this mess, this government is in this 

mess and pushing the panic buttons all over the place because 

of incompetency. No reason, no reason that this government, no 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

good reason that this government should be using closure, using 

unilateral rule changes to have to achieve its legislative agenda. 

I mean it almost boggles the mind that they could have got into 

this mess this quickly in their mandate. 

 

Again I remind you, Mr. Speaker, it’s most often that closure is 

used only as a last resort, only as a last resort, when 

considerable debate has occurred, where in fact there is a 

weighty public policy issue at stake. But no, the response here, 

after getting themselves in the mess because of their own 

incompetence, is to use the heavy hand of closure and unilateral 

rule change. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, or is it because, or is it because this 

government has so mismanaged the nurses’ file that they fear 

the consequence of their mismanagement on that front? Have 

they so mismanaged the nurses’ file, Mr. Speaker, that now they 

fear work stoppages, that now they are desperate to have this 

essential services legislation in place so they have that 

sledgehammer to deal with nurses and other health care workers 

and other workers in the province? Is that what this is all about? 

Is this now panic because of the mismanagement of the nurses’ 

file? 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s been some significant 

mismanagement in that file as well, some significant 

mismanagement. I mean they sign an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] with the nurses in all good intent, I expect, but 

they cannot define how much this MOU is going to cost. They 

refuse to define it in terms of cost, Mr. Speaker. They have no 

costing on the MOU. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a father come into our constituency office, a 

father of a nurse who’s now practicing in Alberta, who desired 

to return to Saskatchewan. What did she find out? She finds out 

she can’t get a full-time job in this province. Now how can that 

be, Mr. Speaker? How can that be when this government said 

they were going to manage this file? That was supposed to be 

fixed. 

 

What have they done in terms of bargaining with nurses? Well 

they put on the bargaining table a bunch of take backs, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to take back from the nurses in this 

province things that they have negotiated and fought for over 

the years. Now that’s sure some way, Mr. Speaker, to 

encourage retention and recruitment of nurses — to go to the 

bargaining table and provide a bunch of take backs. 

 

So they can’t define the MOU. They don’t know how that’s 

going to work, and they don’t know where the money is. And 

by the way, Mr. Speaker, April 1 passed and money was 

supposed to flow in the MOU, and they won’t tell us if money 

has changed hands. 

 

So is this, Mr. Speaker, a desperate attempt to get their essential 

services legislation complete? Well perhaps that’s the reason. 

Again an example of incompetence. Now let me just say, Mr. 

Speaker, when a government is incompetent and has to find its 

way out of this incompetence by using the heavy-handed tools 

of unilateral rule change and closure, then we are in trouble as a 

province. If five months in, they have to use these tools, what’s 

it going to be like three and four years from now? What’s it 

going to be like? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a tyranny of the majority. We’ve heard 

members speak about it, Mr. Speaker. In my view if the power, 

if the exercise of power is made easy, that’s when the rights of 

individuals, families, and communities are in jeopardy. And it’s 

not the intention of this opposition to make the exercise of 

power easy for this group of men and women. 

 

We believe in the importance of opposition, and that’s why 

we’re going to fight this motion with every tool available to us. 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, you will see every member on this 

side of the House in his or her place standing against this 

government. At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, they’ll get 

their way. Make no mistake about it. They have the majority 

and they can impose the majority. At the end of the day, they’ll 

get their way. 

 

But I want that government and the people of Saskatchewan to 

know this: people will not forget. People will not forget how 

this government, this newly elected government in only five 

weeks has been so incompetent to put itself in the position of 

panic that it’s in, and they won’t forget that the first response 

was to use the sledgehammer on democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

What we are debating today is a drastic revision of the rules 

governing the sitting of the Legislative Assembly to extend 

hours greatly from the hours that had been agreed to over time. 

And that in and of itself should not, I think, be a cause of 

concern for members of the public because certainly in our 

history there are many occasions where members of the 

Legislative Assembly have worked even longer hours, but have 

done so by agreement. 

 

What we are also doing now is that we are limiting our remarks 

to 20 minutes as opposed to rules that allow members 

essentially to speak for an unlimited period of time. So people 

that are watching the proceedings may have some concern 

about the fact that their member of the Legislative Assembly’s 

remarks are being circumscribed, limited by a motion of closure 

by the government. 

 

Speaking of unlimited contribution to debate, I want to 

recognize the contribution made by the member for Regina 

Dewdney. I want to recognize the contribution to debate by the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin, both of whom have spoken 

now for the last two days on this particular motion. I think they 

made many excellent points. They did it very well. I think one 

columnist referred to the member of Regina Dewdney as being 

loquacious. Certainly both members, between them, covered the 

waterfront. I think they pretty much covered any and every 

issue that is germane to this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I feel a little bit like . . . Was it Elizabeth Taylor’s seventh 

husband on his wedding night when he said, you know, I know 

what to do; I just don’t know if I can make it interesting. And so 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

I have somewhat the same challenge here, Mr. Speaker, after 

the member for Regina Dewdney, after the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin, not to mention my own leader, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I know what to say. I just don’t know if it hasn’t 

already been said and if I can make it interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today in the brief time that I have available to 

me I want to quickly cover three topics, three topics. One is 

Yogi Berra. The second topic, Mr. Speaker, is the question of 

irony, and thirdly the question of competence. 

 

Now as to Yogi Berra, Mr. Speaker, you will know him as an 

American baseball player and manager coach who is also 

famous for his tendency to fracture the English language in 

provocative and interesting ways. Some of us would say that he 

is in fact a foremost American philosopher because of the issues 

that he raises in his use of the language. For example, “I want to 

thank you for making this day necessary.” Well I don’t know if 

that’s appropriate to this debate or not. It might have been 

appropriate when he said . . . he might have had the member for 

Regina Dewdney in mind when he said, “It ain’t over till it’s 

over.” And certainly that might have been going through the 

minds of some members, but today I want to talk about another 

observation of Mr. Berra’s and that is “It’s like déjà vu all over 

again,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what do I mean and what am I talking about? Well in 

1986, having just been elected the first time to this Legislative 

Assembly, and I think in my second day I was sitting in this 

Chamber — in opposition then too — was startled to find that 

the first item of business after the Throne Speech the day before 

was a motion by the government House leader to change the 

rules of the Legislative Assembly. No prior warning, no 

discussion. The then House leader, Eric Berntson — and I think 

members of the public will be aware of that name — 

unilaterally which means undertaken or done by one side or 

party as opposed to bilateral where it’s done by two parties or 

multilateral where it’s done by many parties or all parties, move 

unilaterally to change the rules of the Legislative Assembly. No 

warning, no discussion, change the rules. 

 

The specifics in that case were about quorum, and the intent 

was to make it easier for government members to be away from 

the Chamber. All in all, Mr. Speaker, it was considered by all to 

be an arrogant display of power that characterized the Devine 

regime in those years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we are again 21 and a half years later, déjà vu all over 

again, Mr. Speaker, a government again seeking to change the 

rules unilaterally without prior discussion, without consent from 

both sides, without agreement from both sides, seeking to 

change the rules of the Legislative Assembly. Now is it like 

1986 again, an arrogant display of power? Well I’ll leave that 

for history to write the book on that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll leave it 

for historians to decide and to write about whether this is an 

arrogant display of power. 

 

But I tell you the common element in both cases. Whether it’s 

1986 or now in 2008, the common element is right-of-centre 

parties that become frustrated with process quickly, quickly 

move to change the process that they’re involved in. We heard 

that from the Minister of Labour today in question period that 

the opposition would be concerned about process at all as 

opposed to simply being concerned about the substance of 

something that he is proposing to do. But I think again the 

common element here is that a right-of-centre party that is 

concerned or frustrated with process and moves quickly to 

change that process. 

 

Or is it the end — that is, the passage of legislation — the end 

justify the means, a unilateral change of the rules? Well for 

those that have watched this proceeding, they will know that’s 

an essential question for debate in any philosophy 100 class that 

one might take at university or elsewhere. Does the end justify 

the means? I think, you know, there are occasions where we all 

agree on the role or we agree on the end to be achieved. We all 

agree on the means that need to be employed. 

 

And there are other overriding ethical concerns. For example a 

police officer might be supported in using power or using force 

to restrain an individual or harm an individual if it’s done to 

protect the public. So there are occasions when we’d say, well 

that means can be supported because the ultimate end is a 

valuable end and is good for all of us. 

 

But the question is, is it justified here? Now the member for 

Regina Dewdney, the member for Regina Meewasin, and my 

leader before me dealt in detail with that question — especially 

the member for Regina Dewdney. And I would say, is it 

justified here? No. It’s not justified here when you look at the 

details of what the government is seeking to accomplish. 

 

What is their goal? What is it that they want to do at the end of 

the day? For example, one of things they say is important for 

the government to do is to repeal The Potash Development Act. 

I think that’s the name of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. Now this is a 

Bill that’s been on the books for 30-plus years. Since the mid 

1970s, they’ve been on the books, has never been proclaimed as 

I understand it. 

 

But now the government wants to repeal this Act. So is it urgent 

after 30-plus years? Now the members of the public might well 

be asked, is it urgent that you repeal something that’s been on 

the books, has never been proclaimed, has been there for 30 

years, is it urgent, urgent to repeal it? Does that justify this 

drastic change in the rules of the Legislative Assembly? Well I 

leave it for the public to judge. I know what the members are 

saying, but I leave it for the public to . . . 

 

Was it a campaign commitment, because sometimes 

government might be given some leeway if it’s a campaign 

commitment. Is it something they campaigned on? No, it 

wasn’t. So you know, the people that are watching the 

proceeding might well ask, well what then is the reason or the 

need for this drastic change in the rules to accommodate this 

particular piece of legislation? 

 

What about, for example, another Bill that’s before the 

Legislative Assembly: fixed election dates? Now that’s 

something that everyone knows the government campaigned 

on. They said we’re going to have fixed election dates. But is it 

urgent? Is it urgent given that the election they’re talking about 

is in 2011, some three and a half years from now? Is it 

particularly urgent to have this piece of legislation dealt with 

here and now and therefore would justify this kind of assault on 

the Legislative Assembly’s rules? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

Another one is essential services. Now was that a campaign 

commitment? No, it wasn’t. The government did not campaign 

to change essential services. They said in fact the contrary, that 

it wasn’t needed. Is it urgent? Well you know, we’ve had the 

present situation with us now, I think, for 103 years, Mr. 

Speaker, longer than that if you want to go back to the days of 

the North-West Territories. 

 

So you know, again the public might be asking themselves, is 

this a particularly urgent piece of legislation, given that the 

existing way we have of dealing with these items has existed for 

103 years? Are there egregious examples of late that would say 

we have to move on this as a matter of urgency? I don’t think 

so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So the government has options, Mr. Speaker. I agree that on 

Bill No. 1 — it’s called The Growth and Financial Security Act 

which essentially sets out a new framework for the 

government’s budgets for this year and future years — is 

something that will need to be passed in this Legislative 

Assembly because, as it stands at this point, the government is 

breaking the law. And the government will continue to break 

the law until it passes this new piece of legislation called The 

Growth and Financial Security Act. So out of all these Bills that 

the government said are so urgent, so necessary, there is one 

that definitely does need to be changed. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

are sensitive to that. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, you know, I think the government has 

options, and there’s nothing on the legislative agenda to justify 

the motion that’s before us. 

 

My second topic, Mr. Speaker: irony. Or is it perhaps more 

appropriate to speak of incongruity, lack of harmony . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . What do I mean? There have been 

many rule changes over the years in the Legislative Assembly. 

The common element of almost all of these rule changes is that 

they have come as a report with recommendations from 

committees of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

You see, the Legislative Assembly says look, we on both sides 

identify a need to change the rules. Set up a committee. And the 

common element here is that this committee is then comprised 

of members from both sides of the Legislative Assembly. They 

go out, they review the rules, then they come back with a report 

with recommendations which, you know, in the main get 

adopted by the Legislative Assembly. But again the common 

element is that they are mutually acceptable to both sides of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And each change in the rules that we have seen over the years, 

Mr. Speaker, rests on a foundation of rule changes that have 

been agreed upon by previous legislatures. And these changes 

go right back to 1877 under the former North-West Territories 

council that preceded the Legislative Assembly, and then 

followed by rule changes in — oh there’s a long list of these, 

Mr. Speaker — in 1906 when a motion was made by the 

then-premier, Walter Scott, for rule changes; 1917 a complete 

revision. 1918 there was amendment, 1928, 1931, ’34, ’56, ’57, 

’63, 1970, ’76, 1980, 1981. And there have been rule changes 

since that time, the most recent being of a year or so ago, and 

again the conclusion that we can draw from all of these rule 

changes is mutual consent, Mr. Speaker, agreement from both 

sides of the Legislative Assembly. Why? Because we recognize 

that to maintain parliamentary democracy it’s best to have 

agreement on the process. Because if we don’t have agreement 

on the process — and parties and governments come and go — 

if we don’t have agreement on the process, then this Legislative 

Assembly essentially has the law of the jungle and might is 

right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s not the way it should be, and that is the thing that 

should very much concern the members of the public who are 

watching because at some level people understand that 

parliament, as was noted here by a former Law Clerk from the 

parliament in London, that parliament or the legislature is a 

sublimation of civil war, that if you don’t have a Legislative 

Assembly, if you don’t have a parliament, then how do people 

reconcile strongly held views about how society should be 

governed? 

 

And I agree that the members on the other side will have 

strongly held views that differ from our side, but the question is, 

how do you resolve that? How do you resolve that in a peaceful, 

democratic way unless it’s through a Legislative Assembly? 

And then how do you do that effectively if there can’t be 

agreement on the rules that govern this place, Mr. Speaker? 

And that’s why it should matter to the public. It’s their 

Legislative Assembly. It’s their province. I think the public, you 

know, likes to see progress. The public likes to see results, but 

even more the people of Saskatchewan, I dare say, like fair 

play, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the irony, the incongruity of a majority forcing changes of 

rules, to rules that have been developed by mutual consent. 

There is an incongruity there that you would now have the 

majority seeking to change something that we’ve all agreed to 

in the past. And so have members of this very opposition or 

government that now sit in this Legislative Assembly, sat there 

then, that agreed to these rule changes. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, a word about incompetence, the leader 

touched on this. You know the public might be saying that, well 

it’s a new government, and we should cut them a little slack. 

You know, there’s a new government, and they’re susceptible 

because they’re learning their way to making a few mistakes. 

And, you know, to be sure that members in the opposition who 

seem to have clear views based on limited information get into 

office and therefore say, well you know, we can’t quite do it the 

way that we thought we could do it. 

 

For example, there are aspects of the budget which now have a 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund that in opposition the members argued 

against. But now there’s again a Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

because they found out, upon reflection and discussion with the 

experts in the civil service, that certain changes perhaps 

shouldn’t be made. 

 

And I think the public kind of understands that, kind of 

understands that. But, you know, you can’t understand this 

particular instance of where both sides of the House and 

especially the opposition who is now the government — now 

the government — is probably more intimately aware of how 

the rules work or, you know, how the rules work, how it is that 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

you need to get legislation through this House. There’s no 

cutting them any slack on this particular change, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s none at all. We all understand the need to provide a 

new government some slack but not when it comes to following 

the rules of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Again when it comes to the rules the now government . . . And 

they like to call themselves the new government, but maybe 

they call themselves the new government because they’re trying 

to appeal to the public about when they stumble and make 

mistakes, and we’ve certainly seen evidence of lots of this over 

time. They prefer to call themselves the new government, and 

they’re hoping the government might cut them some slack but 

not in this particular case. 

 

I think the issue here is one of competence or lack thereof. They 

had an opportunity to plan the session, to take advantage of the 

available hours, and they didn’t do it. Through December and 

early March they refused to call evening sittings when they 

could have been debating these Bills. I don’t know why. Maybe 

they had social engagements or obligations on their calendar. I 

don’t know. But that was an opportunity they had. 

 

They could have taken advantage of the calendar. We still don’t 

understand to this day when you publish your calendar and say 

we’re going to come back on March 3 to give us the additional 

time to deal with the legislative load that we have, and then to 

change that to set that back to March 10, Mr. Speaker. So why 

delay calling the legislature in March when that is the very 

thing that, you know, you should not have done if you wanted 

to pass the legislation in a timely fashion? 

 

So I want to be charitable and call it incompetence, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the alternative — ham-handed, arrogant display 

of power — is . . . I want to be charitable. I wouldn’t say it was 

that. I would say that this is, simply put, Mr. Speaker, 

incompetence. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the government and 

again to quote Yogi Berra, “I want to thank you for making this 

day necessary,” to which I would add, it wasn’t necessary. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I want to join 

in the debate to support the efforts of my colleagues in trying to 

point out to the people of Saskatchewan what exactly is going 

on here. And for the sake of my listeners that may be back 

home, because some communities have the legislative channel 

and others don’t, but I want to quickly explain, to kind of 

encapsulize if you will, what’s happening here. 

 

What’s happening here, usually a government has the 

opportunity through the Legislative Assembly to push forward 

their Bills and their budget and so on and so forth. And what 

clearly happened was the folks across the way, because of their 

inexperience and primarily because of their incompetence, they 

didn’t figure out and didn’t add properly the amount of hours 

that they needed to sit in the Assembly to go through all the 

Bills and to make sure that all the legislative agenda that they 

have in mind or they have in place, that they get it through. 

 

But these were the rules, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the two 

parties negotiated several years ago. And the House Leader on 

that side — who’s still the current House Leader, was the 

House Leader at the time when he was in opposition — and of 

course, the House Leader on our side at the time, Mr. Hagel, 

they negotiated the deal. And they said okay, we will set the 

agenda for the Legislative Assembly, and we’ll identify certain 

times that you’re allowed to debate Bills. We’ll set up a certain 

amount of hours that you’re allowed to look at the budget. 

We’ll also look at this whole notion of community input, public 

consultation. And so we started moving the stuff forward. And 

boy, it really sounded like it’s going to be a good democratic 

process for both the opposition and for the government. 

 

Now we fast-forward to 2008. They’re finally, after years and 

years of trying, they finally get to be government. And hold it 

— they didn’t put enough hours on the schedule to follow 

through with what they agreed with a couple of years ago. 

 

So we as a party and certainly as an opposition want to make 

this very simple point to the people of Saskatchewan and to 

those that are listening. They bungled this process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They did not figure out the amount of hours that they 

needed, that they agreed to, that they simply did not have the 

hours allotted in this session to make not only their legislative 

agenda pass, but the budget pass as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it’s just really important to point out to the people of 

northern Saskatchewan, the point we’re trying to raise, the point 

we’re trying to raise is, quite clearly, as an opposition party and 

as members of the opposition we want to point out to the people 

of Saskatchewan and the people of northern Saskatchewan, a 

very simple function of the government is to get your legislative 

agenda through and your budget through if you have the 

majority. And these guys somehow bungled it up. 

 

Now they come to the opposition saying, well we made a big 

mistake here. Can we fix this? And we’re saying oh no, we’re 

going to tell the people of Saskatchewan, because of your 

inexperience, what exactly is transpiring here. So they come 

along and they say, well we have more voters than you, and we 

have more MLAs than you. And we said, yes you do. And they 

said okay. 

 

So they’re kind of figuring this out here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They’re doing a number count. It took them a couple days. And 

they said, yes we do have more members than them. Why don’t 

we just simply ram through legislation saying we’re going to 

stop all consultation. We’re just going to do what we have to do 

as government because we added our numbers and we have 

more MLAs than you. And we said on this side, yes you do. 

 

And that’s what this closure motion is all about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is quite clearly that they’re simply using their majority 

to squelch independence. Mr. Speaker, they’re simply using 

their majority to stifle advice and quite frankly to circumvent 

due process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what I’ve done is, I’ve taken the luxury . . . I always look at 

the quote in The StarPhoenix. And they have it after every one 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

of their columns. Every year or every weekday, they give us an 

opinion, and it’s called the SP opinion — and of course SP 

being The StarPhoenix, not Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And The 

StarPhoenix opinion simply says on the bottom, it says, and I 

quote, “Democracy cannot be maintained without its 

foundation: free public opinion and free discussion throughout 

the nation of all matters affecting the state within the limits set 

by the criminal code and the . . . law.” And this was a quote 

presented by the Supreme Court of Canada in 1938, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So what I’ve done is . . . I think that really sets the tone of what 

is happening here. They messed up the legislative agenda. They 

didn’t properly figure out their time frames. And then all of a 

sudden . . . It took a couple of days for them in the session to 

realize they had more MLAs than us. So all of a sudden they 

said, okay we’re going to have this closure motion. We’re going 

to shut down all debate. We’re going to continue moving this 

thing forward. 

 

And it’s not about any principle. That’s the most amazing thing. 

It’s not about one specific agenda or it’s not about any, really, 

crisis that’s out there, as the member from Dewdney explained. 

He indicated that all the Bills that they’re talking about on their 

legislative agenda could be easily passed. This is not a matter of 

life and death. And they simply made the mistake because 

they’re inept and they’re inexperienced. And I point out as well 

is that they simply don’t have the ability to govern. And this is 

why I want to make that point to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But in the future, Mr. Speaker, when I explain the quotes here, 

especially the Supreme Court of Canada quote of 1938, that 

always follows The StarPhoenix opinion, every day, it uses a 

number of words. And I wanted to explain to the members 

opposite, I had the advantage of looking through the Oxford 

dictionary. The full title of it — of course you have to do this 

for, you know, for copyright sake — is the Shorter Oxford 

English Dictionary on Historical Principles. And if you go to 

page 516 of the first volume, and I looked underneath . . . And 

this is for the guys across the way here. And it says, it talks 

about democrat. What is a democrat? And it says, “an adherent 

or advocate of democracy.” So democratic and democrat, it’s 

pretty much the same principle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I’m trying to explain to them, in the English dictionary, what 

democrat is or democratic is — again I’ll be very, very 

repetitious here — “an adherent or advocate of democracy.” 

And they can find that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on page 516. And 

the dictionary of course is the Shorter Oxford English 

Dictionary on Historical Principles. 

 

The second word I think they have trouble with — and that’s 

the first word I think they have a lot of trouble with — is of 

course process, process. You know, and I wanted to look up in 

the dictionary again, the same dictionary, the Shorter Oxford 

English Dictionary on Historical Principles. This is volume 2 

by the way. 

 

And we look at this whole notion of the word principle. And 

what does the word principle say? And I’m just going to read it 

for them so they know, and this is on page 1671. And principle, 

it says, “especially great; of high degree of importance.” So 

they know what principle is now. And they know what 

democrat is. 

 

And the third word I think they have difficulty with, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the whole notion of process. So we got 

democratic figured out, and you got principle figured out. And 

this is not from me; it’s not from the member from Athabasca. 

This is from a dictionary. You know, this dictionary is used by 

hundreds of thousands of students and professional people. And 

on process, if you turn to page 1677 of the second edition . . . I 

know I’m confusing those guys across the way with the first 

edition and second edition, but there’s so many words in here 

that they need to understand and study. But on process, on 

process, it says, “a continuous and regular action or succession 

of actions taking place or carried on in a definitive, definite 

manner.” 

 

So now we’ve explained democratic. Now we’ve explained 

process. And now we’ve explained principle. Those three 

words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all in the dictionary. And I 

think sometimes the reason I do this is I don’t think they 

understand those three words very clearly. And it’s an amazing, 

it’s an amazing feat to be able to sit here and say, well we made 

a mistake, but we’re going to blame it on the opposition. We’re 

going to blame it on the opposition. We’re going to say they’re 

holding up business, and they’re being unreasonable, and we’re 

just a new government; give us a break here. 

 

And the point is the people of Saskatchewan ought to know is 

that this is not a new mistake, or it’s not a new government that 

come along and didn’t understand the rules. They designed the 

rules in co-operation with us two years ago. We, as government 

of that time and they as an opposition, negotiated these rules. 

 

And in these rules we clearly explain that you’re allowed a 

certain amount of hours to debate Bills, a certain amount of 

hours to go through all their discussion on the budget, and then 

after that, we’ll end. And then everybody has their due time and 

due process. And the opposition has their opportunity to ask 

questions, and the government of course has the opportunity to 

defend. Now that was done two years ago, if not three years 

ago. And a lot of people put a lot of effort into that. And we had 

a lot of great help in understanding how this new agenda was 

going to work for both the government and the opposition in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when they come along and say, give us a little bit of slack, 

we didn’t understand the rules, I tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, they did understand because they were part of 

the architects of those rules. 

 

So now suddenly we fast-forward again to 2008. And once 

again democracy and principle and process are words they 

simply do not understand nor do they care to respect, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that’s one of the most important and 

fundamental point, I think, is made at the bottom of every 

StarPhoenix — point that they make. Every StarPhoenix 

opinion that they write, they always follow up with that, with 

that statement. 

 

And I want to read it out again. And this is really important, 

people know. And the statement is, “Democracy cannot be 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

maintained without its foundation: free public opinion and free 

discussion throughout the nation of all matters affecting the 

state within the limits set by the criminal code and the common 

law.” And that I think, it really resonates with a lot of people 

because it’s allowing the people of Saskatchewan and the world 

to say, democracy has a solid foundation if we’re allowed to 

seek public opinion, if we’re allowed to have free speech within 

a very responsible fashion. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I don’t 

think on any front the responsible action that we talk about and 

The StarPhoenix makes reference to is not being undertaken by 

that party through this closure motion. 

 

Now what is simply happening here is that if you design the 

rules and somebody explains the process, the letters, and the 

words that you have to understand, you have a bigger majority, 

well shouldn’t you at least leave the opportunity for people to 

have opinions and to participate in this great opportunity called 

democracy? 

 

And the obvious answer today to the closure motion — saying 

no we’re not going to listen to nobody no more; we’re shutting 

down all debate here — that is simply, as I mentioned at the 

start, it is squelching anybody’s opportunity to come forward to 

talk about some of their issues and their opinions to the 

opposition or to various venues that may be available to them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I think if I go back to my earlier start in 

politics, my father was — rest his soul — he was a very good 

source of advice for me. When I first started in politics, he’d 

give me some advice. And every time he gave me advice, I’d 

say to him, yes I know, dad; I know. So he’d give me some 

more advice. I’d say I know. And I’d say yes okay, dad, yes I 

know. So every second, third, fourth word out of my lips every 

time he gave me advice, I’d tell him, I know. So after about a 

year of that, he told me, come here, Buckley; come here, son. 

So I leaned over to him and I said, what? You don’t know a 

darn thing, he said to me. 

 

And several years later and after he passed away, he was right. 

There was a lot of things I didn’t know. So when you see 

people making the same mistake as this government is making 

. . . You know, my point is, if you’re going to get advice from 

people, it is foolish and unwise to disregard that advice. It is 

foolish and unwise to not give them the opportunity to give you 

advice. 

 

You don’t have to listen to all the advice you get, but it is very 

foolish of any government to arrogantly say we’re not going to 

listen to any more of this stuff; we’re putting this closure 

motion in. And you’re quite frankly stifling democracy and 

rejecting people’s advice to you. And that is not fair at all in 

any way, shape, or form, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think it’s important, again as I pointed out, in seeking 

advice . . . Some of the Bills are talking about essential services 

Bills. Well shouldn’t you talk to the public about this? 

Shouldn’t you talk to the labour movement? Shouldn’t you talk 

to the business community? Shouldn’t you talk to the cities, to 

the people that are being impacted? Should you not give them 

the opportunity? And the obvious answer is no, we made a 

mistake here; we can’t give people the opportunities so we’re 

going to ram through the closure motion. 

 

And I’ll point out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s also quite 

frankly appalling is that they think they know everything, and 

that’s a mistake I made early on, and I make that as a reference 

to them as a new government. The fact is if people are giving 

advice, don’t say, yes we know, we know. At the end of the day 

you go back to your mistakes, and this one is a big mistake. 

This is a big mistake . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You will 

find out. You will find out that you didn’t know. And that you 

made a lot of mistakes that eventually is going to catch up to 

you. And that kind of process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a process 

that is not good for any government. And sooner and later — 

and it’s going to much sooner than anybody expects — you’re 

going to find out that that has a price to pay. 

 

So again what I’m going to do, if the government really wants a 

copy of the definitions of the three words, I can forward that to 

them. But they’re going to have to ask me to do that; that’s 

extra work for me. So if they want a copy of those — what the 

word democrat means, what the word principle means, what the 

word process means — I can forward, not my interpretation of 

those words, but really from a dictionary, and that’ll help them 

figure what they’ve done wrong here. 

 

So you go on a number of fronts and on every front that you 

look at — whether it’s democracy or whether it’s principle or 

whether it’s process — these are words that are really important 

and essential to any government, those three words: process, 

democracy, and principle. And we don’t see any evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, any evidence that any of those three words or the 

principles behind those words are being exercised and certainly 

put in place by this government. 

 

So what’s happened to the people of Saskatchewan? For their 

very brief explanation, I’ll explain to them, that as a result of 

them having more MLAs, they’re putting in this closure motion 

to stop the debate that we’re talking about in terms of making 

sure that people understand that this official opposition is not 

trying to stop the business of that government. They simply 

made a mistake. They simply did not figure out that the rules 

that they put in place two years ago are in effect when they 

became government. Those rules were designed for the 

opposition and for the parties. They helped design those rules. 

Now all of sudden they’re government. They said oh we didn’t 

know those rules. Yes, okay didn’t know those rules. We want 

you to fess up and tell the people of Saskatchewan that you 

made a mess of this. And they wouldn’t do that, so what we do 

as an official opposition? Our job and our role and our 

responsibility is to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 

what they done wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I look back at the whole notion of anybody’s 

political career and life in general . . . is that being able to speak 

freely in this world, in this country, in this province, is pretty 

darn important. It’s pretty darn important. There are many 

countries throughout the world that don’t enjoy the same 

democracy that we have. Many times we fight with words in 

this Assembly whereas other countries fight with guns and 

bullets, and that’s not something that I think we ought to take 

lightly because there are many, many people throughout our 

history of this province and from many families and from many 

regions of this country and this province have fought for to 

sustain democracy and have fought to become a free world. 

 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

And when you see government come along and saying, well 

basically we don’t understand the rules we made, and as a result 

of that we’re going to put this closure motion in . . . We’re 

going to limit the debate. We’re going to ram through our 

legislative agenda. And that legislative agenda, there’s some 

part of the agenda that really quite frankly isn’t important in life 

or death, but there is some that do have ramifications. And all 

we’re asking is that we have public consultation and public 

input into the Bills. 

 

But once again, as I mentioned, there’s no process allowed. 

There are no principles involved, and as a result of that, 

democracy is failing from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

So I would close on these points. Number one is that when you 

have a new government, yes you want to try and give them 

some slack. But they understood the rules two or three years 

ago, and for them to claim ignorance and say well we didn’t 

know these rules existed, that was just plain shoddy 

governance, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll point out that, as a result of 

the shoddy governance, we were and still are prepared to work 

with the government to show them how this is done because 

obviously working together is important to build Saskatchewan. 

 

So once again we said, okay fine, you know, we can work with 

this, but we wanted to debate some of these Bills. We wanted to 

make sure we took them to the public to have the public’s input 

on some of these Bills, and they said, no we can’t do that. Well 

we said, we want to see that democracy maintained. We want to 

see that process unfold. And they said, no. So as a result of that 

we put in a motion to hold them here and to keep asking these 

questions. Now they put in this closure motion saying we’re 

going to stop you guys from freely speaking about some of the 

issues that affect Saskatchewan, not just for this year, for years 

and years to come. 

 

So again I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that they have their 

positions and opinions on various matters as we do, and the 

people of Saskatchewan will shop around to see which opinion 

that they share and which opinion that they’re comfortable with. 

But the principle of having free speech, the principle of 

defending democracy, and the principle of making sure as part 

of the good governance process that people talk about, that you 

have the due process of anything they do as a government . . . 

and, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing no evidence of that. And that 

adds up to the list of incompetence that we can easy rattle off 

here that this new government, so-called new government is 

really suffering through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I’ll point out to the people of the North, we want to 

have debates. We want to have discussion. We want the 

public’s input in some of these Bills. These guys don’t want 

that, Mr. Speaker, and that’s unfortunate. And that really in my 

opinion stifled democracy. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Finally I’d point out in the last 20 seconds I have as a result of 

being stifled, that yes okay, it’s only 20 minutes today. But we 

will take 20 minutes every single day to bring up issues that 

makes that government uncomfortable. And this side of the 

House will defend democracy. This side of the House 

understands process, and we understand principle, Mr. Speaker 

— something that those individuals across the way have a great 

amount of difficulty understanding. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

stand today and join in on the discussion. I do feel it’s been an 

important discussion that we’ve had, and I look forward to the 

comments that we will continue to hear this afternoon and into 

the evening. I believe this discussion is important, Mr. Speaker, 

because the issues that it touches, the issues that it addresses 

truly cut to the heart of our democracy and truly cut to our 

system of parliamentary democracy. 

 

They address the concerns of people who trust in our political 

system to take into consideration the interests of the majority as 

well as the interests of the minority. And it’s through this 

system, it’s through the tension back and forth between the 

majority and the minority that at the end of the day the citizens 

of this province are well served. So I believe this discussion is 

important to the citizens of Saskatchewan. And it’s especially 

important to the people of my constituency, the people of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

I would like to start off my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by turning to 

a news release that was issued on October 16, 2006. And this 

news release was issued by the Legislative Assembly: “House 

Services Committee Agrees to Permanent Legislative 

Calendar.” That’s the title of this news release, Mr. Speaker. 

And I would like to share the first two paragraphs of this news 

release because I feel it gives us an idea of some of the reasons 

why there are rules in place in our legislature to ensure that 

debate occurs in a fair and in an honest and in an effective 

manner. The first paragraph reads: 

 

Today, the Standing Committee on House Services 

unanimously adopted recommendations that will see 

significant changes to the operation of the Legislature. 

 

A sub-committee . . . 

 

This is the second paragraph: 

 

A sub-committee composed of the Speaker and both 

House Leaders have recommended changes that will result 

in the establishment of a permanent legislative calendar of 

65 sitting days per session — 25 days in the fall and 40 in 

the spring. Speaker P. Myron Kowalsky said “the changes 

are another step toward the process of modernization”. 

The goal is to make the Assembly work more effectively 

and efficiently. The new calendar will also change the 

number of weekly sitting days from four to five, similar to 

other western provinces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as a new MLA, I’ve remarked about how I’ve 

gone through past news releases to get an idea of what some of 

the previous decisions of governments have been and going 

through copies of Hansard to get a sense for the type of debate 

that occurs and some of the comments that are made. 

 

So as I was going through this news release, Mr. Speaker, there 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

were really three things that jumped out at me, three aspects to 

this news release. The first was the date of the news release. 

And this might seem like a simple point, but it actually is an 

important point for this discussion. The date is October 16, 

2006. So this change, Mr. Speaker — we’re currently in the 

year 2008 — so this change occurred some time ago. 

 

Members on both sides of the House were aware of this change 

that took place some time ago. And I think for the most part 

members on both sides of the House had adapted their actions, 

their plans, their roles within government and opposition to fit 

within the schedule. So my first point is that this is something 

that’s been around for a little while. 

 

The second point, Mr. Speaker, in this news release . . . and this 

is in the first paragraph. Unanimously — that word jumped out 

at me. So when this change occurred back in 2006, there was 

understanding from all parties involved, from both sides. It was 

a co-operative effort that occurred through negotiation. And I 

think that’s an important point to remember because when using 

the power of closure, that’s not something that involves 

negotiation. 

 

And the third point, Mr. Speaker, about this news release that I 

would like to draw to the Assembly’s attention, it’s actually two 

words, two words that start with e. And they’re in the sentence 

where . . . at the time the sentence read: “The goal is to make 

the Assembly work more effectively and efficiently.” So I think 

those are two important things to remember why this change 

occurred back in 2006, why everyone agreed to it. Both sides 

agreed to it, Mr. Speaker, because they realized that these 

changes would indeed be effective and these changes would 

indeed lead to greater efficiency for the operation of the 

Assembly. 

 

As you would be aware of, Mr. Speaker, these changes are part 

of a general process of modernization of parliamentary 

democracies in Canada and the Western provinces, and actually 

around the Commonwealth as well. And other legislatures, 

other parliaments have caught on to this idea as well that 

predictability with the calendar allows government business to 

operate in a more efficient and effective manner. 

 

The House of Commons in Ottawa adopted a parliamentary 

calendar in 1982 — some time ago — in order to make times 

more predictable. We’ve also seen a sweeping modernization 

agenda in the United Kingdom, again for the reasons of 

efficiency and effectiveness. And as I mentioned we’ve seen it 

in other parts of Western Canada — in Alberta in ’93; Manitoba 

in ’96 which was made permanent in 2003, and in British 

Columbia in 2002. So it’s a change that people across the board 

realize is an important change to make. And as in the case with 

this jurisdiction in the province of Saskatchewan, the changes 

usually occur in a spirit of being co-operative and working 

collaboratively. I think that’s an important point to remember. 

 

In this legislature October 16 was the date in 2006 when the 

Standing Committee on House Services unanimously adopted 

the recommendations of the subcommittee. And this was not 

entered into lightly. It was not entered into without forethought 

or consideration. It was after the committee looked at what was 

occurring across the board and realized that this is a good 

decision; this is something that we need to implement here in 

Saskatchewan and need to move on with. 

 

One reason that was identified as to why this is a good decision 

is because changes like this can reduce the partisan 

manoeuvring that can take place. It brings more predictability 

for both sides of the House to operate efficiently. 

 

I think also that this was recognized on both sides of the House. 

The New Democratic Party, we realized this was something 

good. But it’s also something that was supported by the then 

opposition House leader where he did indeed view this as 

improving the way the Legislative Assembly works. On May 

17, 2007 the member from Melfort provided this statement in 

the Legislative Assembly, and I quote: 

 

. . . I believe this is the first full session where we’ve 

operated under the new rules of the Assembly that have 

been established and developed . . . in balance we have 

been very successful in bringing our Saskatchewan 

legislature to the forefront of parliamentary process, not 

only in this province but also in the entire country . . . we 

can all be rightly proud of the work that we’ve done to 

accomplish these changes. 

 

These changes . . . are for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan firstly . . . the fact that there is more 

predictability also, in particular, benefits our constituents 

and the people . . . of the province . . . 

 

So clearly at that time, when this occurred, all the players 

involved recognized that this was a good decision and one that 

should be embraced. And clearly both parties realized that this 

change was good and adjusted accordingly, and also the 

departments or the ministries also saw that this was a good 

change. And this is, Mr. Speaker, indicated. 

 

I have a calendar here from the Ministry of Labour that was 

prepared in preparation for this spring sitting. And it’s a 

calendar where I assume ministry officials within the 

Department of Advanced Education, Employment and Learning 

are giving advice to the minister to pass on to the Government 

House Leader, advice about how much time is needed to pass 

the legislation that they want to have passed, the legislation that 

they view as important, and the legislation that they want to 

have taken care of and marked off on the agenda, brought into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On this calendar, Mr. Speaker, March 3 is identified as the day 

session resumes, and throughout that week there are days that 

are identified, days that would be appropriate times to engage in 

the reading of a Bill and having debate. So that was March 3. 

 

And I know in my office in my constituency in Saskatoon 

Massey Place, I had the calendar up on my wall, and I had 

checked on-line on the web page, oh when are we starting up, 

because I was making appointments for the month of March, 

and I was lining up meetings with constituents and meeting 

with different groups in my area. And I had actually booked off 

that March 3 week because I was expecting to go to work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it was a bit of a shocker when I learned that we weren’t 

going to work in the legislature until the following week. So 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

while ministry officials had a sense as to when we should start 

sitting, somehow that information did not get transferred from 

the Ministry of Learning to the Government House Leader. 

 

Now I don’t know if that’s because . . . the Minister of Labour, 

rather. I don’t know if that’s because the Minister of Labour 

chose not to pass on that information. I don’t know if that’s 

because the House Leader didn’t hear the information. Perhaps 

someone forgot about the information. There are many, many 

areas where the information could have fallen through the 

cracks. But the problem is that the information did fall through 

the cracks. People did know when we needed to start up, and 

that didn’t occur. So that is too bad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the government finds itself in a position where, oh boy, 

we had a calendar. We have a list of legislation that we would 

like to pass, but sadly we don’t have enough time. When we 

look at these rules that have been agreed to, there’s a certain 

amount of debate, a certain amount of discussion that needs to 

occur for each of these Bills to go through the legislative 

process. That’s the beauty of our system, Mr. Speaker, that 

there’s predictability to this system. 

 

So now we find ourselves . . . and eventually the government 

realized this, I believe, that well I’m adding up how many Bills 

there are, and I’m adding up how much time is needed on these 

Bills, and actually we don’t have enough time. We’re in a bit of 

a bind here. So instead of planning ahead, what they’ve opted to 

do is to use their majority to impose their will. 

 

It actually reminds me of a story, Mr. Speaker, about a young 

man I heard of named Joe. And Joe was a fine young man. He 

came from a town in Saskatchewan. He had a rough start in life 

actually. The relationship with his parents was a rocky one. In 

many ways it was sort of a marriage of convenience, and they 

didn’t have a lot of things in common, and there were a lot of 

divisions in that marriage. 

 

But Joe had a dream. Joe wanted to, someday, he wanted to go 

to the University of Saskatchewan. When he finished high 

school, he wanted to hop on that STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Corporation] bus and head to Saskatoon to 

attend the University of Saskatchewan. The first time he tried to 

get into university he actually, he wasn’t . . . He was a mediocre 

student; we’ll be perfectly honest here. And he was a fine guy 

but not a great student. The first time he applied to university, 

he actually didn’t get in. 

 

But the next time around, he did manage to meet the minimum 

threshold, and he was admitted to the university. So he was 

thrilled. He opened the letter. He rushed to his post office box, 

opened it up, and he read he was accepted to the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], and he was thrilled. So he called 

up his friends. He said guys, we’re going to have a party 

tonight. This is going to be a good time. I got into university. 

I’m very, very happy. 

 

But already Joe’s mom, who had really sort of guided him 

along through high school, she was a wise woman, and she 

began to give Joe some advice. And the next morning after this 

big party they were sitting at the breakfast table, just having 

some toast, and his mom thought it would be a good 

opportunity to maybe share some wisdom. 

She said, Joe, when you’re going to university, there’s a few 

things you need to remember. The first one, you’ve got to make 

a packing list. You can’t just one day go off to university. You 

have to have a list of the things you want to take to the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The second thing is you need a plan for the semester, Joe. You 

can’t just sign up for classes, show up, and think everything’s 

going to go well. You need to take, sort of, the bird’s-eye view 

of the situation and see what you have to do and develop a plan. 

 

And the third bit of advice that Joe’s wise mother gave to him 

was that you need to be disciplined. It’s not enough simply to 

have a duffle bag full of stuff. It’s not enough to have a plan, 

but you actually have to follow it. I think that was good advice. 

 

But sadly Joe, he was strong-willed and hard-headed, and Joe 

simply just carried on with the rest of the summer. Yes, he 

worked away at a few part-time jobs, saved a little bit of 

money, enough to pay tuition, but barely, with the rising cost of 

tuition. And the time came for him to head to the U of S. 

 

[16:15] 

 

He knew the bus was leaving at noon. 10:30, Mr. Speaker, he 

rushed into his room, rushed into his room, just grabbed a little 

bit of everything. He took a couple pairs of socks. He took a 

toothbrush, but forgot his toothpaste. He took his ball cap. He 

took a few notepads, a few pens. And he thought, oh I’m set for 

university. This is going to be great. I’m going to do so well. 

 

Well Joe arrived at the university and boy, did he have a good 

time. The first little while on campus, Joe was down in Louie’s 

every day in the afternoon. He became an exceptional pool 

player. He also spent a lot of time hanging out in the tunnel, Mr. 

Speaker, just watching people go by, drinking coffee. 

 

But he wasn’t taking his studies seriously, Mr. Speaker, and 

mom would get on the phone and say, Joe, are you doing your 

studies? You know we don’t want you to be a Christmas 

graduate. We want you to do us proud. We want you to spend 

four years at the university. And Joe said, don’t you worry, 

mom. In my dorm room, the student that was there last year left 

his textbooks. And believe it or not, they’re the same classes 

I’m taking, and they’ve even highlighted the important parts. So 

it’s not going to be a problem. I can just turn to the pages where 

they’re folded over, where there’s a bit of pink and orange, and 

I’ll read those. Things will be just fine. 

 

Well the semester went on, Mr. Speaker, and Joe carried on 

with this approach. He carried on with this approach, rather 

lackadaisical, just taking life as it comes. And I mean it’s an 

okay way to live for a while, but after mid-terms arrived, Mr. 

Speaker, Joe realized, I actually need to get some things done 

here, and I’m in a bit of a bind. I mean, at the beginning of the 

year I had all these things that I wanted to do and now the time 

has just slipped by because I didn’t heed my mother’s advice. 

I’ve made a horrible mistake here. I was not . . . I didn’t have a 

list. You know, I left a lot of the things back home, some things 

that I actually didn’t want to leave there — my mom found 

them — and that was a problem. But I also didn’t have a plan. 

And not only did I not have a plan . . . well I sort of had a plan, 

but it was just on a napkin, and then I didn’t really follow it, 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

and that was a major problem. 

 

So right towards the end of the semester, Joe realizes he’s in a 

situation here that’s a problem. He rushes off to his professor, 

Mr. Speaker, and he says to his prof, you know, like I’m in a 

real problem here. I’m in a bad situation. I know I’m supposed 

to have this done, and I’m involved in this group project. It’s a 

huge assignment. People are counting on me, so many people 

are counting on me, and I’ve dropped the ball, professor. 

 

And the professor said, but Joe, I gave you the syllabus on day 

one. You knew the rules. You knew that the paper was worth 

this much. The assignment was worth this much. Group 

participation was worth this much. And what did you do, Joe? 

You just hung out at Louie’s. And, I mean, that’s an okay way 

to live in the short term, but it’s not a long-term plan, Joe. 

 

And Joe said, I know I’ve really erred, professor, but if you 

could just cut me some more slack. You see, I’m involved in 

this group project, and the group . . . I know they all agreed to 

these rules. I know the group was counting on me, so if you 

could just provide me with a bit more time to do this, my group 

would really appreciate it. I think they’d be well served. And, 

you know, I wouldn’t disappoint my mom, and at the end of the 

day, pleasing my mom, pleasing my parents is what’s really 

important to me. 

 

So the professor said, you know, Joe, while a man reaps what 

he sows, while it’s important for you to learn from your 

mistakes; I’m going to have mercy on you Joe, and I’m going to 

provide an extension of time, Joe, for you to complete this 

project. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we learn a few lessons from this 

parable of Joe, and that’s that one needs to be prepared. They 

need to be prepared. They need to pack up their bags well. You 

need to clean out things out properly. They need to have a game 

plan, Mr. Speaker, and they need to follow that game plan. And 

when that doesn’t occur, Mr. Speaker, when that doesn’t occur, 

there are problems. Mom is not made proud. The students in the 

group with the assignment are not made proud, or not pleased 

with that person. They’re let down. It’s devastating to them, 

affecting their marks on the course, and they’re in a real bind. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, well I’ve outlined this parable and identified 

the three important lessons that I think we can take from this 

process and relate it to this legislature. The same rules need to 

apply. You need to be prepared. You need to have a plan. And 

you need to be disciplined to follow through on it. The 

difference here is that in the story Joe is dependent upon the 

professor in showing mercy. In our situation the Joe has the 

right to force his will on the professor, and that’s a real 

problem. That’s why democracy is not served well when the 

majority bullies their way over the minority. 

 

As I said, the Sask Party knew the rules. They knew the rules 

because they helped make them. The Sask Party is ignoring the 

rules because they failed to have a plan and failed to follow a 

plan that they didn’t have, so that’s quite obvious what the 

problem was. This is not the right thing to do for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan citizens are well served when 

there is strong debate on both sides. So, Mr. Speaker, with this I 

will conclude my remarks. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today on this very odd day. It’s a day that we’re defending 

the rights of democracy, the majority here who’s overruling and 

tearing apart some of the basic principles of democracy. And I 

find it very alarming. I’ve been here for over six years and this 

is a concern that I have. 

 

And I want to start out by saying that I want to thank the 

speakers who have gone before me to highlight this issue. And 

they’ve repeated themselves maybe a couple of times, but I 

think we’ve learned an awful lot over the last couple of days. 

And I want to start by mentioning the member from Regina 

Dewdney and the member from Saskatoon Meewasin and the 

good work that they’ve done in highlighting the issues. 

 

I want to repeat one of the quotes that the member from 

Dewdney started his speech with, and I think this is very, very 

important. Mr. Speaker, he was quoting from a book called 

“The Role of the Legislature,” written by Merrilee Rasmussen. 

And he goes right to the conclusion. And he talks about the 

erosion of the legislature, the role of the legislature in the period 

from 1982 to 1991. And this is what it says. This is the quote: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, albeit perhaps . . . 

more slowly than at times in the past. The Devine 

Conservatives believed that they had a majority of the 

seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted. 

 

And are we seeing history repeat itself today, this week. This is 

very, very sad when we see the tyranny of the majority and they 

are acting very much the same way. 

 

Of course it’s an interesting process that we’re in. We’re seeing 

a government that’s caught by its incompetence going to attack 

some basic principles of democracy. 

 

And so what are some of these incompetent, some of the things 

that they’ve done wrong? Well they want to change the rules of 

the Assembly. And it’s nothing more than a cover-up. So a 

basic function of any government is to prepare legislation, write 

it, plan for it. But clearly they have not done their job here. It’s 

only a basic function, and they really missed the opportunity to 

show what they’re really made of. 

 

Or maybe they really are showing what they’re made of. This 

11th-hour change is nothing more than an attempt to really 

cover up their mismanagement and a stunning incompetence. 

And they really want to get some of these pieces of legislation 

through. Now we have spoken up against some of them. But 

some of them we’ve said, they’re really some of the things that 

we were going to do because some of the things we’ve agreed 

to. 

 

Now the Sask Party over there, they negotiated these changes 

when they were in opposition, but all of a sudden they’re a 

problem. Didn’t they understand the implications of what they 

were negotiating at that time? Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ll hear it 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

over and over again, and we’ve heard over the past couple days 

about why are they so incompetent about some simple 

mathematics. These rules didn’t sneak up on this government. 

They were in place when they were elected and they knew it. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they clearly knew the game when 

they got into it. 

 

And they’ve said over and over again, they keep going back to 

their platform and saying, we’re doing what we said we’d do. 

We got the book. We’re going by the book. Well they also 

know what the rules were of this House. Why are they changing 

it now? Well as I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s because of their own 

mismanagement and incompetence, you know. 

 

And of course what we see is particularly a couple ministries 

that are having some difficulty. And one that I was involved 

with in the past government, the Department of Labour, we see 

some major changes. And just today in question period, we 

understand now that these are some of the most broad, 

far-reaching legislation changes in Canada. 

 

And they didn’t quite plan it out they way they should have. 

And they had opportunities to have public meetings, refer it to 

committee, but they’ve not taken that opportunity. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that we had the opportunity to meet in 

December and March, have evening sittings, but they didn’t do 

that. Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve really dropped the ball. 

 

One area that I do want to talk about is, for example, where we 

see incompetence is particularly in the area of Social Services 

and the ministry there. Really, essentially, I think I’m on my 

fifth strike now. I’ve got to tell you about some of the things 

we’ve seen. 

 

Of course we were clearly disappointed to read and to hear the 

media reports of a meeting this morning that the Premier and 

the Minister of Health had with the folks from Station 20. They 

went apparently to listen. It wasn’t quite really listening. They 

apparently went to deliver a message, is more what it was, that 

it wasn’t going to happen . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It was 

on the website. You go to the The StarPhoenix website. It was 

on at 1 o’clock. Yes. Not a problem. So yes, you got to get with 

the program. 

 

But anyway, so you had this Station 20 fiasco — 2,500 people 

on Saturday morning show up to say this is the right thing, this 

is community driven, this is a solution for issues that inner city 

people face in Saskatoon and in Regina. And we put this money 

forward over a year ago to revitalize communities . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order. Order. If 

members wish to carry on a conversation, they may do so 

behind the bar. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. So here they have a 

decision made on misinformation. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

housing issue, the housing issue — what a fiasco that’s turning 

into, appointing a task force the day before the budget. They 

must have just opened up the budget book and realized, we’re 

not doing anything. What can we do? Appoint a task force. 

 

We see it in so many areas around the housing. We heard 

questions about SOS [Saskatoon Overnight Shelter]. They were 

promised money. Then it was taken away and there was 

confusion. What were the commitments made? I don’t know. 

It’s really alarming. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record question no. 

476. I just got this answer back just a couple of days ago: 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: What housing 

community groups has the Minister met with between 

November 7, 2007 and March 19, 2008? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many people, how many 

groups do you think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 50. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — 50 groups? No, a little lower than 50. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 25. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — 25? 25. No, you’re not even warm. People are 

not warm in this House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Got to be at least 10. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Got to be 10? Got to be 10? You know what it 

is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? One. She met with one group, and this 

is the writing right here which they approved. She met with 

Passion for Action Against Homelessness. 

 

Now we know the major cities. Saskatoon has a homelessness 

committee. Regina has one. I believe Moose Jaw, P.A. has one 

of which Sask Housing puts money forward to. There’s at least 

four, all right? There are housing authorities right across this 

province. She chooses to meet with one group, one group. Now 

if that’s not the height of incompetence, that is really bizarre, 

Mr. Speaker, really bizarre. 

 

So and then we go on to the modernization strategy. Holy 

smoke, what a fiasco that was, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here we 

have a situation on budget day, Social Services employees were 

brought together and told about this new strategy. I don’t 

believe that was part of their plan, their platform. But the 

following week, we hear a back and forth, the minister knew, 

didn’t know. She blamed the officials all over the map, but 

finally she reversed that decision. But we’re not clear, because 

of the press release, what it really means. What does it really 

mean? People are really, really worried about that. 

 

And of course I could talk about the disability, Council on 

Disability Issues — a huge, huge misstep early in January. So 

here you have a government that’s going from, careening from 

one fiasco to another to another. And here we are where we find 

ourselves today. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we need to do is really back up 

and take a look at the big picture because the ground level here 

looks like a bit like a disaster, and we may be missing the big 

picture. You know it’s sort of like, you can’t see the forest for 

the trees because you go, well it’s just a discussion here, maybe 

we can just move on and just forget about this, it’s early on in 

the mandate. But I tell you it’s really setting the tone of their 

mandate, this heavy-handedness. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

[16:30] 

 

So I want to talk about some of these rule changes that they’re 

putting forward and what that really means for democracy. It 

really is about parliamentary democracy and the rights of the 

members of this Assembly. This rule change is an abuse of 

power that reflects on the democratic principles of this 

institution and how it reflects upon the rights of Saskatchewan 

citizens to be heard in this Assembly, and that is so important. 

 

Day after day we bring forward petitions about Station 20. For 

example, 2,500 people gather, the largest demonstration in 

recent history in Saskatoon. You would probably have to go 

back to the ’60s and ’70s and then back to the ’30s and ’40s 

probably for the next largest group, next largest demonstration. 

This is not a small thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker; this is a very 

important thing. People are not being heard. and our job as 

opposition is to bring that forward, to bring those concerns 

forward. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not only contrary to the 

principle of democracy, but it’s also contrary to the way this 

Assembly has worked for many years. It’s contrary to the 

principle of good leadership. Now over the past number of 

years, we’ve been able to negotiate things. And of course one of 

the things we’re very proud is the negotiation of the rules 

changes which brought the committee structure into place. 

 

I remember the days when we had estimates in this room, and 

we were all here captive to this process. We saw that this wasn’t 

working, and we needed to be more relevant to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It would be in their best interests if we would 

work together, all members of this Assembly. 

 

Well the true test of democracy is based on how this Legislative 

Assembly works, based on the rules of this Assembly. And the 

unilateral action of taking away the rules as they were put into 

place is shameful. 

 

Now I want to quote Stanley Knowles, this is from “The Role 

of Opposition in Parliament,” and I think this is very, very 

important: 

 

Democracy includes respect for the rights of minorities. 

Democracy is not real unless the force of public opinion is 

brought to bear not only on the choice of a government 

once every four or five years but on the legislative process 

month in and month out, day in and day out, during the 

time between elections. 

 

And that’s true. People are not just watching us on election day 

and whether it was November 7, 2007. It’s every day. It’s every 

day. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another part of democracy, the 

principles of democracy talk to the majority rule and minority 

rights. And I think last night we heard this most eloquently 

from the member from Meewasin and also the member of 

Dewdney. But I want to also reflect on this because I think this 

is very, very important — critical to the work we do. The 

integrity we have when we come into this House, it’s just 

integrity and how we act here is so, so important. 

 

Well majority rule is a means for organizing government and 

deciding public issues. It’s not another road to oppression. Just 

as no self-appointed group has the right to oppress others, so no 

majority — not even in a democracy — should take away the 

basic rights and freedom of a minority group or individual. Now 

it goes on: 

 

Minorities need to trust that government will protect their 

rights and self identity. Once this is accomplished such 

groups can participate and contribute to the country’s 

democratic institutions. 

 

This is so true in this province of Saskatchewan where we have 

communities and people . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan)): — I recognize the 

member. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in your gallery, good 

friends of mine, constituents of Yorkton. 

 

On the far right is Randy King, a well-known country gospel 

recording artist and president of the Full Gospel Businessmen’s 

Fellowship from Yorkton. Beside him is a really great young 

fellow — and I always talk nice to him because he’s about 

twice my size — Jeff Langan. He does amazing things in 

Yorkton with Aboriginal youth and at-risk youth in Yorkton. 

Next to him is a good friend of mine as well, Michael 

Sarafincian. Michael and I have gone on Mexico mission trips 

together, and he’s a corrections worker and a youth worker in 

Yorkton. And beside him is his girlfriend, Kristina Ahosaari. 

 

And they’re all here today for the full gospel supper in the 

cafeteria today, Mr. Speaker, and just visiting to see what’s 

happening in their Assembly here. So I’d ask all members to 

greet them as they are visiting today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You know 

one of the things I’ve been doing and actually I have been doing 

this, reading a lot about this issue over the last couple of months 

because we see this as politicians how our constituents, not only 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

in Saskatchewan but in Canada and around the world, are 

becoming disconnected to the kind of work we do. They feel 

that they have no power. They have no influence. They elect 

people, but they come here and somehow they’re changed 

people. When they’re out on the hustings they say all sorts of 

things, but they get here and all of a sudden they want to push 

things through. 

 

Well there was a report published in the United Kingdom. It’s 

called the power report and it was reported the political system 

of what’s happening in the United Kingdom. And I think if we 

look over there — which in many ways we owe an awful lot to 

our parliamentary system — if we look at the tradition we come 

out of, of course clearly it’s out of the system in the United 

Kingdom. I just want to quote some of the things. One of the 

chapters talk about the reality of the electoral system and 

politics and how people feel disengaged, and I think this speaks 

clearly to our issue that we’re debating tonight. The one factor, 

and I’ll quote now: 

 

The one factor felt to cause disengagement that runs 

through all strands of our investigation is a very 

widespread sense that citizens feel their view and interests 

are not taken sufficiently into account by the processes of 

political decision-making. It cannot be stressed enough the 

depth and extent of this perception amongst the British 

public. Many, if not all, of the other accepted explanations 

presented here could also be understood as variations on 

this theme of weak citizen influence. 

 

So here we are representing citizens in . . . and clearly we’re 

being stymied by this rule change tonight. It goes on to say: 

 

“We are powerless against unaccountable individuals, why 

should anyone be interested in politics?” 

 

“To vote, people need to feel that it achieves something 

more than just exercising a right. People want to feel that 

their vote makes a difference to their lives; for many this is 

not felt.” 

 

And I can tell you tonight, in downtown Saskatoon, in 

Riversdale and Pleasant Hill, they’re going, what just happened 

to us? And it goes on to say, “It is just the fact people don’t 

really think they make a difference.” Some other quotes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker: 

 

“I think the politicians pay lip service to the public, they 

don’t put our suggestions into practice.” 

 

“They pretend that we’re involved and that, but you’re not 

really.” 

 

“The first thing is, you’ve got to get somebody who’ll 

listen and this is 90 per cent of the problem. You’ve got 

nobody to talk to.” 

 

“I feel as though they (politicians) don’t want you 

involved.” 

 

“[And] (politics) is a closed shop. You don’t feel you’re 

being told the truth.” 

 

And that is so true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this rule change is just an example 

of this government, the Sask Party government, abusing their 

power, showing the opposition that they are boss. It’s a 

schoolyard bully mentality. Now to use majority power over 

minority in this legislature is not in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan, of the people in our society, and it’s not at all in 

the interests of fairness. And I want to quote here from Stanley 

Knowles. And this is so, so important: 

 

. . . a full and unquestioned recognition of the rights and 

functions of the opposition to the government . . . [is 

required to] protect the rights of minorities; only in this 

way can you make sure that the force of public opinion . . . 

[is] brought to bear on the legislative process . . . 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question remains, why the panic? 

This is not about the legislation; it’s about abuse of power. This 

is what this is all about because they know the legislation will 

in some form move forward. We’re at the beginning of this 

term, this session. They know they have time. What’s this all 

about? And I really do have some serious, serious questions 

about this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in review I want to talk about how this 

really is incompetence in so many forms. And I just want to 

highlight again how I am concerned. As I go about talking to 

different groups and hear concerns, especially in the area of 

social services, people are very very concerned about what that 

means. There is a big chill out there. 

 

And if there was ever a message to be sent to people in 

Saskatchewan, it’s what’s happening today and this week by 

these men and women over here who are saying, listen, we’re 

the boss. We’re simply the boss. And if you want to get in line 

and get your stuff, then get in line. Otherwise we don’t want to 

hear from you. And so they’re setting the tone. And this is 

really, really a concern. It’s abuse, and it’s about being a bully. 

 

So they’ve been caught in so many incompetent circumstances, 

so what do they do? They rush in to change some rules. But 

they have forgotten about why they’re here. It’s all about 

democracy. It’s about something we cherish so deeply here in 

Saskatchewan. And this is a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s many people here are new. This is the first time they’ve 

gone through a budgetary process. What a lesson to learn in 

your first term. What a lesson to learn. I’ve been here six years, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I have not seen this kind of bullying 

in this House. I’ve seen negotiating. I’ve seen people getting 

together. But I’ve never seen anything, anything at all like this. 

 

I want to end on a quote by Stanley Knowles again. It’s so 

important. He goes and he says: 

 

If then free discussion in parliament is to mean anything, if 

it is to be real, certain measures of strength must be 

accorded to the opposition. It must be recognized that the 

opposition’s right, indeed it is its duty, whenever it feels 

strongly about any matter of public policy, whether it be 

something the government is proposing or concern over 

something the government is failing to propose . . . [we 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

should] criticize and attack government for all it is worth. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am in favour of the 

amendments. I think the amendments are very, very good and 

well thought out. And I will definitely be speaking and voting 

tonight with honour and a sense of commitment to the 

democratic process against this ill-founded motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to get on my feet and enter into this 

debate. I think essentially what this speaks to is competency. 

And I will outline a few . . . well several points in terms of why 

it sort of fits with a pattern that they’ve developed over the last 

little while. It’s my pleasure to get on my feet and do that. I can 

tell that the members opposite are completely interested in what 

I have to say by the numbers of them that are ignoring me. So it 

will be an interesting process here. 

 

They weren’t in power very long, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, 

when the member from Melfort was put into the position of 

being the Finance minister. And the finances of the province 

were called stark. We left $1 billion for them, over $1 billion, 

and they called it stark. Now does that speak to competency? I 

think it does. I think when you have a group of officials that 

will tell you what money is in the bank and what’s been left 

over, and you come out and tell people that the finances are 

stark anyway, I think that speaks to your competency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or lack thereof. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Or lack thereof. Absolutely. 

 

The next item, the handling of the P.A. pulp mill file — there 

have been a litany of mistakes, incompetencies that have 

followed this file since they took it over. They have a member 

from Batoche who chaired a committee to look into the 

situation. They travelled throughout the province. That 

committee has no findings. You can’t find anywhere a 

conversation that they had with one person, although they made 

a press release and made it look like they were going to do 

something. There are no findings brought forward from that 

committee. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone has said that they’ve 

been looking into legislation for essential services for over a 

year. They have another member that comes forward and says 

that that is not true. Now whose competency does that speak to? 

I think the member from Saskatoon Greystone speaks volumes 

of his work on that file. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The member from Humboldt, she has, in reference to the 

restructuring of her department where they’re going to 

centralize services, take away fieldworkers. And they have a 

four-year plan to do that. Now she says that she hasn’t seen the 

four-year plan. She comes out in the media. It’s out in the 

media that there’re going to be a bunch of cuts in rural 

Saskatchewan to employees. What’s her first reaction? That her 

officials are to blame. 

 

Now it’s difficult to understand that after it’s proven that 

you’ve signed off on a four-year plan, that your knee-jerk 

reaction would be to blame your officials — shocking 

incompetence. She said that she hadn’t seen it or didn’t 

understand it. Then it was found out that she indeed had signed 

off on it, and oh I can’t take that back. So what am I going to 

do? I’m going to tell people that I signed off on it, but I’m not 

sure what exactly it says. So we’ll accept that the first-year plan 

will go through because it’s already in the budget, so she didn’t 

have a choice. But for the final three years, we’re going to 

review it. So that again speaks to competency. 

 

Within a few weeks of taking office, they decided that they 

didn’t like the wheat sheaf emblem. The member from 

Canora-Pelly said that he wanted to get rid of the wheat sheaf. 

They were going to write it out of all the government 

documents, websites, releases before consulting anybody. Then 

there’s an outcry from the public. The public didn’t like it at all. 

So what happens? They reverse the decision — competency. 

They want to go and do things unilaterally, just like they’re 

doing with this Bill, this motion. And they don’t have the 

competency to carry it through. 

 

They have a history, a recent history at least, of being 

schoolyard bullies. And it’s proven with this motion that they 

want to stifle debate, and they’re going to use bully tactics to do 

it. 

 

We have witnessed recently the attitudes of three of their 

members in this House and in committee. The member from 

Indian Head-Milestone was not appreciative of the comments 

being made by one of our members. I remember it very vividly. 

He runs into the Chamber, screams till he gets sat down and 

then is forced to leave the Chamber — strictly to bully. He had 

no other purpose to be here. 

 

The member from Kindersley just today, the Speaker ruled on a 

point of order for using the same tactics. So the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest in committee just a few weeks ago got 

into difficulty in that committee for his attempt to bully one of 

our members. So they have a mentality of bullying and a history 

of it in this House. Ruling is against them for doing it, and so 

they think that they should use it to suppress debate. It speaks to 

their attitude toward the opposition, toward democracy in 

general, and it’s unfortunate. 

 

Now I’d like to get into a bit of a discussion if I might. Again 

this speaks to competency. But I’ve got in my hands a calendar 

that was put out in 2007. And it says here that on March 3 

session resumes. Now in order to have enough time to get these 

Bills passed, they’re going to have to sit for a certain amount of 

time, and it’s outlined by the officials in the assumptions page. 

It says that this calendar assumes that the opposition will 

require the full 20 hours of debate on proposed legislation. It 

says it right here. I mean anybody who could get through this 

calendar and read the first . . . It’s the first bullet, assumes that 

the opposition will require a full 20 hours of debate on the 

proposed legislation. And in order to do that you have to sit 

these days. They chose not to. 

 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

It also outlines very specifically when second reading speeches 

will occur and that the debate on the legislation will occur on 

each day for one hour except on private members’ day and 

during the budget debate. So it’s very specific in its detail on 

the calendar and in terms of the hours that you require and 

what’s needed to get your legislation through. So I guess the 

question is (1) did they read it, (2) did they understand it, (3) 

can they add? It’s not that difficult to multiply by 20. 

 

They made a choice. They made a choice not to start on March 

3, which is outlined in the calendar. They made a choice to take 

a week off at Easter, when indeed we could have sat for several 

days there. They’re short on evening sittings because they 

didn’t want to for the first part of this session. They sure didn’t 

want to in the fall. So we lost time there. 

 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, the fall 

session is outlined to be up to 25 days, and we sat for a total of 

8. Now I will admit that they should get a bit of a pass for that 

being that the election was so close to the fall session. But what 

they could have done was made sure that those Bills at that time 

were referred to committee so that we could have worked 

between the time the legislature ended in the fall till the time it 

started again in the spring. But they chose not to do that and 

thus wasted valuable time. 

 

Instead of preparing properly and instead of utilizing the rules 

that exist, that they agreed to . . . We had an all-party committee 

that went down to Australia to study their parliamentary system. 

They were a part of it. Everybody agreed to the rules, and they 

chose not to follow them. 

 

Now I’d like also to at this time speak to some of the promises 

that they’ve made as a group, and this speaks again to their 

promise and their reflection on how they view legislation and 

motions. So they made some promises. 

 

They talked about when we used the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] slush fund, and they stated 

that they would never use one of those and that it was an affront 

to financial practice. And even though every financial 

institution in North America thought it was the proper way to 

manage our funds, and we got credit rating upgrades based on 

the way we managed the province’s finances — 16 in a row, 

mind you. 

 

The very first Bill that they introduced in the House is the 

financial stability Act. The Act simply renames what they 

referred to before as a slush fund. Now does that speak to their 

campaign or their promises and their character? Absolutely. 

 

Prior to the election, they were asked by various groups if 

essential service legislation was required. Certainly not was the 

answer. It’s not required. We think that the present system 

works fine. And the member from Indian Head-Milestone had 

made those comments. 

 

Bills 5 and 6 speak directly . . . well Bill 5 essentially speaks 

directly to essential services and that we are going to follow 

through with them. And not just moderate a Bill, but what we 

found recently through an FOI request, is that the minister’s 

own department views these as the most sweeping in Canada, 

so again speaks to promises that they made before and a level of 

competency that they don’t have. 

 

Now another campaign promise — and this is very interesting, 

Mr. Speaker — another campaign promise that they have, that 

they’ve kept . . . and I think it would be considered no. 56 by 

the member from Swift Current . They admit now that there’s a 

housing crisis in Saskatchewan and that they need a task force 

to look into it. Perversely they kept a campaign promise by not 

putting anything in their budget for housing because it wasn’t in 

their campaign platform. Housing not in their platform — 

unbelievable. So in the 11th hour before the budget, they strike 

a task force — even though this has been studied to death and 

it’s well understood what’s required — they strike a task force 

to look after housing. So perversely they kept a campaign 

promise by doing nothing on housing. 

 

Now I have done some reading on parliamentary democracy 

and actually read a synopsis of the 53rd Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Conference in New Delhi, India, held just last 

year. They made essentially five points: (1) was the 

fundamental purpose of a democratic process; (2) minority 

views and how they’re upheld; (3) the rights of opposition in 

the parliamentary democracy; (4) government opposition and 

co-operation and how that might affect democracy; and (5) 

campaign promises and opposition’s care when using them. 

 

It says here that the fundamental purpose of a democracy, and 

I’ll quote: 

 

Parliament is fundamentally about debate and the 

transacting of the people’s business in public. Thus a 

genuine political opposition is a necessary attribute of 

democracy . . . 

 

It goes on to say that there, quote, “There was a general 

consensus that there can be no strong democracy without a 

strong opposition.” The stifling of debate brought forward by 

this motion is an affront to this principle, the principles brought 

forward by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. And 

it’s a sad reflection on the government and what they feel is 

appropriate in a democracy. 

 

Now there are several places in this document that talk about 

minority views and how they should be represented. It says here 

that democracy ensures that the views of the minority are given 

full exposure. So it protects people who essentially can’t protect 

themselves, and what this motion does is exactly the opposite to 

that. It flies in the face of that principle. 

 

The report goes on to say that by doing so, the opposition 

becomes “the voice of the voiceless.” It “. . . builds the 

confidence of the people and reassures them that their concerns 

and interests are ably expressed and protected.” Again the 

protection of the minority is essential to democracy, and what 

they’ve done here in the last couple of days is an affront to that. 

 

Now this paper speaks on several occasions about the rights of 

an opposition, and it says, and I’ll quote: “Delegates in the 

workshop agreed that it is the opposition’s right, if it believes 

that the public interest is at stake, to oppose the government’s 

policies and actions through legitimate means” — means set 

forth by the House that we have used. “The opposition also has 

a right to operate in a free and democratic atmosphere and be 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

recognized both in and out of Parliament.” So it says here 

there’s supposed to be a free and democratic atmosphere. Again 

this motion kills that atmosphere, and it doesn’t allow the 

freedom of the opposition to do its job. 

 

Additionally it says that, in speaking of the Hon. Alban Bagbin, 

an MP [Member of Parliament] from Ghana, that he further 

highlighted that to effectively perform its roles, the opposition 

needed to be given some rights and responsibilities. The roles 

identified are the right to operate in a free and democratic 

atmosphere. It’s the same point being made once again. 

 

It speaks to another principle, which is the co-operation of an 

opposition and a government, and I’ll quote, “He urged the 

opposition to make room for co-operation and consensus 

building with the government,” which is what we’ve done and 

what they did as an opposition to create the rules that this 

House works under. 

 

So to have them work to make the rules and then, when they 

become government, turn into bullies to break the rules, it’s 

shocking incompetence and direct mean-spiritedness. It goes on 

to say that the opposition has a role and has to be careful of that 

role. Now the quote here is, “However, it needs to be [in 

reference to the opposition] careful in its criticism . . . [about] 

the government as it may be in government next and yet fail to 

implement what it was criticizing the government for.” 

 

[17:00] 

 

Well here we have a challenge in Prince Albert now, Mr. 

Speaker. In Prince Albert alone, prior to the election — and 

some time prior — the now Premier stood on the bridge with 

the then mayor and said that, one, Prince Albert is big enough 

for a second bridge; and two, that the government of the time 

should pay for all repairs to the bridge. 

 

Now just a few weeks ago when asked, when the member from 

P.A. Carlton was asked about a second bridge in Prince Albert, 

his response was that, well we’ll have to fit it in with all of the 

needs of the people in Saskatchewan. And it’s an election 

promise that is broken, and it’s an affront to the principle 

played out by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. 

 

They also promised the people of Prince Albert an airport. No 

work has been done on that airport. 

 

In a debate that I had with members of the government and the 

person that opposed me in the election, they promised the 

people of Prince Albert a tertiary health care centre. Now this is 

interesting for the people of Prince Albert. The mayor has been 

interested in having one there for years, but they have not 

followed up with one stitch of that promise. The obvious piece 

that they promised in addition to those things are the pulp mill, 

and I’ve spoken many times in this Chamber about that 

promise. 

 

When it comes to fulfilling promises made before the election, 

when it comes to fulfilling their roles as members of this House, 

when it comes to fulfilling their roles as ministers, they’ve 

proven themselves not to be up to the task on each of these 

items. 

 

I want to highlight for folks in my last few remarks, the now 

House Leader, he said, and I quote, “These changes are about 

improving the way the legislative assembly works, while at the 

same time giving MLAs more opportunity to stay in touch with 

our constituents.” He said that October 16, 2006, and he can’t 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

honour for me to rise and take part in this debate on behalf of 

the fine folks of Regina Northeast. Usually, Mr. Speaker, when 

I have the opportunity to rise in this House, I say it’s not only 

an honour, but it’s a privilege, which it is. But it’s also an 

occasion which is usually a happy occasion, one that brings me 

pleasure. Unfortunately today is not one of those days that I feel 

pleasure. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what I feel is sadness; sadness 

that the debate that we’re in and the fact that what we’re 

debating is the loss of our democratic process. 

 

Denying the opposition their rights to research and to contact 

stakeholders is a denial of the democratic system. Mr. Churchill 

once said that democracy is not perfect, but it’s better than 

anything else out there. But democracy is very fragile. It has to 

be looked after. It has to be nurtured and it has to be cared for. 

 

There are instances in the world where democracy was 

attempted, tried, but was not nurtured, was not cared for, and 

was lost. And that happens when individuals and a group of 

individuals gain power, gain authority, and they use the 

heavy-handedness of that authority to crush the principles of 

democracy. That principles must always remain firm. 

 

The democratic system, as we enjoy it here in Canada, built on 

the British parliamentary system, is very, really a very simple 

system. There’s a process of election that takes place every four 

or five years. The party who elects the majority members forms 

the government. The government’s role and responsibility then 

is to bring forward legislation to the House for the House to 

scrutinize. 

 

The role of the opposition is to have the opportunity to 

scrutinize that legislation. In order to do a reasonable job of 

scrutinizing the legislation, the opposition needs the ability to 

receive the legislation, identify stakeholders within our society 

that this legislation could affect, contact those stakeholders, 

share with them the legislation, give them the opportunity to 

respond to that legislation to whether or not it has an effect on 

them — if that effect is positive or if that effect is negative — 

perhaps receive suggestions from them as to how the legislation 

could be twigged to make it better, to make it better work for 

them as individuals, better work for them within their industry. 

 

Then the role of opposition is to bring that suggestions to the 

House, share it with government. Government then has the 

ability to do that due diligence and may perhaps even make 

amendments to legislation, to make that legislation better, to 

work better for the people of this province. That’s the role of 

the opposition. That’s the role of government. 

 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

Mr. Speaker, this takes time, takes time to be able to identify 

stakeholders. It takes time to be able to contact the stakeholders, 

give them time to digest the legislation, apply it to their 

situations, and to provide the opposition with a response. 

 

And we have today in Saskatchewan a government that’s only 

four or five months into their term who have brought forward a 

process, a process of the Assembly and legislation that they 

would wish to have passed. And we as opposition said that we 

don’t have the reasonable hours to be able to fulfil our role to its 

fullest. So then they bring forward a motion to expand the 

sitting hours of the legislature. That then, Mr. Speaker, in 

mathematical terms will provide enough hours, the 

mathematical hours as agreed to in the rules. It does. 

 

But what it also does is it jams the opposition. It jams the 

opposition because we are going to be here in this House from 

10 o’clock till midnight, from 10 o’clock to midnight. What we 

need to do then as the legislation comes forward, we need to 

identify stakeholders. We need to be able to contact those 

stakeholders. Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to contact stakeholders 

after midnight, after midnight. I don’t know about you, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’m sure that most stakeholders would not 

appreciate a phone call at 3 o’clock in the morning asking them 

if a particular piece of legislation has a negative or positive 

effect on their operations. 

 

It’s jamming us, Mr. Speaker. It’s taking away the ability of the 

opposition to be able to contact stakeholders, to have 

meaningful dialogue with stakeholders, to be able to take the 

expressions of wishes from those stakeholders and bring them 

back to the legislature. It’s denying the opposition the 

opportunity to carry out that dialogue. That is a crushing of 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real issue here, the issue here is about 

parliamentary democracy. It’s an issue of the rights of the 

members of this Assembly. The rule change is an abuse of 

power that reflects on the democratic principles of this 

institution and how it reflects on the rights of Saskatchewan 

citizens to be heard in this Assembly. 

 

The very principles of democracy is under attack, Mr. Speaker, 

when it wasn’t necessary. It wasn’t necessary to be so 

heavy-handed. Negotiations, discussions, co-operation would 

have worked if the government would have ventured down that 

road and even given it a try. And I find it interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that the party opposite, the government of the day had 

one position on issues when they were in opposition and have 

now a new position when they are in government. 

 

Most recently the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company has released an annual report of which 

he now states, Mr. Speaker, and if I may even quote from it, and 

I quote, “The success of the company is measured in ways other 

than just financial results.” 

 

When that particular minister was in opposition, they had and 

he had, led by that member, one hallmark in regards to STC and 

that was privatization. He wanted to move it into the private 

sector as fast as possible. They kept referring to the fact that it 

was costing money. 

 

Well STC does cost money. It does cost the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer money. It’s subsidized because it’s a good subsidy. 

Like any other public transportation system, whether it be in 

Regina or Saskatoon, it’s subsidized because it’s mandated to 

provide a service, a service to the people of Saskatchewan, to 

the ridership and to the transportation of freight. It does a very 

good job of that, and I am pleased to see that the minister has — 

I hope he hasn’t hurt his neck in whiplash — but he’s done a 

complete turnaround on that particular front and he is now 

supporting STC. And I want to compliment the minister for 

that. He’s done a three sixty on that one. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, back to the issue at hand, the rule changes are 

contrary to the principles of democracy, but also in the way of 

the operation of this Assembly and the way this Assembly has 

been operated for many, many years. And it’s also an affront to 

the principles of good leadership that’s been lost. In less than 

six months — in four to five months of government — this 

government has not only done some complete turnabouts, but 

they’re certainly shedding themselves of the principles of 

leadership, the principles of fairness, the principles of honesty. 

 

When a government abuses its majority, uses its majority to 

abuse the rule changes as we have seen here, it starts to have a 

very worrisome effect, I think, on most people because when 

power sets in and you start to allow power to cloud your 

judgment and you allow power to start making decisions that 

normally probably you wouldn’t have, and then you begin to 

wonder about what is the future of democracy and how far is 

the corruption of power going to carry the government. Is it 

going to carry the government to the point where it starts to 

have a negative effect on minorities and that doesn’t take the 

time to consider the positions of minorities? Is it going to allow 

the government to run roughshod over other issues other than 

just the operational hours of the Assembly? You begin to 

wonder all those things. 

 

If the Sask Party believes in the principles of democracy, they 

would believe in working with all the members of this 

Assembly in the best interests of the people of this province, 

and they would not use their power to abuse the minority. 

 

The true test of democracy, the true test of the parliamentary 

system is based on how the Legislative Assembly works. It’s 

based on the rules of the House. And the changes of those rules 

has taken away from the balance needed between the majority 

and the minority interests and it is eroding democracy. And 

that’s what we’re seeing happening here, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

seeing democracy being eroded. The rules are in place here to 

protect the rights of both the minority and the majority interests. 

 

The rules are here to create a balance. Mr. Speaker, balance is 

what this legislature is all about. Balance is what that particular 

party wanted when they were in opposition, when they in fact 

worked co-operatively with the all-party committee that was set 

up to modernize the rules of this Legislative Assembly. And 

that’s something we should be always working for. We should 

always be working for finding ways to make the operation of 

this Assembly more efficient, more effective, more simplistic, 

but most of all more democratic. 

 

We want to make the system more democratic. We want to 

open it up to the general public, the ease of the general public to 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

have access to this Assembly — in as far as the members is 

concerned, as far as the members of opposition is concerned, or 

as far as the members of government is concerned — so it 

further democratizes our system. That was the thought process 

behind the establishment of the field policy committees and 

they have, I think, worked quite well. I think they’re developing 

and I encourage that to continue because I think that’s a very 

good process. 

 

[17:15] 

 

But at the same time we have to ensure that the basic principles 

of democracy — fairness, balance, and equal opportunity — is 

made available to all the members in the House here, all the 

elected members, including the members of the opposition. The 

opposition members must have the ability to communicate with 

Saskatchewan people particularly when it comes to legislation, 

so that we can ascertain from them, ascertain from them how a 

particular piece of legislation may affect them as individuals, 

them as in businesses, or perhaps them in a group. We want to 

know is this good legislation or bad. We want to know if it’s a 

positive effect on them or perhaps no effect at all. We want to 

know if it has a negative effective on them. If it’s a negative 

effect, then what can be done to make it better? What can be 

done to improve it? What can be done to make it a positive 

piece of legislation for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Like I said earlier, in order to do that we have to have the time 

to contact the stakeholders. We have to have the time to give 

the stakeholders the opportunity to digest the proposed 

legislation. We have to have the opportunity to have the 

stakeholders communicate with us — the opposition — their 

ideas, their thoughts on how it could be made better. And then 

we share that with the government and the process will unfold. 

That particular opportunity is now denied to us, the opposition. 

 

The Sask Party used to support a broad democratic reform. Now 

because of their own mismanagement and incompetence, they 

are willing to throw democratic process aside and change the 

rules of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

as a result of their own incompetence are now proposing a rule 

change that has a very negative effect on the democratic process 

in this great province of ours — very great province. 

 

As I said this didn’t have to happen. The impasse that the 

government finds itself at by just simply miscalculating, or 

perhaps not even being aware of the number of hours that is 

required in the Legislative Assembly here to digest the 

legislation, to digest the estimates — simply the amount of time 

that’s required to do the business of the people of this province 

in this Legislative Assembly — they misjudged that. There’s no 

question about that. 

 

And it could have been resolved through negotiations and 

through consultations, through discussions. But consultations is 

not something that that particular party over there is known for 

since they’ve become government. 

 

There’s been no consultations in regards to labour legislation 

that has been tabled, no consultation on Station 20 funding that 

has been ripped away, no consultations on rule changes. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s no surprise that that group of men and women over 

there, the Sask Party, have now as their hallmark no 

consultations. 

 

Does the Sask Party care about the democratic process? Well 

the evidence, I think, is very obvious. The answer to that 

question would simply be no. They run roughshod over the 

opposition simply because they goofed. They goofed in not 

being able to calculate the amount of time required to put their 

legislation through, to deal with the business of the people of 

Saskatchewan in this session. They goofed. 

 

People make mistakes. Nobody should be held to a standard any 

higher than anybody else. We’re all human beings. We’ll all 

make mistakes. The way you address your mistakes is you sit 

down and you consult, you negotiate, you find a way out of this 

thing without using the heavy hammer of your majority to deny 

the fine people of Saskatchewan the right to a democratic 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the basic function of any government is to have 

legislation written, presented to the Assembly, then passed. The 

Sask Party through its incompetence to the point that they have 

failed to be able to carry out the basic functions of a democratic 

process. And who suffers in this, Mr. Speaker? It’s not us, the 

members in here who will have to sit longer hours and who will 

have to debate into the wee hours of the morning. We don’t 

lose. 

 

The real losers in this whole process is the people of 

Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan lose because they 

will be denied the opportunity to have input into the legislative 

calendar of the government opposite. They’ll be denied that 

opportunity because the opposition won’t have the ability to 

communicate with them, won’t have the time and the ability to 

communicate with the stakeholders who are going to be 

affected with legislation, and to be able to discuss this 

legislation with them, and be able to take their discussions and 

bring them back to the floor of the Assembly here. 

 

That’s not going to happen in this province this session, Mr. 

Speaker, because that party and that government is denying the 

basic principles of democracy to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Rule changes, rule changes is something that is normal. It’s a 

normal process to have rule changes, but it’s normally done 

with the unanimous consent of the House. It’s usually done, it’s 

usually done when consultation and negotiation has taken place. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is not what we’ve seen here. That is not at 

all what we’ve seen here. In fact what we’ve seen here is just 

the opposite. 

 

We’ve seen power, the weight of power go to the heads of the 

men and women over there — the government, the Sask Party 

Government of Saskatchewan today — to the point where 

they’re willing to abuse that power at the detriment of the 

people of Saskatchewan. They’re more interested in having 

their . . . feeding their power frenzy than they are in doing good 

work for the people of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

sad day. This is a sad, sad day not only for democracy, it’s a sad 

day for the history of this legislature. It’s a sad, sad day for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s coming up 10 

years since I have been in this legislature, and over the years I 

have developed a very strong interest in the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association and have attended many meetings of 

that body. All members of the Assembly are members by the 

fact that they are elected to represent their constituencies and 

elected to this Assembly. 

 

The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, or the CPA as 

we call it, represents over 50 countries, Commonwealth 

countries in the world. And when we go to meetings we meet 

with people from all around the world and they talk about 

democracy as the cornerstone of our commonality. 

 

Respect for parliamentary democracy is hard won. Many 

countries have fought bloody wars and still are fighting bloody 

wars to get even close to where we are today. And people have 

died standing in line to vote. We take for granted so many 

things that we have, and they’ve been won at such a huge price. 

Respect for tradition is a long-held tenet of this legislature. We 

have held these traditions for the sake of the esteem that the 

legislature should be held in by the public and by those of us 

who serve in the legislature. We’ve had to move a motion so 

that male members of the Assembly could remove their jackets 

on a day when the air conditioning stopped in the building and 

it was unbearably hot. We dress for business in this Assembly. 

We don’t dress for a barbeque or a bar night. We have respect 

for the legislature. 

 

These seemingly small things say to the public that we do have 

respect for the legislature, that we do respect the . . . that this is 

a place where respect is shown not only to the Assembly but to 

the traditions of the Assembly and hopefully to each other. If 

there are traditions that no longer serve the needs of the 

Assembly or the role that the members play in the Assembly, 

then these traditions can be changed. And they can be changed 

by what used to be called the Rules Committee which is now 

the House Services Committee and basically both parties are 

represented on that committee. 

 

Those things that need to be changed are passed by mutual 

agreement. Many of my colleagues have talked about mutual 

agreement which is how this House has been run over the years 

I’ve been here and I understand for many years before that. And 

the processes are also . . . It’s understood by all the parties, that 

this is how we do the business of the legislature — mutual 

agreement, long discussions, a lot of debate, a lot of 

investigations of how other democracies are working, how other 

parliaments are working. We don’t make decisions lightly or 

quickly. We take this seriously that this mutual agreement is for 

the betterment of the House and for democracy as a whole. 

 

And when we do these things, unilateral decisions, a breakdown 

of that tradition, that mutual agreement and that mutual respect 

is a sad comment on where we’re going to be going in this 

legislature — unilateral decisions, incompetence, and frankly 

some of the bullying tactics. 

 

And the bullying comes out not only in the mocking comments 

that are made in this legislature but in some of the actual 

intimidating comments that are made in this legislature that go 

basically unheard in Hansard, but are heard by many of us who 

sit in this legislature, and who I think, well not only are hurt but 

are dismayed by some of the things that are said. And frankly, 

how can you have respect for someone who speaks the way 

they do in this legislature and by their very speech and by the 

very words that they say harm — harm — the esteem that this 

legislature should have in all of our minds. 

 

We will no longer have that respect if the role of the opposition 

is undermined as it is being done with this closure rule. 

Basically a healthy democracy has to have an effective 

opposition or the majority will overrun the minority. Many of 

my colleagues have talked about that. 

 

And interestingly enough, in the CPA conference of September 

in ’07 in India, one of the workshops was on the roles, rights 

and responsibilities of the opposition. And many things came 

out of that plenary or that workshop that are applicable here 

today to talk about why an opposition does what it does and 

why it needs to be how it is for democracy to be strong and to 

be relevant to the people that it serves. 

 

There was a general consensus [in the workshop] that 

there can be no strong democracy without a strong 

opposition. 

 

And I think that’s what the people of Saskatchewan elected us 

to be. There’s enough of us to be strong. I’ve heard many, many 

times people say to me, they’re so glad to see the people that 

are here because they know we need a strong opposition. 

 

Indeed, the strength of the opposition in Parliament is an 

essential element for measuring the quality of democracy 

in a nation. 

 

And if people think that this doesn’t matter, when people are 

making light of this debate, it does matter because democracy 

does matter to people. And people who are watching, people 

who hear about this, it can’t be taken lightly when democracy is 

threatened and democracy is undermined. This is not something 

to be taken lightly or to be mocked because it is serious for our 

nation. And I will be coming to some of the things that it 

actually can do that is demonstrated for our prosperity even. 

 

A responsible opposition performs a critical role to the 

effective working of Parliament and to the well being of 

the nation [as I’ve said] . . . It ensures the views of the 

minority are given full exposure, especially when the 

matter at hand is of great national importance. 

 

The things we do are of importance to this whole province. It is 

important that everything has as much exposure and debate as 

possible. 

 

By doing so, the opposition becomes the voice of the 

voiceless, builds the confidence of the people and 

reassures them that their concerns and interests are ably 

expressed and protected. The opposition also checks on 

the activities of the government. This is done through 

questions in . . . the committee system. 

 

Basically the watchdog of the government, “. . . the opposition 

highlights and exposes those aspects of the government policies 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

and operations that are not in the national interest.” 

 

For example today what we’re talking about is not in the 

province’s best interests. When we have undermined the 

respect, and the mutual respect that we have held in this 

Assembly, the way we have done business with the rules, this is 

not going to be for the betterment of the province. We will be 

judged by what we do today in years to come. 

 

The opposition highlights and exposes those aspects of the 

government policies and operations that are not, as I said, in the 

national interest. And consequently the government is 

sometimes then induced to modify its policies to be in harmony 

with the public opinion. And as many of my colleagues have 

said, the public will judge. They will judge. 

 

This appears to be a limited debate. It will have long-reaching 

and far-reaching effects on our society, and people will judge us 

by what we do tonight. The opposition would have to have 

certain things to deliver their roles effectively. You have to 

have certain rights. And if we believe the public interest is at 

stake, we do have to oppose the government’s action. We do 

have to speak up and say so. And it’s interesting that these are 

people who come from around the world in Commonwealth 

countries. This is what they have said. And we sit here today 

and talk about undermining all of this by weakening our 

democracy and our democratic process in this province. 

 

[17:30] 

 

It is the opposition’s role to find faults and to suggest 

amendments to the legislation, which is what we’ve done — ask 

questions and scrutinize the actions. That’s our role. “The 

opposition acts as a public watchdog over the activities of 

government.” That’s the whole idea of an opposition. 

 

“. . . in a parliamentary democracy those that govern must 

constantly compete for the favour of the people so . . . [the 

people] always [know they will] have a choice.” And there are 

people in other countries who have talked about their 

democracies who have turned their parliaments into a rubber 

stamp — places where military rule; democracy no longer has 

any validity or any relevance. It’s rubber-stamping. I mean if 

we can look at closure and we change rules unilaterally, we can 

just talk about rubber-stamping democracy. 

 

There’s “. . . healthy criticism is good for a healthy government 

and that arrogance has no place in a democracy.” Our 

government was accused of being arrogant after 16 years in 

government. This government, Mr. Speaker, has a degree of 

arrogance after four or five months — five months, I believe. 

It’s really going to be disappointing to see and it’s actually kind 

of a frightening thought to see how far this arrogance will take 

them in the coming years. I don’t think anybody is going to be 

happy with where this is going to take us if what we see today 

is carried on and continued. 

 

The opposition has to be, it’s “. . . seen as an institutional 

promise that a change of government is possible and a reminder 

of the temporary nature of authority and power.” So you may be 

able to use your hammer, your heavy-handedness now, but it’s 

a temporary measure. It’s given to you as a trust from the public 

and if you abuse that trust you may be able to get away with it 

once but the public is watching. 

 

And I have often joked that there’s two or three people 

watching these proceedings and basically they’re our parents or 

our family. I’ve had so many people come up and say to me, no 

that’s not true; we watch. So people are watching us. It may 

seem to be an isolated Chamber activity tonight because there’s 

few of us in the Chamber. But people do watch and they pay 

attention and we will be judged. 

 

The best interests of a democratic practice . . . And “. . . in the 

best interest of democratic practice and in the interest of the 

nation that both the ruling party and the opposition [have to] be 

loyal to the nation and uphold . . . [the] law . . .” and what is the 

best interest of the public. A civil society doesn’t function the 

way that . . . When we talk about the majority overrunning the 

views of the minority so that they cannot be heard, a civil 

society doesn’t function that way. 

 

Third world countries operate that way in a dictatorship or in a 

totalitarian manner where the minority is not heard or their 

voices considered. And we see daily the struggle that these 

nations and these people — those oppressed — mount to 

change their lot. People resist that. They do not agree that the 

minority should not be heard or considered. 

 

To many watching and listening, this issue does not seem to be 

that significant. But the essence of democracy demands the 

respect of the government for the legitimate role of the 

opposition. 

 

In this instance, the Sask Party government did not prepare 

itself to carry out its legislative role. The agenda was not 

prepared. It’s not as if it was a surprise. We had legislation in 

the fall. We had ample opportunity to have sittings in evenings. 

We had ample opportunity intersessionally to meet and discuss 

these things. So how come this came as such a big surprise to 

the House Leader and his members of the Sask Party that now 

we have to bring in something that we’ve hardly ever seen in 

this government? I’ve not seen it in 10 years. How we have to 

do that is beyond me. 

 

They were for all intents and purposes asleep at the wheel in the 

Sask Party. And to be charitable, it is a huge learning curve to 

come into government. It’s a huge learning curve. They had 

very little experience on the government side and in some cases 

little aptitude for leadership. 

 

The sticking point of our argument, however, is that when 

government finally realized that the rules of the House would 

not facilitate their agenda, and because they had failed to 

properly prepare for the session, they got out the big stick — 

change the rules. 

 

That’s a pretty extreme measure. There was no discussion. 

There was no attempt to negotiate. There was no attempt to 

discuss compromise — what could be done to change the way 

this was, what could be done to fix it. There was no attempt to 

do that. What we saw was the hammer come out and this is 

something that . . . It will damage the reputation of this 

Assembly and it will damage the respect for democracy. 

 

Less than two years ago when the Sask Party was in opposition, 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

they negotiated the very rules of this Legislative Assembly that 

they are today trying to change. And negotiating is the key 

word. 

 

The rule changes were implemented in 2006. We all know what 

they meant. We had many, many hours of discussion on what 

this would mean at the joint committee level. And it was a hard 

decision to come to, because we have traditionally not had fixed 

dates. We have not had fixed hours. Basically the government 

was at the basically the whim of the opposition when things 

started and stopped. So this was a huge step forward and 

mutually agreed in this Assembly to promote democracy and 

basically respect and some sort of order in the Assembly, and 

order in our lives actually, because it’s much easier to serve 

your community when you have some idea of what days you’ll 

be in the community. Now obviously we will not be in our 

constituencies. I will not get to Eastview for a long time with 

these changes of hours. It is going to hamper my ability to serve 

my constituents. I won’t be there. 

 

The previous rule changes, as I said, were results of studies and 

reviews and observations. It wasn’t taken lightly to change the 

rules. The Sask Party government, as I’ve said, as a result of 

their own incompetence . . . This has nothing to do with 

anything else except not being prepared and not being 

competent to be government in this first session. Your learning 

curve is over. Your time is over. You do not have a do-over. I 

mean nothing is . . . You have to jump in and take over and be 

in charge. You’re in government. That’s your job. And you 

didn’t do it. 

 

So rather than doing the honourable thing and the democratic 

thing and basically the standard practice when it comes to rule 

changes and consulting with the opposition, as I said, out came 

the hammer. Mr. Speaker, when a government abuses its 

majority and unilaterally changes the rules, then democracy as 

it is envisioned in this province and within the rules of the 

Assembly is gone. 

 

I think one of my colleagues said, this is the day that democracy 

dies. That’s a stark statement, but we’re chipping away at 

something we have held dear here and that we’ve taken a long 

time to get to this point. And we have seen basically a cavalier 

attitude that if it doesn’t work for them, it’s gone. 

 

That’s not how this Assembly has worked up to this point. And 

I’ve been here 10 years; I’ve not seen this. The true test of 

democracy, the true test of parliamentary system is based on 

how this legislature does work. It’s based on the rules of the 

House. And the unilateral change of rules is taking away from 

the balance needed between majority and minority interests, and 

it is eroding democracy. 

 

The rules are in place; they’re there to protect the rights of both 

the minority and the majority interests. It is for a balance. And 

to quote Stanley Knowles, and I know my colleagues have done 

so over the course of this debate, in his “The Role of the 

Opposition in Parliament”: 

 

Democracy includes respect for the rights of minorities. 

Democracy is not real unless the force of public opinion is 

brought to bear not only on the choice of a government 

once every four or five years but on the legislative process 

month in and month out, day in and day out, during the 

time between elections. 

 

So as I say, we are judged always on what we do here. And 

again, according to some of the information that we have from 

the States: 

 

There can be no single answer to how minority group 

differences in views and values are resolved — only the 

sure knowledge that only through the democratic process 

of tolerance, debate, and willingness to compromise can 

free societies reach agreements that embrace the twin 

pillars of majority rule and minority rights. 

 

And to quote John Diefenbaker: 

 

If Parliament is to be preserved as a living institution . . . 

[the] Loyal Opposition must fearlessly perform its 

functions. When it properly discharges them the 

preservation of our freedom is assured. The reading of 

history proves that freedom always dies when criticism 

ends. It upholds and maintains the rights of minorities 

against majorities. It must be vigilant against oppression 

and unjust invasions by the Cabinet of the rights of the 

people. 

 

The members of this Assembly are: 

 

. . . elected by free men and women on the basis of free 

discussions which cannot be abrogated, [it] is not just a 

club of good fellows who ought to do the nation’s business 

in the shortest possible time and with the least possible 

contention; rather it is a body which should examine every 

proposal that is made to make sure that it is in the 

country’s best interest; it is a body in which attention 

should be drawn to proposals that ought to be made but 

which are often overlooked . . . 

 

And this again is from Stanley Knowles. 

 

The opposition has only the rules for its protection, hence 

the authorities on parliamentary procedure emphasize the 

greater importance to the opposition of the only protection 

it has, the protection of the rules. 

 

From Stanley Knowles again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be judged, as I said, by what we do today 

and what we let go today. I think it’s a harsh commentary that, 

when I say, what does this mean to people, respect for politics 

and politicians has reached an all-time low. And there is a 

major disconnect with the public. 

 

As politicians, if we fail to protect democracy — indeed, mock 

democracy and the very tenets — how then can we expect 

democracy to matter to the people who watch us? We are the 

role models for the public and by our actions contribute to their 

disdain. 

 

We all will be judged by our actions in the next four years. 

Today is a major black mark on the Sask Party government. If 

this is the new way for Saskatchewan, we are not ready for 

growth and prosperity. 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

And I do want to quote one thing about how democracy leads to 

prosperity: 

 

In the developed world, Parliaments are a reasonable 

independent, open, and transparent check on government, 

hence our prosperity. For the rest of the world, Parliaments 

are dominated by their governments . . . 

 

and are not as prosperous as we are. 

 

And we are willing to give this up? We will not be, we’ll be not 

ready for growth and prosperity. We are ready for a 

rubber-stamping version of democracy, seen mostly in third 

world countries. 

 

It is a sad day for democracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sad day to see 

that an incompetent government has taken us all to this point, 

where we have to stand up and defend democracy in this House. 

It is a sad day, and it is a black mark for the Sask Party. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you 

for allowing me to make a few statements regarding what has 

occurred in our Assembly. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was when I 

was first elected and came to, came to the Assembly and people 

were talking about the committee that was working, that was 

working on rule changes, that was working co-operatively with 

the opposition regarding the rule changes. And how everyone 

talked, could this be possible? Could the government and the 

opposition come together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they could 

come together on agreed-to rules that would make this 

Assembly an Assembly we could be proud of in Canada? And 

as the committee worked and spent hours on the rule changes 

and we heard reports back, it became something that all of us 

looked at and talked about that this was going to in fact be a 

reality. 

 

So when the committees finally gave its unanimous report and 

we were, at that point in time saw a calendar — agreed hours, 

joint committees, or committee work, and the committee work 

that the committees would do — we were all a bit, I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and perhaps you included, proud that we had 

achieved this. That our committees, that the people working on 

that and the support we had given them and the freedom we had 

given them, that it showed to us that democracy truly, truly was 

alive and well in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

think, and I think that we all here, including yourself, could 

agree on that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was then, it was then that now we had 

an election and we had a new government, and that is a 

democratic right of every individual in this province to vote for 

our governments, and they chose the Saskatchewan Party to 

govern for the next four years. 

 

They had hoped, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as most people do when 

they vote, they had hoped for something new. They had hoped 

for change, and they were anticipating and waiting to see what 

that change would bring. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were 

hoping for a bright new future, and I’m not sure that that’s what 

they got as the member across the way has just said. I don’t 

think they got her. They didn’t get her. 

 

[17:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they did get is I 

think they’re witnessing in the first four months and some odd 

days is that they got disappointment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

got disappointment. 

 

And I just at this time would like to read perhaps into the record 

some of the things that were said about this committee, about 

the House Services Committee, where a Speaker at that time, 

Myron Kowalsky, said, “the changes are another step toward 

the process of modernization,” Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said. 

The goal is to make the Assembly work more effectively and 

efficiently. 

 

The new calendar will also change the number of weekly sitting 

days from four to five, similar, similar, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

other Western provinces. We were coming on board, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we were coming on board with the rest of the 

Western provinces, and I think most members appreciated the 

ability that they were going to receive Friday as a constituency 

day. 

 

There was a lot made, as you know at that time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that there was talk that the politicians would use that 

as a day off, but I think we’ve proven them wrong, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Everybody in this Assembly has used that 

constituency day to good advantage — good advantage to meet 

with the constituents, good advantage to deal with their 

problems, good advantage to talk to our constituents, to visit 

with them. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is at the core of 

democracy. At the very core of democracy is the exchange 

between the people who are elected and the people who elected 

them. 

 

Further on that, after a careful, and this was House leader Glenn 

Hagel at the time: 

 

“After a careful review of the operations of other 

legislative processes, we have come to the conclusion that 

these changes will result in a more productive and 

effective Legislative Assembly . . . These changes will 

allow members to better balance their duties as legislators 

and to their constituents.” 

 

The new committee system allows for two committees to sit 

simultaneously, which means the Assembly now sits the same 

number of working hours in 65 days as it previously did in 73. 

A very, very productive change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

At the same time that this was being said, we had the member, 

the opposition House leader at that time, stood and said the 

following, Mr. Deputy Speaker: I believe that it is the first full 

session . . . And this was on May 17, 2007: 

 

I believe [that] this is the first full session where we’ve 

operated under the new rules of the Assembly that have 

been established and developed . . . in balance we have 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

been very successful in bringing our Saskatchewan 

legislature to the forefront of parliamentary process, [Mr. 

Deputy Speaker] not [only] in this province but also in this 

entire country . . . we can all be rightly proud of the the 

work that we’ve done to accomplish these changes. 

 

These changes . . . are for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan firstly . . . the fact that there is more 

predictability also, in particular, benefits our constituents 

and the people . . . of the province . . . 

 

I could not agree with him more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a 

bright day for the people of Saskatchewan and for the 

Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time also I would just like to read to 

the record a few points on the role of the opposition in 

parliament. And this from the Hon. John G. Diefenbaker: 

 

If Parliament is to be preserved as a living institution . . . 

[the] Loyal Opposition must fearlessly perform its 

functions. When it properly discharges them the 

preservation of our freedom is assured [Mr. Deputy 

Speaker]. The reading of history proves that freedom 

always dies when criticism ends [Mr. Deputy Speaker]. It 

upholds and maintains the rights of minorities against 

majorities. It must be vigilant against oppression and 

unjust invasions by the Cabinet of the rights of the people 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker]. 

 

From Stanley Knowles: 

 

. . . free discussion means “criticism, answer and 

counter-criticism”, it means “attack, defence and 

counterattack”, it means “the freest and fullest analysis 

and examination of political proposals” [Mr. Deputy 

Speaker] . . .  

 

Mr. Knowles goes on to say: 

 

. . . [The members of this Assembly are] elected by free 

men and women on the basis of free discussions which 

cannot be abrogated, is not just a club of good fellows who 

ought to do the nation’s business in the shortest time and 

with the least possible contention; rather it is a body which 

should examine every proposal that is made to make sure 

that it is in the country’s best interest; it is a body in which 

. . . [the intention] should be drawn to proposals that ought 

to be made but which are often overlooked . . . 

 

Careful scrutiny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, careful scrutiny is also at 

the heart of what we are speaking about. And unfortunately, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what has occurred is that after one day of 

debate on unilateral change, we have the introduction of 

closure. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reasons given are that the 

government will not be able to pass its Bills. Now to me, after 

feeling and watching as a new member this House work 

co-operatively together to come together to pass legislation that 

we would all be proud of, that would bring us in line with the 

other Western provinces, what has happened? 

 

The government could have started the session on March 3. 

They could have started it on March 3, but they waited until 

March 10. We did not sit evenings. We lost valuable time. We 

have important legislation that needs debate. Instead we are 

stuck on debating rule changes — rule changes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now the government talks about democratic change. They talk 

about democratic change. In the Saskatchewan Party Policy 

Book, “Saskatchewan Party Guiding Principles,” no. 6 reads: 

“Democratic reform to make government more responsive to 

the people it serves.” This is one of the guiding principles of the 

Saskatchewan Party — “Democratic reform to make 

government more responsive to the people it serves.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in some of the legislation that they have 

passed, the arguments that we hear from the Saskatchewan 

Party in terms of, in terms of democracy in the workplaces — 

which they put forward as one of their changes that they feel are 

. . . or one of their Bills that are specified Bills — they argue 

that there should be an open forum for discussion prior to a 

vote, an open forum, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for discussion. And I 

wonder if that means, I wonder if that means one day. I wonder 

if that means one day of open forum discussion before there is a 

vote. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think it means one day of 

discussion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so there’s a lot of talk about democracy. 

There’s a lot of talk about democracy, and the talk about 

democracy is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, democracy is a very fragile 

structure. Democracy is very fragile, and we as agents must be 

ever vigilant of the faith and trust that has been placed in us by 

the electorate to protect that democracy because that is our 

greatest promise. 

 

Democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is invested in the people 

when exercised directly by them — by them, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — or by the elected agents under a free electoral 

system. And we must ever, ever be vigilant, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has failed, has failed its 

first real test by curtailing debate, democratic debate on the 

issues in this House. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s indeed a sad day 

when debate is curtailed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they brought forward censure. I would say 

they brought this forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of 

incompetence, because of incompetence and because they are 

too arrogant to admit it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question would be, is, what are they 

afraid of? What are they afraid of? Why are they afraid? Why 

are they afraid of democracy and debate? Why shut it down? 

Why not hear the debate, hear the arguments, work towards 

solutions? That is what this Assembly is about. That is what I 

thought the Assembly was about after getting elected, after 

getting elected and seeing the committee come together and 

propose these very positive reforms for this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what about their essential services 

legislation? Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does this say in terms of 

debate? 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they say that this legislation is favoured 

by the public. Then why are they so afraid of public scrutiny? 

Why are they so afraid of democracy? If the public is in favour 

of this legislation, like the Sask Party’s saying, then why are 

they so afraid to have it confirmed? Why not take it out, why 

not take it out for public hearings, put it up to public scrutiny? 

Let democracy, let the to and fro of debate take place. Why are 

they afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Are they afraid? And is this 

becoming the way that the Sask Party will operate in 

government? Will they use, as we have heard, a heavy hand? 

Will they use a sledgehammer to close debate? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only have they failed the tests on these 

Bills in not allowing public debate, but they have also failed the 

test on not allowing public debate on expanded hours. They are 

ramming it, I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

ramming it through because they are afraid. They are afraid of 

debate. They are afraid of democracy. And they are afraid of 

putting themselves to the test, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are 

hiding. 

 

They are four-plus months into the government, and they are 

failing, failing on Station 20. They’re failing in areas of human 

rights. And they are simply failing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

appear to have little respect for people — belittling — and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they are failing. They are afraid of being 

wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of having to admit that they are 

wrong. And they are, from what I am seeing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, forgetting why they are sitting here. 

 

Democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for people. And as I said 

earlier, we were elected and now are the agents for people in a 

democratic place. We have to remember why we are here 

because we are here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as guardians of 

democracy. They are not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest 

— in fact I would say I believe — that they are not allowing the 

loyal opposition to debate issues. Afraid of debate, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; afraid of entering into dialogue, afraid of having 

something that they have done put under scrutiny, and they are 

afraid of being wrong so they are reacting in fear, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[18:00] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they say fear breeds ignorance, but added 

to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fear also breeds intolerance and 

provokes suppression and that is what is happening here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They’re trying to suppress debate. They’re 

trying to suppress scrutiny of ideas. And I ask, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, why the fear? There are 38 members over there. There 

are 19 over here. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not allowing us to do our job. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I came here elected by the people of Saskatoon 

Fairview to do a job, and I have to go back and tell them that 

the new government is not allowing me to do my job. They’re 

not allowing the citizens of Saskatchewan to hear debates. 

They’re not allowing the citizens of Saskatchewan to hold 

public consultations. They are not allowing the citizens of 

Saskatchewan to hold public hearings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Instead what is happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 

ramming Bills through showing that they are the boss, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and unfortunately that we have to use in this 

Assembly words like bully. And they are doing this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as I said because they’re trying to hide the 

incompetence. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the process . . . and I see my time is 

running out. Where is the process in the debate? Where is the 

democracy and who is it that suffers when these kind of actions 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

member from Melfort is chirping over there, and I think I’m 

glad that he finally was listening. I think he was listening all 

along, and I would hope that the words that he used before, that 

he would stand by them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope that he 

would stand by them. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I rise . . . Well maybe 

not as much pleasure as I would like rising tonight to join in this 

debate because I truly wish that we weren’t in this position and 

having this debate on a forced change of rules in the House to 

accommodate a government who is incapable of establishing an 

agenda or incapable of following an agenda or any type of plan. 

Well it’s a disappointment in the House and a disappointment 

for democracy. And as my colleague just commented, when we 

are duly elected and come into this Assembly to make 

presentation on behalf of our constituents and engage in the 

democratic process, it truly is a sad evening when we’re 

debating this motion this evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years we have seen some 

significant rule changes here in the Assembly. And it’s not 

unusual because you can go back over the decades, and there 

has always been a continual process of modernization in 

assemblies and parliaments throughout the world. Whether it 

goes . . . Well and I think the most common and the one we are 

most aware of would be modernization that would include a 

parliamentary calendar. 

 

And we can look at the House of Commons in Ottawa and they 

adopted a parliamentary calendar in 1982 in order to make the 

sitting and non-sitting times predictable. The United Kingdom 

instituted a parliamentary calendar in 1992 within a more 

sweeping modernization agenda for their parliament. Also we 

see other provinces across Canada. Alberta initiated a calendar 

in 1993, Manitoba in 1996. And Manitoba’s calendar was made 

permanent in 2003. British Columbia also entered on one of 

these modernization projects in 2002 and made their calendar 

permanent in 2004. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in May 2006 the Standing Committee 

on House Services in our Assembly appointed a subcommittee, 

a study delegation whose purpose it was to study and make 

recommendations on the adoption of a legislative calendar and 

revisions to sitting times here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And this subcommittee was composed of all members of the 

House, all parties present in the House, and also the Speaker of 

the House. And it was a joint, co-operative, and collaborative 

effort between the government and the opposition. So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, on October 16 the Standing Committee on 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

House Services, which was made up of members from the 

government and opposition, unanimously adopted the 

recommendations of that subcommittee. 

 

The recommendations of that subcommittee were based on the 

experience of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan with 

an informal parliamentary calendar. The informal calendar was 

based on an agreement made in May 2004 between the 

government and the opposition, and that agreement expired in 

the spring of 2006. And the recommendations of the 

subcommittee were also based on the reviews and observations 

of the parliamentary calendar being used in other Canadian 

provinces and that was Alberta, British Columbia, and 

Manitoba. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we went through a number of years of 

discussion on this, and the subcommittee did a fair bit of 

investigation. Both the opposition and the government of the 

day came to consensus on the issues of how the rules should be 

changed, what was important, and what would best fit our 

legislature here in Saskatchewan. And it was found that fixed 

sessions provided ministers, members, and their staff the ability 

to manage their time more effectively. It was a more effective 

use of staff resources, and the subcommittee also found that 

parliamentary calendars helped members balance their duties in 

the Assembly with their constituency and caucus 

responsibilities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for me a big point of this was the point 

where they talk about managing your constituency 

responsibilities because when we don’t live in the city where 

the legislature is located, we’re travelling back and forth 

between our home communities and the legislature, and the last 

thing we want to do is not to be able to bring forward the views 

of our constituents and to be able to deal with issues that are 

there at home. So this was important for many of us. 

 

The subcommittee at that time was firmly convinced that a 

permanent parliamentary calendar would make it easier for the 

Assembly as a whole to carry on its functions more effectively 

and that a permanent parliamentary calendar was the next step 

in further modernization. So once again there were studies 

done, and the subcommittee had a look at a number of 

recommended rule changes and the joint committee, here again 

chaired by the Speaker of the House, the official opposition 

House leader, and the government House leader. And this again 

was a collaborative and co-operative effort to create a new set 

of rules for our Legislative Assembly, that it would allow our 

Assembly to function in a more productive, efficient, and 

effective manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for someone to say that they didn’t have a role in 

this process or didn’t understand the rules as they are today, 

both parties in the House today played a big role in establishing 

these new rules and the initiation and the gradual 

implementation so that our spring session in 2007 was the first 

session where the new rules were fully implemented. And it 

was that full cycle of the new rules being put in place and 

actually being able to work through them and to get a better feel 

for how they actually worked. And Mr. Speaker, it was a pretty 

successful process, and I think the work that was invested by 

the members in this House and by members who are no longer 

sitting in this House, they invested a great deal of time and did a 

very good job on the new rules that we have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can talk in detail about the rules. We can 

look at some of the specific changes. But what I want to say to 

you is today, when I was first elected a number of years ago, 

1999, one of the very first committees . . . And we all know 

when you’re first elected and you come into the Assembly, it 

can be a bit of a confusing process when you start to look at the 

caucus that you are elected into. You may have committees of 

your caucus. You will have standing committees of the 

legislature. There may be special committees. And it can take 

you a little while to get on to how the system works, how the 

processes work. It can be a little confusing, and it can cause a 

little bit of struggle at times. 

 

The very first committee that I was put on to where we sat 

down and started doing some work, was in early 2000 and it 

was one of our caucus committees. And what was proposed at 

that time was a discussion paper that we released to look at the 

modernization of the Saskatchewan Assembly. And while at 

that time being new to the Legislative Assembly, and before the 

subcommittee or once the committee started working, the 

all-party committee starting working, but that initial paper was 

really my introduction into the committee system within the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And to see how those rules and the process worked and changed 

and the rules were developed to suit what was needed here in 

Saskatchewan and what our members felt would be appropriate 

and a good adjustment for Saskatchewan, there’s two things 

that really stand out for me. 

 

First and foremost, we talked about modernization of the 

legislature, and it’s really kind of a global term that can 

encompass many factors. But for me the discussion and the 

argument that stood out for me was that I don’t think there’s a 

politician anywhere in North America — and it could even be 

beyond — that shows some distress when we look at voter 

turnout and voter apathy when it comes to the democratic 

system and elections right across Canada, right across the 

United States. We worry that the institution has somehow 

drifted away from being relevant in our constituents’ lives and 

that they feel that somehow what we do here in this Assembly 

may not affect them as directly as it can. So for me part of the 

whole discussions when we got into the discussion on changing 

the rules and modernizing the system and making our 

parliamentary system more relevant to citizens to try and 

engage them in not only in the issues of the day but also the 

processes within the legislature. 

 

And that’s where we went to the policy committees and the 

policy field committees that are established where Bills, where 

estimates will be referred to the appropriate policy committees, 

and they will have a set period of time depending on the interest 

in the Bill or the controversy in the Bill, where members can sit 

and all members — you don’t have to be specifically a member 

of the committee — but any member of this Legislative 

Assembly and whatever area of Saskatchewan they represent is 

more than welcome to come to those committees and be able to 

question either the minister and the department on a Bill and 

have a good discussion. 

 

It’s not a yes/no session. We will get some lengthy answers and 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

explanations from officials as well as from ministers, and you 

can have the kind of dialogue that gives that better 

understanding of a more open discussion and one-on-one 

discussion where you can actually address issues that may be a 

problem for someone in your constituency. Because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when I’m in this Assembly I’m never referred 

to on my first . . . by my first name unless I’m in trouble. So 

hopefully that doesn’t happen. 

 

But seriously, we’re not referred to by our names. We are 

referred to by the constituencies that we are elected from and 

represent. And there’s a good reason for that because each of us 

brings with us the comments of our constituents, the concerns 

of our constituents to speak to a Bill or to speak to an issue here 

in the Assembly. So this discussion in committees, this 

discussion on the floor of this Assembly means so much more 

than what it may at face value. When people see for a few 

minutes they may watch the Assembly on TV but it goes much 

deeper than that. 

 

And it is a long and storied history we have as members in this 

legislature, and it brings with it a sense of responsibility of 

those that have come before us and have had some wonderful 

debates in this House — issues that have been discussed and 

debated, that have had a long-lasting impact on the province 

that we all live in and call home. 

 

[18:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we are faced with changes that will 

unilaterally change rules within the House for a period of time 

and take away all that’s been worked for — take away all of the 

expectations that we bring with us not only as MLAs but the 

expectations of our constituents, of opinions of theirs that we 

will voice, concerns that we will bring forward to hopefully 

have addressed — when that is taken away, it’s a serious 

matter. And, Mr. Speaker, to have this taken away . . . We are in 

third week, fourth week of spring session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these rules were set out with the full intent and 

understanding that whether you were in government or whether 

you were in opposition, there was a balance. There was a 

balance in the rules so that the government could get the work 

done that they intended to do and have the ability to do, but also 

it gave a balance to the opposition, that the opposition also had 

the opportunity to do the job that we are here for — to question, 

to shed light on areas, and maybe even to have questions of our 

own answered, maybe just to develop that better understanding 

of whatever initiative the government is going through. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we were with a new government that 

started out with a very short, eight-day session in the fall. Now 

many of us were surprised that it was only eight days because 

you often wonder by the time you get into the Assembly and get 

settled in, there’s not a lot of time for committees to work. So 

we had a Throne Speech, couple of Bills that were tabled, and 

that was it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the duties of the public policy 

field committees is that they have the ability to meet outside of 

the sitting of the legislature, so it could have easily been done, 

that those policy field committees could have sat after 

Christmas until sometime into March when the House was 

convened again. 

 

And even then the set calendar that we’ve adopted through this 

rule system was set to have the House start on March 3. Well it 

was postponed and didn’t start till March 10. And that’s fine. I 

understand that there could be issues of a new government 

getting through a budget and getting that all developed, but 

there’s absolutely no reason why the committees couldn’t have 

sat. There’s absolutely no reason why the committees couldn’t 

have been giving input, asking questions on the legislation 

during that time. 

 

The whole system is built around developing a committee 

system that will provide opportunity for public input and will 

provide opportunity for this Legislative Assembly and those 

committees to work between formal sessions of the Legislative 

Assembly. That’s part of the big push behind the modernization 

was to provide that connect, so public could make presentations 

to these committees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to prove and to have 

another avenue — not to prove — but to give the public an 

avenue where they could feel the impact and have some input 

into legislation that may impact their lives. 

 

That’s the whole intent behind the policy field committees. 

They are now a major portion of this legislature, and they’ve 

been set aside and ignored, absolutely ignored. So the whole 

idea behind the modernization of this Legislative Assembly has 

been set back years, almost eight years of work — eight years 

of work to put in place an appropriate system in this Legislative 

Assembly, for public input, for a good consultation process that 

could work outside of the legislature. 

 

We aren’t constrained by the hours of the legislature. We aren’t 

constrained by the days that the legislature sits because the 

policy field committees have the ability to sit between sessions. 

They have the ability to do work. They have the ability to 

receive public input. They have ability to have their work done 

before we return to the House. This was ignored, ignored. It 

wasn’t that it wasn’t known that this could be done. It was 

ignored. So now here we sit where the government is going to 

unilaterally change the hours of the House to cram through 

some legislation. 

 

And my colleague from Saskatoon made some very good 

points. Why are you afraid of public input? What in this 

legislation . . . if it meets national norms, if it’s the same as 

every other province has, why are you afraid to have 

consultations and public input into this legislation? 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the same thing we’ve 

seen from the very beginning since this government has been 

elected. It’s either their way or no way. And during the first 

session — that very short eight-day session that we had in the 

fall — the Premier was in the House and he said, oh well we 

already did our consultations. They were held on November 7. 

Ha, ha, ha. Well isn’t that funny. 

 

Well do you know what? They were elected, but it doesn’t give 

you carte blanche to say for the next four years, I’m going to do 

whatever I want. It means that the public has entrusted in you 

the responsibility of building the province of Saskatchewan but 

also in consultations with our population. It’s not just by 

yourself. It’s in consultations with the public. It’s in 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

consultation. It’s within the debate in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

But over and over again — whether it’s firing civil servants 

who won’t toe the party line or, worse yet, firing them for no 

cause, without cause; whether it’s political meddling in the 

Labour Relations Board and quasi-judicial boards that are at 

arm’s-length from the Government of Saskatchewan no matter 

who’s in power, and voicing expectations in the media that 

these boards need to take into consideration the views of the 

government of the day — it’s either my way or no way. And 

that’s exactly what we have seen in the legislature. That’s 

exactly what we’re seeing with this forcing through of the rules 

and legislation. It’s either their way or no way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult for us to sit here and do this. But 

you know, we’re elected to bring forth the views of our 

constituents, and we’ll do that. If we have to sit here till 

midnight and be here again at 10 the next day, we’ll do that 

because that’s the job we’re elected for and that’s our 

responsibilities in this legislature. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that’s exactly what we intend to do. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to have the opportunity to participate in this debate. I’m not 

necessarily all that glad about this debate taking place, the cause 

for this debate of course being the heavy-handed, the 

sledgehammer tactics of the government. 

 

It’s interesting. I’ve been in this House since the spring of 2001, 

and over those years, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a lot from the 

opposition about the importance of democracy, about the 

importance of due process, about the importance of rules that 

serve not just the government but the opposition as well, that 

serve us all as we strive to do our part here in this parliamentary 

democracy in this Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I know for a fact that, if this was 

us doing this to them, there would be no end of outrage. 

There’d be no end of gnashing of teeth and rending of garments 

over on that side, Mr. Speaker. And do you know what? They’d 

be justified because, when it comes to the rules of play, the 

rules of engagement, there’s a long-standing tradition in 

parliamentary democracy that it must be agreed upon by both 

sides. That’s the very essence of democracy. 

 

And it says a lot about people that when they get a little bit of 

power how they use that power. And if they use that power in a 

just way, in a fair way, in a way that respects the rules of 

fairness, that respects common tradition and agreed-upon 

principles that have evolved over centuries, Mr. Speaker, if they 

abuse that power what does it say about them? And I guess in 

this case it says plenty. It says, we’ve gone to the people in the 

fall; we got a mandate based on a certain platform that we took 

to the people, and we can do whatever we want because we won 

the election. Now of course that platform that they took to the 

people, there were a few things there that were — how shall we 

say? — less than clear at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

One of those things I think of is Station 20 West, Station 20 

West where we’ve had 2,500 people on the streets of Saskatoon 

saying that this is a good project. This is a community project. 

This is an important project to the inner city of Saskatoon. It’s 

an important project to improve the health outcomes of people 

in the inner city of Saskatoon. 

 

And I remember very well when that project was announced 

and the $8 million were dedicated to that project. And I 

remember at that time the fact that the opposition, the then 

opposition, the Sask Party sent their Finance critic — no less 

than their Finance critic, the member from Silver Springs — to 

that announcement. And what the member said at that time is 

that this is a great announcement; call the election. Now did he 

say this is, this is a project that we think is ill-founded, we think 

this is a project that shouldn’t go ahead? No what he said, you 

know, good project, let’s get on with the election. 

 

And I guess if he’d wanted to go to the people in a 

straightforward way, if that party had wanted to represent their 

position in a straightforward manner what they would have said 

is that the moment we get our hands on the public purse we’re 

going to rip that $8 million right out of the hands of the people 

in those communities and tough luck. 

 

And I guess if they’d gotten a mandate to do that, Mr. Speaker, 

you know — fair ball. It’s a democracy. They went to the 

people with a platform. That’s what they said; they were 

straight up about it so that’s the mandate they’d received from 

the people. But they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They said 

something else entirely before the election and then did 

something else entirely different after the election. 

 

I think of the essential services legislation that’s come forward. 

You know of course in the past year and a half in this Assembly 

and in the public discourse we’ve heard a lot from members 

opposite about how there would be no need for essential 

services legislation. And it would seem that that was so much, 

you know, an attempt to allay the fears on the part of working 

people in this province, an attempt to perhaps lull them into a 

sense of complacency, that essential services wasn’t coming 

forward. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have it their 

platform. They didn’t, they weren’t upfront about it with the 

people of the province. But of course after the election, one of 

the first Bills that they bring forward is essential services 

legislation. 

 

And when we suggest that it be taken out to the public for 

genuine public consultations, what is the response from this 

government? It’s to bring down the sledgehammer of closure, to 

try and shut down debate; to ram home their agenda. 

 

And I find it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that that is the 

practice on this side. They’ve got power. They’ve got a 

mandate. They’ve got a mandate based on false pretenses. But 

they get into power, and of course, what are they doing? 

They’re trying to ram home things that they said oh no we don’t 

need to do this, in their very own platform. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, on a couple of points where the 

opposition, the then opposition said one thing, the now Sask 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

Party government is doing another. You know, there’s been a 

lot of talk in the past few days about, you know, rules; we can 

change the rules at whim. We can change the rules just as we 

see fit. Because why? We won an election in November. 

 

But how did they win that election, Mr. Speaker? They won it 

on false pretenses. They won it by not being straight with the 

people of the province. They won it by not having the guts, the 

backbone to say what they were really about in places like 

inner-city Saskatoon, by not being straight and not having the 

guts to say what they really wanted to do to the working people 

of this province. 

 

So again they say they’ve got a mandate. And I say a mandate 

to do what? One of the things that they ran on in this campaign, 

which was right interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, was the fact 

that they brought forward fixed election dates. And it’s 

interesting because of course, in the history of the CCF-NDP 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party], we’ve always called elections more or less on four years 

— you know, maybe a little bit less, maybe a little bit more. 

 

But the then opposition made a big hue and cry about how they 

were going to bring forward fixed election dates, you know, 

because they’re the great champions of democracy. And it’s 

interesting that, you know, why would they bring this forward? 

Because I think, Mr. Speaker, they were trying to inoculate 

themselves against their own record because the last 

government that went five years plus a day and the last 

government that abused democracy in this way that would need 

fixed election dates to guard against them are their 

predecessors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess it’s interesting because of course, you know, there 

are various members on that side that had a rich and long 

association with those people. So they’re scared of that record. 

They want to hold up something to say, oh no that isn’t us. 

We’re different. So they’ve got a four-year fixed election date, 

so it’s interesting in that sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[18:30] 

 

It’s also interesting from the perspective that, you know, they 

champion democracy on the one hand. But the fundamental 

principles of parliamentary democracy in this legislature in 

terms of fair play, in terms of consensus between the parties 

when it comes to the basic rules of engagement in this 

Chamber, you know, they can’t do that. So they use closure to 

ram home a democratic Bill, and I guess I’m glad of that 

because, you know, at least we’ll get that Bill into law, and then 

we can guard against them having further abuses, future abuses 

of the democratic process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to think back over the few years 

that I’ve had the privilege of sitting in this place and the many 

times that the members opposite have demanded fair play, have 

demanded, you know a fair shake under the rules, the great 

interest that they’ve had in terms of the reform process. 

 

I know that the member from Cannington did a lot of work with 

the then member from Regina South in terms of a inter-party 

committee and work that was done to go around the world in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, in terms of investigating the model in 

Australia. And they came home with recommendations around 

our committee system that improved the system, Mr. Speaker. 

And that was done in co-operation between the two parties. 

 

And again, I guess we did that because democratic is our 

middle name in fact, Mr. Speaker, so we did that. The 

opposition did that because — I don’t know — they had an 

interest in the exercise. And we came to an agreed upon set of 

rules around how the committees would operate, and we were 

able to introduce these committees that could go out across the 

province and take testimony or bring people in to talk about 

how laws would affect them. 

 

And again the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and other, 

other of my colleagues on this side of the House would talk 

very eloquently about the importance of how we act here 

influences the way people approach their institution, their 

democratic institutions, and how that is sometimes, how that 

translates into declining voter turn out because people get fed 

up with the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess the reforms that we’ve set about over the past eight 

years to try and make the system more responsive to the people, 

make the system more accountable to the people, you know, I 

guess what all that relied on was an NDP government in power 

because we have these committees that we could use to full 

effect. And what do we have from the government opposite? An 

attempt to deny the very possibility and the great possibility of 

having people involved through those committees. 

 

The way that they’re bringing in closure, Mr. Speaker, it denies 

the very fact that it was, it was a committee of both sides of this 

House that involved the wise officials of this House that did a 

great amount of study and work to go across Canada to look at 

the different rules in place in different assemblies and chambers 

and to come back with recommendations that would make this 

Chamber work better — work better for the people, more 

efficiently for the people. 

 

And of course one of the things they came back with was the 

fixed calendar. And, you know, this was something that . . . It’s 

not like it just sort of snuck up on people, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

like it was a rabbit pulled out of a hat or something. This was 

something that was road-tested in this very Chamber. This was 

something that there was a lot of thought put into by both sides 

of the House, by both House Leaders. And of course at the time 

when that legislative calendar was adopted as one of the 

centrepieces of the legislation or the changes around the rules of 

the House, of course it was greeted by then the Speaker that 

“the changes are another step [forward] toward the process of 

modernization.” The goal was to make the Assembly work 

more effectively and efficiently. 

 

The then government House leader said: 

 

After a careful review of the operations of other legislative 

processes, we have come to the conclusion that these 

changes will result in a more productive and effective 

Legislative Assembly . . . These changes will allow 

members to better balance their duties as legislators and to 

their constituents. 

 

And the then opposition House leader, the current Government 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

House Leader, had this to say: “These changes are about 

improving the way the Legislative Assembly works, while at 

the same time giving MLAs more opportunity to stay in touch 

with our constituents.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how the times have changed. We’ve gone 

from this great state of agreements and putting out the joint 

press release, but of course when it comes time for joint action 

and real deeds to follow up those good words, you know, can 

you count on the Government House Leader now to live up to 

what he had to say then? You can’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess I find that to be a disappointment. And I find it, 

you know . . . I guess my more cynical side would not be 

surprised. But you know, when you get together and you work 

to create new rules and you put all this effort in and it’s 

ballyhooed in the House and, you know, even our, you know, 

political columnist, the dean of the political columnists, Murray 

Mandryk, says that both government and opposition give a lot, 

and what they did may even be a little historic, you know. 

 

This was greeted with great fanfare at the time it was passed, 

and now of course we find out that because the governments 

can’t seem to count their way through the eight days in 

December and what they’re going to need in March, and come 

back late in March, and because they can’t count their way 

through a legislative agenda, can’t count their way to manage 

the process, it’s like . . . You know right now many university 

students are going through finals and it’s . . . You know, the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place brought a fine parable 

about a fellow named Joe who couldn’t manage his way 

through a semester at university and then of course paid the 

price for that at the end. 

 

But I guess this is sort of like the people that don’t understand 

the process even though they’ve signed off on it, even though 

they’ve helped to design it, Mr. Speaker. They say that at the 

end, well you know what we need to do is to jam through these 

changes to the rules. We need to bull our way through, and the 

opposition should just suck it up. And I guess I find that 

contemptible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s like the university student that doesn’t pay attention, 

doesn’t do the work all through the semester, and then tries to 

get through by cramming at the end. And you know if they want 

to pull an all-nighter or all-weekers . . . You know people in this 

province look at this legislature, and they’ve got some problems 

with it already. They look at that kind of behaviour, Mr. 

Speaker, and it just makes them more disenchanted, more 

disgusted with what goes on in this place. 

 

And I guess you know if they can’t manage their own process, 

if they haven’t got the competence, the basic know-how to get 

the job done and then they want to make it up in terms of 

cramming at the end, I guess this is where we get to with this 

closure motion, with this ramming home the agenda. And you 

know, does that improve the process here? Does that improve 

the job that we do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, on 

behalf of the individual constituents who have sent each of us 

here to represent them? I think not, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

it’s funny that this cramming approach, this sort of jam it at the 

end . . . 

 

You know you can tell a lot about people when they’ve got 

some power and how they use that power. And if they use that 

power in a way where you don’t co-operate and you don’t 

consult and you just sort of play the boss and, you know, my 

way or the highway, it says a lot about leadership and the 

people that are providing that leadership or the lack of 

leadership as we’ve come to understand it in society, Mr. 

Speaker. So I guess I find that surprising. 

 

I find it interesting that here we are debating these laws that the 

people have sent us to consider, debating these issues that the 

people have sent us here to give voice to. And the government’s 

first sort of opportunity to demonstrate whether or not they 

know how to run a three-car parade, their first chance to show 

what they’ve learned over these years in opposition because 

there are certainly members in that opposition that have been 

here a lot longer than I have, Mr. Speaker, and in terms of the 

many years they sat in opposition. 

 

And I hear a voice coming from the distant past, Mr. Speaker, 

almost from the Stone Age it would seem, coming from the 

southeast. I make no reflection on the people of that 

constituency. But the member from Cannington, of all people, 

of all people, Mr. Speaker, a former House leader, an individual 

who went all the way around the world, who went to Oz, Mr. 

Speaker, to help design the new process around this place. He 

should be hanging his head in shame today, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the work that had been done co-operatively in a 

by-partisan sense, the rules that we’d agreed upon, yes across 

the floor. 

 

And now we’ve got the government trying to bull their way 

through because they apparently didn’t understand the rules, 

because apparently they needed to take their socks off so they 

could count their way through the session, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

interesting that the member from Cannington likes to bellow 

from his chair, likes to yell from his chair. But we’re not going 

to be yelled down, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to be yelled 

down. We’re not going to be shouted down in this place. We’re 

going to do the job as best we can, no matter the bullying, no 

matter the ramming home of agendas on that side. We’re going 

to do the work that the people sent us here to do. 

 

And I guess, you know, the member from Cannington likes to 

talk about what’s happened over history. Well I can tell you 

this, Mr. Speaker. The member from Cannington, if he’d really 

meant the work that he’d done as the then opposition 

representative on the committee that helped to redesign the 

committee structure of this House, if they’d really meant what 

they’d done when they tried to bring in the changes to the rules 

to make this calendar more predictable, more efficient, more 

effective, you know, I guess they should have saved their 

breath. They should have, they should have saved the press 

release. Maybe we should have just stayed the way we were 

because the first sort of big push these guys get into, the first 

big jam they get into, they want us to pull not just an all-nighter, 

they want us to go, you know, to a way of doing business that 

most people find laughable. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been sent here to do a job. We’ve 

been sent here to do that job seriously and thoughtfully. But you 

know again, the member from Cannington likes to holler from 

his chair, bellow from his chair. I guess he should have shared 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

those sentiments when he was on the committee helping to 

redesign the rules of procedure in this place. He should have 

helped to do a better job when he was on the committee that 

went all the way to Australia, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know. 

Perhaps he was too busy paying attention to kangaroos, or 

maybe he was trying his hand at surfing or something. 

 

But apparently they didn’t understand the work that they did 

and the decisions they made because, when it comes to the first 

big test of those rules and what that side does with some power, 

Mr. Speaker, we find out what they’re made of. We find out 

that, you know, they can say these rules mean something, but 

their actions of course say something else entirely. 

 

And of course . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from 

Cannington, if he’s so interested in this debate, he should get up 

and say his piece. But he’s not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s just going to holler from his chair a little more because of 

course maybe, maybe he’s upset that his work that he had done 

with the member from Regina South is being abused in such a 

way. I don’t know. Maybe it’s some kind of psychological 

purging that he’s engaging in in terms of what guilt he feels for 

having played then, at that time, a positive role and seeing it 

treated so poorly now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m going to be standing with the opposition on this, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m going to be standing up for the people that sent us 

here. We’re going to be standing up for democracy. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This debate 

that we have today is about a sad time in the history of 

Saskatchewan. And unfortunately this is also a sad time in 

Canada as it relates to the role of the legislatures and of 

parliament in this country. What we are talking about today is 

democracy and the form of democracy in Canada. 

 

And as many people know, I’ve always looked towards some 

kind of a Saskatchewan poem that catches the flavour of what’s 

going on. And so tonight I’d like to read a poem by Gary 

Hyland, in his book, Hands Reaching in Water. And the title of 

this poem is “The Fragile Things”: 

 

Our dreams subside to compromise. 

Damn the faltering fallibility 

that condemns the fragile things we prize. 

 

Justice comes plunging from flak-pocked skies 

and freedom is conscripted for democracy. 

Our dreams subside to compromise. 

 

Who’s left to challenge the disarming lies 

spun by the contrary faculty 

that condemns the fragile things we prize? 

 

While wars swat innocents like flies 

on our slopes of self-made misery 

our dreams subside to compromise. 

The illusion we are masters defies 

our chronic attempts at mastery. 

That condemns the fragile things we prize. 

 

We flower lush intentions to disguise 

the transgressions we are loathe to see. 

Our dreams subside to compromise 

that condemns the fragile things we prize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a poem that talks about some of those 

elusive qualities that we as Saskatchewan people, as Canadian 

people value — the fragile things we prize. And one of the 

fragile things that we prize in this country relates to the rights of 

people and the rights of parliaments or legislatures. Part of how 

we have structured our government in Canada relates to the role 

of this particular legislature as we move forward with the plans 

that we have to share the assets that are gathered together and 

then dispersed to the community. Part of that discussion 

involves how you make decisions. 

 

[18:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a long tradition of many centuries that 

relates to the rules that are agreed upon in parliament, and as 

my learned colleague talked about earlier, parliament is a 

substitute for armed combat. And, Mr. Speaker, we all prefer to 

work within the rules that we have developed and continue to 

develop to make sure that how we resolve our conflicts is done 

with words and not with swords. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me explain why in 2008 I think we have 

some things to be concerned about in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, over the last 30 to 40 years there 

has been a concentration of the power of government more and 

more into the prime minister’s office and into the premier’s 

office. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we see is the Premier, who is a member 

of the legislature and in our legislature the member from Swift 

Current, more and more of the control of what happens is in that 

particular office. And this isn’t something that’s only happening 

in Saskatchewan but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

our Premier is a great friend or emulator of our Prime Minister. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, two years ago and a few months we had a 

new minority government in Ottawa with a Prime Minister who 

believes in absolute control of what happens within his caucus 

and within parliament. And, Mr. Speaker, the types of central 

control that is happening in Ottawa I think is what’s happened 

here in Saskatchewan over the last three or four or five months, 

and why we’re in the mess that we’re in today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite certain but I listen carefully, I watch, 

I hear what different members of the government have said, 

especially some of the ministers but also some of the other 

members of the legislature, and I think that what I perceive to 

have happened over the last five months is that a new Premier 

has come in and said, well we want to do it like Prime Minister 

Harper. And what they’ve done is tried to control all of the 

aspects of government through one particular office and, Mr. 

Speaker, what has then happened is that you have all the 

Premier’s responsibilities and the things that are related there. 

You have all of the caucus responsibilities and the items that are 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

related there. You have all of the issues that relate to the House 

and how that moves, plus all of the ministers’ offices all being 

controlled through a group of people who have relatively 

central control. 

 

And the reason that I talk about this tonight is that in Canada 

quite a number of scholars of government have identified this 

trend. I think probably the one that’s most prominent and that 

people know the best is Donald Savoie, who was a former 

federal civil servant and in 1999, which is almost 10 years ago, 

he wrote a book or published a book called Governing from the 

Centre: The Concentration of Power in Canadian Politics. 

 

And what he effectively said is that in the federal government 

there was a control into the Prime Minister’s office. And a 

number of central agencies controlled by the federal 

government that actually put their tentacles out and their job, as 

in the words of a number of the people who were talked to in 

this book, was to make sure that the ministers were on line, 

make sure that the caucus was on line, make sure that the House 

Leader was all, they were all pulling together on the same 

agenda. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan over the last number of 

months we have heard some statements that mirror or mimic the 

kind of thing that Donald Savoie was saying almost 10 years 

ago. And if you recall, the Deputy Premier made comments 

about why certain people were working for the government or 

not working for the government, and it had to do whether or not 

they believed in the philosophy of the Premier. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very strange statement and I know 

many people in the province are still trying to sort out exactly 

what that means. I know that a lot of the controversy around the 

Labour Relations Board and the appointment of a new Chair 

there relates to also this question of, well we need somebody 

who thinks like we do. 

 

Now who is that we? Mr. Speaker, it’s my proposition here in 

this debate, but I think based on hearing a number of voices 

right across the province, that the Premier and the smaller group 

of people that work together with him are part of this overall 

control or management, I guess is another way to put it, of the 

whole of government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what happened here in this particular 

situation is that this was not a high item on the agenda of the 

transition team or the Premier’s office which was, how do we 

get our legislation completed, and that this got away on them 

because practically there was a concern about getting the budget 

together. 

 

And we acknowledge and I think the numbers of the speakers 

on our side have acknowledged that it’s a difficult task to put a 

whole budget together in time for a middle of March 

announcement when you’ve just been brought into government 

in late November. Well I think what happened, Mr. Speaker, is 

that because of the centralized control emulating the federal 

government, the Premier and the people around him all of a 

sudden started realizing that there were some problems here. 

 

And it’s only about just over a week ago that all of a sudden 

there was a panic that there was a mess and rather than work 

together to sort out how this might be sorted out within the rules 

that had been drafted carefully over many years by members of 

both sides of the House, the decision was made, go full steam 

ahead. Now based on my perception of what’s happened within 

the government over the last four or five months, I think there 

must have been some direction or some push from the centre — 

and whether that’s the Premier or the people around him — that 

we’ve got to get this done. 

 

Now we’ve heard quite a number of times that the concern is — 

and I think I even saw it in the media the last couple of days 

based on comments made by the House Leader — is that we 

have these things that we promised to do in the election and 

we’re going to do this no matter what the rules of the House 

are, what the rules of democracy are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the fragile thing that we have that we’re 

concerned about, is this ability to allow for discussion, which is 

the role of parliament, this ability to allow for going out to the 

people and saying, you know, do you as the public really think 

this makes a lot of sense to do this? All of that is being pushed 

to the side because of a centrally controlled agenda. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, based on the experience that I’ve had in a 

number of the committees that I’ve been part of over the last 

while — and I’m talking about our legislative committees here 

in this legislature — I can see the surprise on some of the 

backbencher members who are members of these committees 

when information comes out that, oh that’s slightly different 

than the line that we heard in the House or that we heard in the 

media. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are a number of the 

members of this legislature who are getting a bit uneasy with 

the amount of centralized control. And I think that practically 

what we can do is recognize that today may be the low point in 

democracy in Saskatchewan. But I set out a challenge to this 

government and I set out a challenge to us as the opposition, 

that as we move forward we need to think through about what it 

means for what we can do for the Saskatchewan people as a 

legislature — not 10 years from now, not 20 years from now, 

but 50 years from now. 

 

What we want is a place where decisions can be made for the 

benefit of all of the people and that are actually broad-based 

consensus decisions, rather than this kind of centralized control 

that we’re all feeling today as being inappropriate. 

 

Now we know that some of the great uneasiness on the national 

level related to our current Prime Minister does relate to his 

concern about being in control of the agenda. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re only four or five months into this government, but I think 

the same kinds of concerns are starting to register with the 

people about this Premier and about the people around him. 

 

Now one of the challenges that has come up in various ways 

over the last four or five months, and frankly before that as well 

but maybe not as well understood, is well who are these people 

that are providing the advice to the Premier? And Mr. Speaker, 

it appears that many of them are not the elected colleagues here 

in this legislature, but they’re actually people who were part of 

an earlier government that caused a lot of difficulty for our 

province. 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

And that particular concern is registered in a number of 

different ways. Mr. Speaker, once again I set out a challenge to 

the government, I set out a challenge to this legislature — and 

that includes all of us — that we need to start rethinking what 

the role of each individual member is, what the role of the 

government members are, and what the role of executive 

government is. 

 

It may be that the emulation of some of the US [United States] 

model of governance is causing some rather great stress on 

institutions like our legislature. And what I mean by that is any 

of us who have been involved in Canada-US comparisons of 

how our legislatures work know how difficult it is to explain 

that the Attorney General is a member of the legislature, part of 

the Premier’s cabinet and accountable in that structure as 

opposed to being accountable directly to the people and elected 

separately. That’s an American model that is there. 

 

We talk and we know that our present Speaker I’m sure has 

given some of these kinds of speeches. We know that our 

previous Speakers have spent a lot of time talking to the public 

about the role of the legislature, the role of executive 

government, and the role of the judiciary. Mr. Speaker, we have 

to recognize that because of the blended roles that we have 

between the legislature and executive government that there’s a 

fragile thing there that is important to protect. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where the trouble arises is . . . comes when 

the trust of the political parties that are involved is eroded. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a book that’s been edited by 

Thomas Courchene and Donald Savoie. It’s just a very recent 

book. I think it just came out in the last year or two, and this 

particular book actually was published in 2003. It’s called The 

Art of The State: Governance in a World Without Frontiers. 

 

And one of the articles in this book is written by Guy Peters. 

And in light of the comments I’ve just made, this comment by 

Guy Peters about reforming representative democracy — which 

is found on page 91 — I think puts a finger on the kind of 

concern that the public has with what’s going on in the 

legislature here in Saskatchewan today. And I quote: 

 

For much of the population now, however, political parties 

have become part of the problem with democratic 

governance, rather than part of the solution. Rather than 

contributing to effective governance, political parties are 

now often considered to be obfuscating issues, protecting 

incompetence, and failing to think beyond partisan 

advantage while in office. To some extent the parties have 

only themselves to blame, given the numerous instances in 

which political parties have rallied around party leaders 

who have obviously erred politically or personally, and the 

numerous times that parties have been seen to abuse the 

office in just the way they criticized the previous 

incumbents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of the confidence in the political 

parties and then the further point that seemingly within our 

controls of our governance in Canada . . . when there’s a 

majority government, you end up having to rely on the 

individual members or the premiers or the leaders who are a 

small group of people and their own . . . and the political 

consciences they have rather than having checks and balances 

as they do in some of the other governance systems in Canada. 

 

[19:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see today is a government which has 

through various ways mismanaged what’s happening in this 

particular House, and as I said before, I think it has something 

to do with the centralized control that’s taken place here. I know 

that if there’d been a broader base of information in making 

these decisions, we wouldn’t be in this jam because there are 

some very capable procedural people that have spent many 

years in this legislature. 

 

Well because of that mess, because of that jam, we are now at a 

point where we may damage this fragile thing that we call 

democracy in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is very 

sad, and it also reflects that many of the members of the public 

will start to further question what happens in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Prime Minister Tony Blair a year and a half ago or 

so gave a speech in Los Angeles which is reported in the 

American Bar Association International Law News. And what 

he was talking about in that particular speech was the role of the 

rule of law and traditional justice. The key point made in his 

speech is that we have to show that our values and our 

democracies are stronger, better, and more just and more fair 

than the alternative. And he’s talking about this particular issue 

in light of the events of 9/11 and other extremist actions across 

the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that we’re somehow removed from some 

of those challenges to democracy that take place across the 

world. Well it’s not so. We have a responsibility to make sure 

that the rule of law applies here in Saskatchewan and the rules 

and the traditional ways, century-old ways, that we’ve had to 

change rules and deal with conflict within the confines of this 

legislature are upheld. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a sad day because that fragile thing 

which we call democracy is threatened by the actions of this 

government who have talked themselves into a very difficult 

spot. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for listening to 

me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 

with some things a little different than some of my colleagues 

have said. The theme of course is very similar. Here we are, day 

23 of the legislature, day 23 of the legislature and we’re being 

forced, through the use of closure, to end debate on the 

unilateral changing of the rules. 

 

But what I wanted to say that’s I think a little bit different is I 

want to draw some connectivity, Mr. Speaker. I want to point 

out that there are hon. members on both sides of this legislature. 

The member for Carrot River Valley does work with relatives 

of mine, does some custom spraying with relatives of mine. We 

have a connectivity. The hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland 

is related to me by marriage. And we can moan and groan all 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

we want, but thankfully I don’t see the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland moaning or groaning, and I’m certainly not either, 

Mr. Speaker. There is connectivity. 

 

At least three opposition MLAs represent my wife’s and my 

children and our grandchildren. Others represent other family of 

mine and of my colleagues. There is an interconnectivity in this 

province that brings us together much more than tears us apart, 

and yet here we are with a motion that is going to tend to tear us 

apart and it says us — them. And that’s a shame. It doesn’t have 

to be that way. 

 

I want to point out that I’ve attended, unfortunately and sadly, 

I’ve attended the funerals of three Sask Party MLAs, former 

MLAs, who passed on while they were sitting representing their 

constituents and representing the province of Saskatchewan. I 

and many of my colleagues have attended funerals, just like 

that. There is a connectivity. There are some things that 

transcend all of the disagreement or even, dare I say, even some 

of the ugliness that rears its head in here from time to time. We 

have connections, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I could go on and on 

drawing on the ties that simply cannot be dismissed. I could go 

on and on drawing on that. But I wanted to say that ties help 

relationships, and relationships need nurturing to keep working. 

They need to be nurtured. 

 

And as I was preparing this speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was 

reminded of the relationship that’s probably the most important 

to myself, and that is the relationship I have with my wife. And 

I’m committing here to do some more to nurture that. I think 

many of us can say we maybe are lacking. I know I certainly am 

acknowledging right now that’s there’s more I could do to make 

that relationship . . . I could pay more attention to it and commit 

to do so. 

 

So here we are. We’ve got closure of a debate that’s passed 

earlier today because the majority used their muscle. The 

majority used a sledgehammer and said, at the end of this time, 

I have a time-limited speech. I have a time-limited speech. At 

the end of my time, I’m done; the new rules come. It’s their 

way, full stop, period. No negotiation, no nothing, and I’m 

simply trying to urge members to consider and reconsider and 

ask, ask if you’ve tried. If you can answer the question, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that you’ve tried, you’ve even asked, is there 

an alternative to this heavy-handedness? 

 

Well I guess we all have to answer that question, but I’m asking 

MLAs to consider because I want to make this observation. 

Organizations that lack effective leadership lurch from crisis to 

crisis, and most of us, most of us have witnessed this in 

organizations that we’ve been either associated with or have 

witnessed in the past. Sometimes it’s organizations that we have 

belonged to. And we have seen incompetent leadership cover 

their incompetence by simply doing something, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, simply doing something. 

 

One example that sprang to my mind — and I think I’ll get 

some general agreement with this — the former federal Liberal 

government was told they had a problem with bank robberies in 

Toronto and they must . . . robberies and service stations being 

held up with guns. And so they said, ah we’ve got a gun 

problem; we must do something. And they did. They introduced 

the gun registry which unfortunately does very little, very little 

to address, that does very little to address the problem . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

astounded. We’ve got a new private member over there saying, 

you guys supported it. And we never supported that. And we 

got on the record very, very early. We had then our minister, 

our attorney general, Bob Mitchell, stood up and made a 

passionate speech, and we’ve stuck with that ground all along. 

 

Robbers, robbers do not register their guns. Crooks don’t 

register their guns. We’ve always mounted the argument that on 

that front we could do much more with gun safety legislation, 

with education, that sort of thing. 

 

But I digress. That’s simply one example of a leadership crisis 

where something should have been done. And they leapt to the 

wrong conclusion and they did something. And so what we 

have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all too often we’ve got organizations 

that have weak or bad leadership that do something. And in this 

case we have an organization that needed a channel changer, 

that needed a channel changer. And why did they need a 

channel changer? What were the debates about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

Well the debates are about things like two pieces of labour 

legislation, essential services which the new government said 

they didn’t need before the election. What a difference a day 

makes, November 7, because ever since then they’ve said we’d 

need it. And the second piece of labour legislation — no 

surprise — it’s changes to The Trade Union Act. But all of a 

sudden there’s some crisis, some crisis in day 23 of a legislative 

session. I don’t quite see it. 

 

And the other reason they needed a channel changed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, was the debate was broadening on the budget 

as people became evermore aware. Before the November 7, 

2007, general election, Sask Party members had all of the 

answers. They said, deal with the education property tax in its 

totality right now. They said you’ve got a richness of money. 

Deal with it right now. Elect us; we’ll fix it right now. That’s 

what you were saying then. Well now we get a budget. We get a 

budget. What did they do? What did they do for your 

constituents or your constituents or my constituents? An 

average of $27 a year on my education property tax for 

homeowners, and property taxes are going up I’m reminded. 

 

And what did they do for farmers? Well let me just . . . Before I 

get there, let me remind members that the hon. member for 

Saltcoats, the now Minister of Agriculture said . . . I remember 

him standing in the legislature, pooh-poohing on the 

1,500-and-some dollars that we were putting forward to the 

average typical farmer in education property tax relief. And he 

was pooh-poohing and saying 1,500-and-some dollars was 

nothing — didn’t matter at all. It was nothing. 

 

And now this year, there’s an additional $500 top-up to that, 

and it somehow solved all the problems of the world for 

farmers. Well how ridiculous is that? And farmers are getting 

wise to it. 

 

The other thing that people are recognizing from the budget was 

this little fact. Education under us — our last budget — we 

budgeted $300 million. Wound up spending I think it was $314 

million when the smoke had cleared but budgeted $300 million. 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

What’s this year’s budget? Three hundred and two million 

dollars in agriculture — 302. So they went from $300 million to 

$302 million, and that for a group that is viewed as the core 

supporters of the Sask Party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Well let me just say if that’s how you treat your friends, boy 

just don’t count me as one. Don’t do me any favours. Don’t do 

me any favours. Don’t help me. I don’t want it if that’s how you 

treat your friends — a less than two-thirds of a per cent increase 

in a budget while you’re sitting on a mountain of $1.3 billion. 

 

It is small wonder, it is small wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

we have this motion. It’s small wonder that we have this motion 

of closure, this motion that is demanding that the hours change. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what a shame. What a shame that we need 

that kind of a channel changer in your first year of government, 

day 23 and I know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about it being day 

23 a number of times. Let me just say why I keep referring to 

this being day 23, other than the obvious. It is day 23. But 

historically sessions have lasted minimum of 60 in my 

experience and the maximum is quite a bit more than that, but 

average somewhere around 68, 75 days, 70, 71, 72 days per 

year. That’s the Saskatchewan average. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Well here we are, here we are day 23. I mean it is 30 — do the 

math — 37 days from day 70. Their lack of organization, their 

lack of ability to think things through or to talk to our 

Opposition House Leader and come to a deal, doesn’t somehow 

— their lack of ability to negotiate — doesn’t somehow, 

shouldn’t somehow translate into a crisis for the rest of the 

world. 

 

In a parliamentary democracy the majority shall have its way, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The majority shall have its way and in this 

case the majority won the election. The Sask Party has the 

majority. You will have your way. Rest assured, you will have 

your way. But always, always the history in a parliamentary 

democracy is after the minority has its say. 

 

And I want to simply say for the record, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve 

served 16 years in government. I have sat through endless hours 

of committee and hearings in this wonderful Chamber, in other 

rooms around this building, listening to questions that clearly 

had one purpose. One. Not all questions, but all too often the 

one purpose of the questions was simply to log time and 

somehow keep us government, then, in the Chamber. Let me 

remind you, we had a one-seat majority. It was to be cruel and 

unusual punishment for us and that was the ultimate goal of 

many of the questions and no one can deny that. No one can 

deny that with any credibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was to take up time and it was to tie up the 

legislature. Occasionally we heckled about it. Occasionally we 

heckled but we always knew that the opposition had its right to 

have its say. The opposition had the right to exhaust all of their 

questions and then we’d move on — always. And we sat some 

awfully long hours at times, but they had their say and because 

we believed in that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to point out and other 

colleagues have pointed this out — pardon me, Mr. Speaker — 

other colleagues of mine have appropriately pointed out that we 

have a schedule. The schedule that came to me, that I made my 

plans on, said we would start sitting March 3. Well, seven days 

later is when we came sitting, seven complete days. There’s an 

entire week, an entire week . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Get over it. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I’m told to get over it, Mr. Speaker. But let me 

say, the government’s inability to prepare and come to meet the 

schedule should not my crisis make. It should not make it where 

I have less access to my constituents and my constituents less 

access to me. 

 

With these new rules, it is going to be very, very difficult. Yes, 

I have a constituency assistant. Yes, the constituency assistant 

will communicate to the best of that person’s ability and will 

handle things to the best of their ability. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

have constituents that — there’s no explaining it — but some of 

them actually wanted to eyeball and talk to me person to 

person. There’s no explaining some things in life. 

 

So we lost the week March 3 to March 10 at the government’s 

request. Okay? And we had a schedule — this has been pointed 

out. But we took an Easter break, a whole week in Easter, 

which was, what’s that? Was that last week or the week before? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Two weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Two weeks ago. Thank you. Two weeks ago. 

Well without any mention that maybe we could come back, you 

know, two or three days earlier and pick up three days there. 

Not even a by-your-leave. And I want to point out, I think that’s 

the very first time we’ve had a full week in Easter in the 21 

years that I’ve been an MLA, the very first time. So it’s hardly, 

you know, that we got used to it or, you know, it’s somehow 

part of our lifestyle. Again, that’s not a tradition. 

 

The government’s failure to see ahead, the government’s failure 

to plan, the government’s failure to try and negotiate with the 

opposition should not result in a penalty to my constituents. 

 

I have here an invitation, Mr. Speaker, to attend a function that 

is taking place on Thursday the 17th in the evening and I’m 

going to have to regretfully send regrets to this. It would be a 

very fun event to be at, and it’s just one of many. Why I raise it 

is, is not because, it’s not about the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. It’s about all of us and the invitations that we 

receive and the things that we try to do in our capacity as sitting 

MLAs. And these changed hours are going to really make it 

very, very difficult. 

 

I want, members, to ask this is to Sask Party members. I really 

do want you to ask your House Leader, I want you to ask your 

House Leader if you’ve tried everything. Because you’ll get 

your way, but there’s a price for everything. And I’m not trying 

to say that in a threatening sense, but when you foster goodwill, 

you get more goodwill. When you use a sledgehammer and beat 

upon the opposition, I can tell you that oppositions push back. 

 

In 1987 in the spring, the Devine government started sitting 

late. They didn’t come until May and they wanted us to be out 

by June. And we said, no way. We wound up sitting all summer 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

and all fall into, it was Halloween day when we adjourned. It 

was the longest summer session we’d ever had. Estimates for 

the Department of Environment took something like 13, 17 

days. Bob Lyons just did a heck of a job. Mr. Speaker, don’t do 

it. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we introduce the next guest, I 

would like to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to introduce a couple of couples 

that are sitting in your gallery who were involved in hosting the 

banquet for MLAs tonight. Willis and Wanda Thorpe, they’re 

from Spy Hill and have taken a minute to just drop in and see 

how the legislative process works. And Nelson and Nicole Pohl, 

they’re from Yorkton. And would you join me in welcoming 

these couples to your Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, if I could have leave to introduce 

some guests sitting in your gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I’d like to introduce Richie Hall, the defensive 

coach for the Saskatchewan Roughriders — Grey Cup winning 

— and his girlfriend, Helen Saltibus, who were down at the 

MLA Full Gospel Businessmen’s meeting put on for the MLAs 

at the legislature by Saskatchewan’s Full Gospel Businessmen. 

Richie was to share about his life and about his faith and how 

his faith has sustained him through the years of his high school 

football, university football, and then in to Calgary, and in to 

the province over the last 19 years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, I’d like to introduce 

them, and I ask the members to give a rousing applause for one 

of the key factors of our, our Grey Cup win. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To engage in debate and to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Introducing guests first, I would also 

really like to acknowledge Richie Hall in our Assembly here 

tonight. As an avid Rider fan, as a MLA from Regina, Rider 

fever is, you know, awfully strong to this province. Richie 

Hall’s meant an awful lot for a lot of years in this province 

when he was on the field patrolling the secondary and keeping 

control of the offensives that came into town. And it’s a 

pleasure to have Mr. Hall in our Assembly tonight and his 

friend or girlfriend, Ms. Saltibus, as well. Thank you very 

much. Or wife, I apologize. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Debate will continue on the motion. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to rise in discussion to the Sask Party’s desire to 

override our rules here. And I guess what it would be 

worthwhile, just as this gentleman, Richie Hall, stood inside our 

Assembly here, I guess there could definitely be a parable or an 

example to football here tonight. And I think that Mr. Hall 

sitting up there in that Assembly symbolizes an awful lot to our 

province. And he symbolizes an awful lot, and I think that the 

members opposite could learn probably an awful lot from Mr. 

Hall. 

 

If we look at the Saskatchewan Party government, this new 

Sask Party government, as a football team — which we 

certainly could — they have a challenge ahead of them. And 

they were tasked with that challenge at election time. They won 

the job if they were the coach or the general manager or 

whatever position they took there with the team. And I wouldn’t 

want to compare this team to the Saskatchewan Roughriders, 

because unfortunately this team wouldn’t be as successful as the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders have been. And there’s many 

reasons for that. 

 

And then I guess it’s many things that would be contrary to the 

way that Richie Hall would do things there. And a big part of 

that is that it’s sort of a football team with a great marketing 

scheme, a great marketing. You know they sold lots of tickets, 

but then when they went to go to training camp, Mr. Speaker, 

they forgot. They decided they were going to push time back a 

little bit. And in some of the off-season training some of the 

guys forgot to do a little bit of the work because they took it a 

little bit easy. 

 

So they got to training camp, Mr. Speaker, which was pushed 

back a little late, and they got there a little bit out of shape. 

They weren’t overly prepared to start their season. They got 

going. They engaged in the team, and of course the result of not 

working very hard, Mr. Speaker, the result of putting things off 

is that you don’t have success, Mr. Speaker. And so they started 

losing games, losing games, losing games. 

 

Now the difference in what the members opposite are trying to 

do here tonight is something that could never be done in sport, 

is that they’re trying override the rules of this Assembly. You 

certainly couldn’t do that in football. You certainly couldn’t 

appeal to the commissioner and say, Mr. Commissioner, we 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

need to push this schedule back. We need to play some games 

later in the season. So there are many comparisons that I would 

offer to football and it was a pleasure to see Richie Hall, a 

consummate professional, in this place tonight. And I hope all 

members within this Assembly could take note from that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know it is really unfortunate in this place that, 

that’s here to allow for a place of discourse, a place of debate, a 

place of different minds, a place for minority views to be 

present, to see a unilateral overrule of the very principles of this 

place. An abuse of power exercised by the members opposite is 

really unfortunate. Their force of their own power, of their 

majority is a shame. 

 

You know, by employing basically the most heavy-handed tool 

available to one within the British parliamentary system is just 

not right. The circumstances don’t warrant it, Mr. Speaker. 

There would be circumstances within a British parliamentary 

system where these actions might be warranted, something of a 

national crisis or a challenge. But in fact when we look at the 

local crises within our province, these guys don’t respond to 

those either. 

 

It becomes an issue, I guess, of the . . . it takes into account the 

democratic reform that was put in motion here by many 

members of this Assembly, on both sides, done co-operatively 

— co-operatively might I remember you, Mr. Speaker. The 

changes were made to enhance House proceedings. And in 

many ways we serve as a progressive model across our world 

and then definitely within our British parliamentary system. I 

think in many ways the role of our system here and our 

Legislative Assembly can transcend boundaries in so many 

ways. 

 

And when we look for, I guess, struggles abroad with 

democracy and oppression and the challenges that exist, well, 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes there’s not a whole bunch we can do 

by inserting ourselves into those circumstances. That’s a hard 

battle, and it’s certainly not one that we can keep up with. But 

we can certainly be models, Mr. Speaker. Our Legislative 

Assembly certainly can be models. And, unfortunately, a very 

progressive system that’s been a model for some time is taking 

a regressive step here this week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going back to the progressive move of establishing a calendar, 

Mr. Speaker. I’ll go to a press release here on October 16, 2006, 

when the House Services Committee, it says: 

 

House Services Committee Agrees to Permanent 

Legislative Calendar. 

 

Today, the Standing Committee on House Services 

unanimously adopted recommendations that will see 

significant changes to the operation of the Legislature. 

 

A sub-committee composed of the Speaker and both 

House Leaders have recommended changes that will result 

in the establishment of a permanent legislative calendar of 

65 days per session — 25 days in the fall and 40 in the 

spring. 

 

It goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Speaker P. Myron Kowalsky said “the changes are another 

step toward the process of modernization”. The goal [in 

this Assembly] is to make the Assembly work more 

effectively and efficiently. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going in that direction here this 

week and, unfortunately, we’re seeing, I guess, a regressive 

state. House Leader Glenn Hagel at the time stated: 

 

“After a careful review of the operations of other 

legislative processes, we have come to the conclusion that 

these changes will result in a more productive and 

effective Legislative Assembly.” 

 

Now I guess again striking the fact that this was done in 

co-operation with the opposition, quoting the opposition or the 

Government House leader, current Government House Leader: 

 

These changes are about improving the way the legislative 

assembly works, while at the same time giving MLAs 

more opportunity to stay in touch with our constituents. 

 

Well that’s our Government House Leader. And I heard the 

member from Weyburn-Big Muddy ask, well when did he say 

that? And it was October 16, 2006. So I mean . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 2006. That wasn’t that long ago. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — No, and it wasn’t that long ago, was it? 

So it seems that we’re going the opposite way there with that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to make a comment that Murray Mandryk points out, a 

reporter with the Leader-Post here in Regina, in 2006, that’s 

praising the legislation: 

 

But by forcing governments to introduce legislation in the 

fall that can’t be passed until the following spring, 

oppositions do have a reasonable tool at their disposal to 

rally public support against any piece of legislation. And, 

frankly, there’s never been a more powerful tool for a 

politician than the power of public opinion. 

 

When you get right down to it, what will be officially 

adopted by Saskatchewan MLAs when the fall sitting 

reconvenes next week will make the legislative assembly 

more democratic than it’s ever been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll just go back to that comment, just the tail end 

of that again, and Murray Mandryk states here “. . . more 

democratic than it’s ever been.” Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 

the wrong way on that. 

 

I would like to again quote our current Government House 

Leader on May 17, 2007. The current Government House 

Leader, who now is taking a regressive step with his 

government, highlights the benefits of this legislation. “Mr. 

Speaker, I believe . . .” and I’ll quote the current Government 

House Leader from May 17: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this is the first full session where 

we’ve operated under the new rules of the Assembly that 

have been established and developed. And I think that in 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

balance we have been very successful in bringing our 

Saskatchewan legislature to the forefront of parliamentary 

process, not in this . . . [process] but also in the entire 

country. And I think that we can all be rightly proud of all 

the work that we’ve done to accomplish these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Government House Leader continues 

on May 17, 2007: 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, are for the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan firstly. And I think that the fact 

that there is more predictability also, in particular, benefits 

our constituents and the people, in addition to the people 

of the province generally. But most . . . [importantly] I 

think it benefits in some significant manner our families 

who have some predictability when their fathers and 

mothers, grandmas and grandpas are going to be home 

with their families . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s, I guess, in short order that that same 

Government House Leader has taken a complete different 

position contrary to the progressive steps that he was seeing 

within the legislature, the ones he was noting at that point. 

 

We could look at, I guess, a bit about the history of rule changes 

within parliamentary systems. Over the last two decades 

numerous parliaments have been modernized. The goal is 

definitely to make them work more efficiently, more 

effectively. And I don’t think these two words are things that 

the members opposite are against. In fact I hear those two 

words quite often from the members opposite. 

 

A common feature of modernization is a parliamentary 

calendar. And that’s what our Assembly here has worked hard 

to establish, Mr. Speaker. We can look back, I guess, to the 

House of Commons in Ottawa when they adopted a 

parliamentary calendar in 1982, and I quote, “. . . in order to 

make the sitting and non-sitting times predictable.” The United 

Kingdom instituted their calendar in 1992, and I quote, “. . . a 

more sweeping modernization agenda.” So we have made 

strides, Mr. Speaker, in making sure that Saskatchewan 

residents are served efficiently and effectively with a modern 

Legislative Assembly, modern process. And it’s unfortunate 

again for us to be just to be taking, to be taking strides back, 

backwards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m going to share is comments from our 

current House Leader because I think he sums it up very well 

when he’s talking with a group of reporters as far as what 

impact this has on our system here, on our process. So our 

current House Leader, the member from Battlefords, and I 

quote: 

 

“What I see is a government who knew what the rules 

were, who mismanaged their role in applying those rules 

to their own legislative agenda and [who] are now bullying 

their way . . . to square one, trying to start the clock over 

again.” 

 

This is an unfortunate turn of events in an environment whereby 

order is necessary to ensure an efficient managing of the 

process. And he continues: 

 

Well let’s just look at the motion. First of all the 

government is saying that they’re bringing in this 

motion to ensure that the legislation will be passed, but 

by introducing the motion, actually they are distracting 

from the legislative agenda. This is a debatable motion. 

It’s also an amendable motion. So while on one hand 

they’re saying that we’ve mismanaged our agenda and 

we need to get back to the debate on the agenda, they’ve 

introduced a motion that will ensure the debate does not 

go back to their agenda. We will debate this motion. 

 

The quote goes on. There’s other good pieces there, but I have 

stuff I want to move along to here. But I guess that was, that 

was at the start of this week, and I mean, it was rather telling. 

We’ve been good to our word, and we followed through with 

those actions here this week. 

 

But this strikes many issues, Mr. Speaker, and it strikes issues 

of parliamentary democracy. Mr. Speaker, it strikes issues of 

the rights of members of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it really is 

an issue of access and voice for residents, our constituents. It’s 

an issue of a government that refuses to consult, hold public 

debate or public consultation. We see this far beyond this 

individual example, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll speak to that 

afterwards. But this government’s failure or failed interest to 

consult broadly is evident across its work. It’s an issue of work 

ethic. The individuals opposite were not prepared to come into 

the legislature and start when we should have started. We didn’t 

need the spring fling or spring break time that was offered. The 

Assembly should have been in operation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an issue of lack of co-operation. And I think 

that’s a big part of what needs to exist within an Assembly. 

We’re here as opposition, but we’re here also to co-operate. 

And there certainly hasn’t been that from the government’s end 

because we could certainly have resolved some of these 

challenges that have arisen by the government’s challenge. And 

it’s an issue of incompetence, most definitely an issue of 

incompetence, and maybe many of those points I’ve already 

spoken to highlight what kind of an issue it is. 

 

If we talk about rule changes . . . You know, we talk about the 

rights of the members of this Assembly. We talk about a 

government that’s abusing its majority unilaterally to override 

the rules within our democracy and the overriding rules that 

were envisioned and were effective in delivering efficient and 

effective democracy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Built up by consensus over years. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Built up by consensus, the member from 

Douglas Park points out. A really, really good point that exists 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But not this time. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not this time is right. The role of the 

opposition and the role of the critic are highlighted in all sorts 

of academia or all sorts of research. I’ll point to a little bit here, 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of quotes. And this is from — and I’ll 

quote from The Role, rights, and responsibilities of the 

opposition — this is from the 53rd Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Conference in New Delhi, India. So this was put 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

on by our CPA. I’ll quote a bit here: 

 

There was a general agreement among the workshop 

participants that the opposition plays a key role in any 

parliamentary democracy. The division between 

government and opposition is as old as political 

democracy itself. The term “opposition” has been mainly 

applied to the party or parties whose elected Members do 

not support the government of the day and who offer 

themselves to the voting public, not just as individual 

candidates but as an organized and disciplined alternative 

government. Parliament is fundamentally about debate and 

the transacting of the people’s business in public. Thus a 

genuine political opposition is a necessary attribute of 

democracy if citizens are to resolve differences peacefully. 

 

I’ll repeat that last part of that statement there: “Thus a genuine 

political opposition is a necessary attribute of democracy if 

citizens are to resolve differences peacefully,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll end my quotes from there because I do want to touch on 

some other, other pieces here. And I do see my time is 

dwindling. 

 

I mentioned the piece about co-operation there. There’s 

numerous times here that our leaders could have got together 

and could have resolved this situation, could have assisted the 

government, could have worked together on some of this here 

— too bullheaded, too willing to flex their own muscles to force 

this one through. And that’s a bit of a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s an opportunity for our House Leader and their House 

Leader to sit down and to chat, to chat honestly, to chat frankly, 

and to resolve this circumstance. Our two whips could have 

done, done the same. So it’s unfortunate we don’t see 

co-operation. And I think the people of our province would be 

hopeful of seeing more co-operation in the future because it 

only benefits the voting public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The complete disregard for public debate and consultation is 

evident here again, Mr. Speaker, with these very actions of this 

government here this week. Now we’ve got all sorts of 

examples of how far-reaching this government is in not being 

willing to consult. We can certainly look at Bills 5 and 6. We 

can certainly look, you know, at our labour legislation there, 

that that hasn’t been the case. We can look at Station 20. We 

can look at school closures. We can look at a whole bunch of 

pieces, Mr. Speaker. I guess I ask the government opposite or 

the government to, as they move forward, please do a better job 

of consulting across, across the board. 

 

It comes down to a question of rules and order, Mr. Speaker. 

We talked about at the start that in football you can’t simply 

change the rules on a whim to make up for your shortcomings, 

whether that’s you came into training camp out of shape and 

then pushed things off late and as a result, we’re loosing games 

— very comparable to this Sask Party government. 

 

But I guess we could also compare this to, Mr. Speaker, to 

business. And I know that we have a lot of proud business 

people in this, in this province. I know of a lot of constituents 

that are really proud business people. And I think sometimes the 

members opposite favour themselves as a bit of a business 

party. 

 

But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the business people I know — 

and I know many and I’m friends with many — is that there’s 

an acumen that exists that I certainly don’t see with the 

members opposite. Businesses that are thriving across our 

province take those risks, take those challenges. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they work around the regulations, the policies. They 

work around the requirements that exist, and they plan for 

these, Mr. Speaker. A business plans. I guess that’s why they 

call a business plan. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, businesses that don’t plan very well, 

many of them don’t succeed, Mr. Speaker, and I guess very 

comparable to the members opposite. I don’t think they’ve had 

a very good start to their government, and I would compare 

them definitely to a failing business. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And a business that I guess . . . the biggest difference in what 

these actions are showing right now is that a business has no 

ability to . . . all of a sudden have failed to have planned or to 

recognize a regulation or a structure or a policy. They don’t 

have the unilateral authority to then go simply override that and 

to make the playing field unlevel, Mr. Speaker, with their 

competitors. They certainly don’t have that opportunity. It’s 

unfair that our government opposite would expect that of them. 

 

Last piece here, Mr. Speaker, hard work. Hard-working people 

of our province, pioneers in this province, farms, hard-working 

mothers, hard-working families, many people holding down 

many jobs — they expect the same of us, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

not getting it from these guys. We didn’t sit long enough before 

the holidays there at Christmas. We came in late. We took a 

break off at Easter. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 

those people who’ve just joined in, I want to sort of go back 

over why we’re having this debate tonight. As all members of 

the legislature will know, the Saskatchewan Party government 

has decided to unilaterally change the rules of the legislature, 

the sitting hours of the legislature, in order to get a couple of 

pieces of legislation through this session of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will recall that last December several people 

. . . and in fact many, many people in this province were 

absolutely surprised when they learned that Government of 

Saskatchewan was going to introduce two particular pieces of 

legislation: one, the essential services legislation and, the other, 

amendments to The Trade Union Act. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

indicated at the time that these would be specified Bills. These 

are Bills that they wanted to get through this session of the 

legislature which will end on May 15. 

 

When the government introduced those two Bills in December, 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

they also introduced some other Bills as well, and at that time 

there were a number of people that were calling for hearings of 

the policy field committee to go around the province, to hear 

from the public on what they thought of these two Bills in 

particular. It was something that the government didn’t want to 

do. They chose to have their own consultation process. And 

people were invited, some people were invited, to respond to 

the Bills, particularly the essential services Bill. 

 

In about February discussions were going on between our 

House Leader and the Government House Leader about when 

the legislature would be reconvened, and I have a calendar here 

indicating that there was going to be a . . . the legislature was 

going to reconvene on March 3. And if you do the math, Mr. 

Speaker, March 3, had we reconvened on that day, would have 

given the government ample opportunity to get their designated 

or specified Bills through this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen. The legislature was 

delayed about one week, and we didn’t meet as an Assembly 

until about March 12, Mr. Speaker, and . . . or March 10. And 

when you do the mathematics of the legislation that had been 

introduced, the legislation that before, the legislations that the 

government obviously knew on March 10 that they were going 

to be introducing, as well as the estimates — 75 hours of debate 

when it comes to each departmental spending estimates — 

when you do the math, the math simply didn’t add up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you would think that the House Leader, who is the 

Minister of Finance, that he would have had someone, if not 

himself, but someone figuring out how many hours would be 

required in order to complete the government’s legislative 

agenda. And it’s clear now that they made a mistake, that they 

could not add and multiply the number of Bills and the number 

of hours that would be required in order to get their legislative 

agenda through this Legislative Assembly. And so what we 

now have, Mr. Speaker, is a decision by the government to 

amend the rules in order to get their agenda done, Mr. Speaker. 

And what this really speaks to, Mr. Speaker, is what I would 

consider to be incompetence or ineptitude. I mean someone was 

clearly asleep at the switch. 

 

Now the members opposite will say, well you know, we should 

just go along with this. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how the 

place works. How we try and get along in this Assembly is we 

have a set of rules. We all know the rules. The government 

knew the rules. We knew the rules when we were in 

government. And you have to figure out when do we come into 

this place, when do we start the legislature, and when do we 

adjourn, and how many hours do we need in order to get 

government business done. And they simply didn’t do that, and 

so tonight is about a unilateral decision by the government to 

change the rules, but it’s also about the government’s inability 

to follow the rules to get their agenda done, Mr. Speaker, and 

the government has decided since they can’t get their legislative 

agenda through that they’re going to change the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they could have decided, well there’s some 

Bills that we’re simply not going to be able to get through this 

session of the legislature, that we will, you know, that we will 

be thoughtful. We will care about democracy. We will care 

about how this place is going to function into the future, and we 

will delay these Bills into the fall because, Mr. Speaker, they 

have four years to do their governing, but that’s what they 

chose not to do, Mr. Speaker. They decided that we can’t get 

our legislative agenda through. We’re the government. We’re 

the boss. We’re in charge, and even though we messed up, that 

doesn’t matter. We’re going to simply go in with the hammer 

and change the rules, unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well a basic function of government is to have legislation 

written. Usually legislation is written by the officials in the 

Department of Justice, but sometimes it’s . . . I guess in the 

Sask Party’s case, it’s written by private bar lawyers. Then that 

legislation is presented to the Assembly, and then it’s passed. 

And it’s quite clear that the Sask Party has a bit of a problem in 

terms of counting and multiplying, and therefore one has to 

question their competence. And the point is that they failed to 

be able to carry out this very, very basic function because we’re 

now sitting here tonight as a result of their inability to carry out 

a pretty basic function. 

 

Because of their mismanagement of the House, we have the 

Sask Party now unilaterally changing the rules of the Assembly, 

and if they didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker, they would jeopardize 

their legislative agenda. So what we believe is that this 

11th-hour rule change is nothing more than an attempt to cover 

up what really is stunning incompetence. It really is stunning 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it really does define 

who we have come to see as the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. The Sask Party negotiated these rules in 2006 when 

they were in opposition, and I guess one has to ask, were they 

so incompetent at the time that they didn’t understand the very 

implications of the rules that they negotiated? I guess that we 

can’t conclude anything other than that. 

 

Now I’ve been in this Assembly when governments have 

passed 75, 80, 90 pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And thus 

far this session I believe we have 24 Bills. It’s not a huge 

legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker. And the rules are quite clear. 

The rules are quite clear. And the Sask Party negotiated these 

rules that we need to have no more than 20 hours of debate on 

Bills that were introduced in the fall. And so once again I go 

back to my original premise that we appear to have a group of 

men and women that are so, they are so, I guess, incompetent 

that they really couldn’t understand simple mathematics. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these rules didn’t sneak up on this 

government. Their House Leader was involved in negotiating 

the rules. The rules were in place when the Premier and his 

government took over. They were in place when the Sask Party 

took over the reins of government, and they certainly were in 

place when the session of the legislature opened on March 10. 

 

So my premise is, Mr. Speaker, that their incompetence and 

mismanagement really has led to the position that the 

government now finds themself in. And, Mr. Speaker, we made 

it quite clear in December when they introduced these Bills, 

particularly the essential services legislation, that they certainly 

didn’t have this on their party election platform and in fact 

something quite to the contrary. The Minister of Health and the 

Premier before the election said we didn’t require essential 

services in this province. But nevertheless they introduced this 

legislation, and we made it clear that we believe that the Bills 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

needed to go out to the public through the policy field 

committees for consultation. 

 

Now since that time, the government’s had ample opportunity 

within the current rules to ensure that they would have 

sufficient amounts of debate on each piece of these legislation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, had they chosen to come into this Assembly 

on March 3, as they originally intended, as the Minister of 

Labour was advised by his government officials — we already 

know that from an access to information piece — we would not 

be in this mess. 

 

Now the Sask Party ignored these opportunities and instead, 

Mr. Speaker, they chose to have the House sit only two weeks 

last fall. It was the government that chose not to hold 

consultations on these Bills. It was the government that chose 

not to use the policy field committees between the fall and the 

spring sitting of the legislature. It was the Premier and his 

government that chose to delay the opening of the spring sitting 

from March 3 to March 10. 

 

Now it’s quite clear that they fear, given that they have 

mishandled this entire legislative session, that they would have 

difficulty passing all of the proposed pieces of legislation. And 

certainly the Minister of Labour sought out advice from his own 

government department in an attempt to assure himself that his 

two labour Bills would pass. Now, Mr. Speaker, it was the Sask 

Party that chose in the early part of this sitting not to have 

evening sittings on Monday nights and Tuesdays. They decided 

they didn’t want to sit. And now they suddenly realize, because 

they clearly dropped the ball and they’re in a panic, and so not 

only are they changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, but they’re 

invoking closure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s been some time since I have seen the 

invoking of closure on a set of rules, Mr. Speaker. The rule 

change that we’re sitting here debating tonight is nothing more 

than a feeble attempt to cover up their stunning — and I have to 

say, Mr. Speaker, stunning — incompetence. 

 

Now over the last several weeks, it is clear that incompetence 

not only reigns supreme when it comes to how the government 

manages this House, but incompetence is clear throughout a 

number of public policy areas. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that’s only been in power for four and a half 

months, and they’re already invoking closure and changing the 

rules. 

 

I think it took Grant Devine more than four and a half months to 

invoke closure, Mr. Speaker, and in the early 1990s I believe it 

took the Romanow government about two and a half years 

before closure was invoked. And it was invoked, Mr. Speaker, 

over a piece of legislation that had some significant financial 

implications for the province when we were trying to get the 

debt and deficit racked up by the former Conservatives cleared 

away in the 1990s. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that they’ve axed funding when it 

comes to Station 20. They have some sort of impression that 

this was an NDP project. I want to assure the public that 

members of the community worked hard for a number of years 

to bring together all of the people and the organizations and the 

university around Station 20. It was a vision of the community. 

As someone who walked with the people on Saturday, I can 

assure the members opposite that there are people, many, many 

people from the community — and people stopped us along the 

way who were members of the community — thanking us for 

our support of Station 20. This was a popular program. And I 

know that there are some sensitive members from Saskatoon, 

members of the legislature, in terms of this program, but they 

are clearly misinformed as to this program. So they got rid of it. 

 

They got rid of it even though the money was set aside in the 

’06-07 budget; even though thousands of people have 

responded to Station 20, including people at the University of 

Saskatchewan, many people at the University of Saskatchewan. 

And we know on the east side of Saskatoon that many of our 

constituents work at the university, teach at the university, and 

they are supportive of this particular project, particularly 

academics, who were looking forward to working with their 

students in the College of Medicine and the College of Nursing, 

physiotherapy, dentistry out of that important space, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve also had the opportunity to speak to a number 

of people in the community-based organization sector. I know 

these people. And, Mr. Speaker, once again many of them feel 

as though they’ve been misled by the government. They 

thought they were going to get a significant increase in funding 

and they did not, Mr. Speaker. And in fact many of the groups 

thought that they would get more than last year, where there 

was a 3 per cent increase, and they learned recently that they 

were getting a 2.3 per cent increase. And in fact many of them 

still haven’t heard as to what their final numbers will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the minister responsible for housing 

and the housing crisis in our province has indicated to one 

group she was going to make sure that they were supported and 

then they found out that they weren’t to get any support. And 

we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party has indicated to 

other groups in the province that they were going to be 

supported and there’s a lot of disappointment when the budget 

came out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact I have friends that worked very, very hard in order 

to get some of the members of this legislature elected, and they 

really are feeling disappointed that a Sask Party thus far has not 

lived up to what they thought the Sask Party was going to live 

up to, particularly when it comes to the social groups in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are saying, oh well, 

they maybe need to go back to their constituencies. Maybe if 

we didn’t have these extended hours they too would be hearing 

from their constituents and some of their supporters that they 

are disappointed, disappointed in certainly what these members 

have done for community-based organizations who really 

believed, Mr. Speaker — particularly those groups that provide 

services to women and children — they particularly believed 

the Sask Party was going to come forward and come through 

with some significant funding increases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we also know that the Sask Party has 

mishandled a number of other situations, particularly when it 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

comes to the public service in our province. And in fact as I 

understand it, Mr. Speaker, several public servants initially 

were released of their duties even though they were long-time 

public servants in this province. And now we have civil 

servants that are being released in dribs and drabs and not quite 

the profile that we had in the fall with the transition team, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And one of the things I know, Mr. Speaker, is that when you do 

not treat the public service well, because they really are the 

people that have to help you get through your government 

agenda, and when the public service believes that you are not 

respectful to them, you do not treat them properly, you have 

them living in fear, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be very, very 

difficult for this government to get its legislative agenda, public 

policy agenda through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you fire long-time public servants that have no 

political persuasion other than to serve the public, that really 

does speak to your incompetence, Mr. Speaker — your 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

some of these public servants that have been fired, certainly in 

December and in January, are still waiting for a negotiation of 

their package. Nothing has been done for these public servants 

yet even though they’ve worked for the government for 31, 35, 

and in one case, 38 years, Mr. Speaker. And these people are 

still waiting. 

 

Now I know that some people aren’t waiting. Ken Love 

certainly isn’t waiting. He’s got his pay and pay increase. He is 

well looked after by the Sask Party. We know Doug Emsley, 

he’s not waiting. He’s been well looked after by the Sask Party. 

And we know that there are others that have certainly been well 

looked after by the Sask Party. But long-time public servants 

who have served the public for 31 years, 28 years, 35 years, 25 

years, they are still waiting, Mr. Speaker, and so are the 

community-based organizations. They’re waiting to hear from 

this government because they believed that they would be 

properly treated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a historic rule change here. There’s 

no question about that. And the reason why is because the 

Government of Saskatchewan so far is so incompetent that they 

can’t even manage their own legislative agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter the debate here tonight on this historic motion 

in the Legislative Assembly. A motion, Mr. Speaker, that I 

think establishes the simple fact that after only a few days — a 

couple of weeks, a few days — into this session, Mr. Speaker, 

we are indeed seeing a very sad day for the Legislative 

Assembly, for the people of Saskatchewan, and more 

importantly for the status of democracy in our nation. 

 

After years, Mr. Speaker, of parliamentarians in provincial, 

territorial, and federal legislatures working on procedures and 

rules that have evolved to the point of civilized debate, rules 

that understand . . . And I’ll elaborate this in a moment, Mr. 

Speaker. Rules that help the public to understand that the 

majority can have their way but the minority must have their 

say, Mr. Speaker, those rules have evolved, Mr. Speaker. And 

what has happened is that on this very sad day we are seeing the 

government opposite, elected just four months ago, throwing all 

of that progress out the window in the interests of their own 

agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana said 

earlier a number of very important things, Mr. Speaker, but she 

used the word stunning, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to use that 

word a couple of times myself, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very sad day. 

 

It’s a sad day because there’s now an acute understanding, not 

only in this place but across this province, Mr. Speaker, an 

understanding that this government is acutely, stunningly 

incompetent, Mr. Speaker. And I will establish that in my 

remarks tonight as my colleagues have established that in their 

speeches earlier this week. 

 

It’s a sad day, Mr. Speaker, because the principle of democracy 

has been attacked by a democratically elected government. Mr. 

Speaker, this process has evolved to a civilized state and, Mr. 

Speaker, this democratically elected government has challenged 

the principle, the very principle of democracy, and I will 

establish some of that in my remarks tonight as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day because the government has 

begun a process that reduces and minimizes and in fact 

eliminates the public right to be involved in the legislative 

process, Mr. Speaker, and I will elaborate on that as well. But 

the principle there is, Mr. Speaker, this government thinks that 

debate should occur in the middle of the night, Mr. Speaker. 

They think that the public process of involving themselves in 

discussions with members of the legislature, members of the 

Legislative Assembly, should not occur until after a session is 

over, Mr. Speaker, instead of during a session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day. It’s a sad day, Mr. Speaker, 

because years of co-operation and development have been 

thrown out the window simply to meet the short-term goals of 

the needs of a few members opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a very sad day because we have seen this government for what 

it really is. And my colleagues over the last couple of days have 

used the word bully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a group of bullies who have so mismanaged their 

responsibilities that the only way they have left to save face is 

to push their weight around, to exert control — the control that 

the public has entrusted to them — without concern, Mr. 

Speaker; without concern for the consequences or the message 

that this might send to future generations of political leaders. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a sad day because we have learned 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, we have learned this week and we have 

learned tonight that having a majority is not good enough for 

the members opposite, having a majority is not good enough. 

They want more, Mr. Speaker, and they want it right away. 

They want more. They want it now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course we in the New Democratic Party, who have been 

on the other side of the House, who have participated in debates 

from both government and opposition, who have lived by the 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

rules, Mr. Speaker, understand that having a majority also 

means having responsibilities. And having responsibilities, Mr. 

Speaker, means playing by the rules, allowing the public to 

understand what it is that the government is trying to achieve. 

Having a majority is not good enough for the members 

opposite. 

 

My colleague who started this debate earlier this week, the 

member from Regina Dewdney, had the following to say in his 

remarks. . . And I commend those remarks, Mr. Speaker, to 

every member opposite. If they didn’t hear every word the 

member from Regina Dewdney spoke, Mr. Speaker, I urge 

them to pick up Hansard, read it, spend the day, Mr. Speaker, 

or the next two days reading the remarks of my friend from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote a few lines from his speech, 

but every word spoken, Mr. Speaker, was pertinent to this 

debate, was pertinent to the future of democracy in this country. 

And I’m proud to sit on the same side of this Legislative 

Assembly Chamber, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Proud to sit on the same side of an individual 

who will stand up for the rights of the minority in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what did the member from Regina Dewdney says . . . 

member say, Mr. Speaker? He says: 

 

Parliamentary law is based on centuries of tradition and 

precedents which have marked the evolution of our 

parliamentary systems, our freedoms from the times that 

the first parliamentarians were governed by the divine 

right of kings, where the kings had the divine right to do 

whatever they wanted . . . But, Mr. Speaker, they gave that 

away. In stages, parliamentary sovereignty was given, was 

given to parliaments across the Commonwealth. And 

today, today, we operate our parliaments and our 

legislatures on a set of rules that are agreed to by all 

members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s the essence of what we’re talking about. That’s the 

essence of why we’re here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s just jump back a minute and summarize why 

it is that we are here today. And let me put this in a simple as 

form as I possibly can, Mr. Speaker, not for the public who I 

understand can put all these pieces together, but for the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, because obviously they don’t 

get it. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. This is a matter that is of urgent 

and pressing necessity by the members opposite. They have yet 

to communicate, Mr. Speaker, to the public what it is that 

they’re trying to do. There isn’t a member of the public 

watching this Assembly today, yesterday, or the day before that 

has any idea of what was said over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every member of the New Democratic Party that 

was able to be in this Chamber today, has been here and 

speaking on this Bill on behalf of Saskatchewan people and on 

behalf of their constituents. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, not one word from the 

government, not one word except the motion to invoke closure 

and the introduction of this Bill by the Government House 

Leader. Not one member elected to the Legislative Assembly 

for the Saskatchewan Party by Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, not one member has said one word about why this is 

important to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why? They don’t understand it, for one thing. But two, this is 

the way they are, Mr. Speaker. They are not satisfied with a 

majority. They want more, and this is the way they get it. They 

push their weight around. They push their weight around in 

here, and by doing that, Mr. Speaker, they penalize the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had parliamentarians in the federal 

House, in provincial chambers, territorial chambers right across 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, who have stood up for the rights of the 

minorities in their provinces, territories, and federal system, Mr. 

Speaker. We are proud of those members. 

 

What can we say about the members opposite who won’t even 

speak, won’t even speak to this pressing necessity Bill that 

they’ve brought forward to us? So what’s the big deal? The 

people of Saskatchewan wonder . . . rules? You know, what’s 

rules? The members of this Legislative Assembly, they just talk. 

Government passes Bills. They do what they want anyway, Mr. 

Speaker, so what’s the big deal? 

 

[20:15] 

 

Okay let’s simplify this, Mr. Speaker. The rules right now are 

very, very simple, Mr. Speaker. The rules as they were 

negotiated, as they’ve evolved . . . and I’m going to explain this 

just a little bit. This is what the rules say today, Mr. Speaker, 

prior to the introduction of the motion in front of us: 

 

The ordinary times for the daily meeting and adjournment of 

the sittings of the Assembly shall be as follows: 

 

Monday 1:30 p.m. — 10:30 p.m. with a recess from 5:00 

p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 

Tuesday 1:30 p.m. — 10:30 p.m. with a recess from 5:00 

p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 

Wednesday [from] 1:30 p.m. — 5:00 p.m. 

Thursday [from] 10:00 — 1:00 p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those times were reached by agreement in the 

past, Mr. Speaker, agreements between the government and the 

opposition to ensure that several things could happen: (1) that 

the business of the Assembly could take place; (2) that the work 

that needs to be done to prepare for the work that’s inside the 

Assembly can be done. In other words, that cabinet has time to 

meet, that the caucuses have time to meet, that the members of 

the Legislative Assembly have time to meet with representative 

groups from across the province who want to be here to share 

time with us, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that when we set up 

parliamentary committees that they have time to meet with 

members of the public, to examine legislative matters that are in 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

front of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these hours were specifically designed by 

members of the Assembly in discussion with each other and 

with members from the outside community to ensure for the 

orderly disposition of the legislative agenda. Mr. Speaker, so 

what’s the motion today? Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, the motion 

in front of us today is extending hours, Mr. Speaker, so that it 

now reads: the ordinary times for daily meetings will be 

Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday from 10 a.m. to 12 a.m. 

with a recess from 5 to 6. And then they add standing 

committees will meet Thursdays from 2 to 12, 5 to 6, and on 

Fridays from 10 to 5. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this means, what this means is that they have 

ensured that the meetings that cabinet must have to do the work 

that they need to do, the meetings that caucuses must have to 

prepare for and work with the public in responding to 

government legislation, the ability of members of the legislature 

collectively or individually to meet with members of the public 

have been severely restricted, Mr. Speaker — all, all for the 

simple reason that the government wants to package a number 

of Bills that they can claim, at the end of the session, that they 

passed. 

 

That’s it, Mr. Speaker, so that they can claim that they were 

able to achieve their goals that they set for themselves, Mr. 

Speaker — not that the public set for them, not that the public 

has anything to say at this point other than through indirect 

means, Mr. Speaker. The public has yet to respond to the 

legislative agenda of the members opposite, and yet we’re 

seeing this draconian legislation brought forward, Mr. Speaker, 

that takes away the ability of members of this Assembly to 

communicate with, work with members of the public to 

preserve the democratic right of the public to be able to 

participate in this legislative process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The whole thing comes down to, how did we get into this 

situation? One of the other rules, Mr. Speaker, was again 

subject to the give and take. A majority government, Mr. 

Speaker, can be assumed, a majority government, it can be 

assumed, Mr. Speaker, because they have the numbers, when a 

matter comes to a vote, will win it. Unless they have dissent 

amongst their members, Mr. Speaker, the government in a 

majority situation will have their way. Therefore if there’s a 

legislative agenda that’s being moved forward, the government 

will have their way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over the years, recognizing that majority 

governments will have their way, legislative assemblies, 

parliaments all across the Commonwealth, across the world, 

Mr. Speaker, realized that if the might of the majority were 

always the case, how do the public scrutinize, hold accountable, 

ensure the transparency, understand, and participate in this 

process, Mr. Speaker? The role of the opposition. The role of 

the opposition. 

 

So in the rules negotiated, there’s an understanding the 

government gets their way, but the opposition has a process that 

it will follow to ensure that the right of the public has been able 

to be heard in a Chamber such as this. So what have they done, 

Mr. Speaker? They have taken that right of the public in order 

to ensure that their right gets dealt with and they’ve compressed 

that. 

 

Twenty hours of debate over a 45-day session, Mr. Speaker, 

essentially is what the rules call for, and the opposition agreed 

to that previously, the current government in opposition, and the 

government agreed. We’ll have our way, but if we manage so 

that we get 20 hours in 45 days on any Bill that we think is 

important, then the Bill will pass. The opposition knows what 

the rule is. The opposition knows that they have 20 hours to 

make their point. If they can’t make their point in 20 hours, the 

government gets their way, no matter what. So we have 20 

hours to have our way. 

 

How do we know what is important to the people of 

Saskatchewan? Communication — being able to take the Bills, 

the legislation, the ideas out to the public; work with them; 

consult with them; meet with them; allow them to talk to us; 

give us some information. We bring it back, consult in the 

Chamber, consult in committee, Mr. Speaker, consult back with 

the public. Twenty hours is over. Government has their way. 

 

But at least they’ve had the opportunity to hear what the public 

has to say on a piece of Bill. And we protect the public’s right 

to know what’s going on and, Mr. Speaker, to be able to have 

input into this process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — And if the members of the government opposite 

think that the public’s right to know at 11 o’clock, 11:30 at 

night or midnight, Mr. Speaker, is the best way to handle this, 

then I say take that out, take that out to the public and try and 

sell it, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t do it. 

 

And not one member, Mr. Speaker, has stood to defend that 

position. Not one, since this Bill was introduced on Monday, 

Mr. Speaker, not one member has defended the position that 

they have argued to take away the rights, to take away the 

rights, Mr. Speaker, of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the great parliamentarians in this country 

— and I’m proud to say that I knew him, I talked to him, I spent 

time with him, I had a cup of tea with him, Mr. Speaker — one 

of the great parliamentarians in Canada, Stanley Knowles . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — One of Canada’s greats, Mr. Speaker, Stanley 

Knowles was one of those ordinary people who came from the 

transportation and the clergy sectors of our nation, Mr. Speaker. 

He came from the drylands of Manitoba. And he went to 

Ottawa to fight for the rights of ordinary people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Stanley Knowles is well known, well 

regarded, well respected, Mr. Speaker. He’s a parliamentarian 

par excellence. And what did he say? “It is the opposition’s 

right to insist at all times on full protection of the rules of 

debate” — rules of debate, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because the 

rules are there to protect the rights of citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Stanley Knowles also said, “The opposition has 

only the rules for its protection, hence the authorities on 

parliamentary procedure emphasize the greater importance to 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2008 

the opposition of the only protection it has, the protection of the 

rules.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there we have the message that 

the opposition has the rules to ensure that the public’s right to 

participation is protected. What does the government have, Mr. 

Speaker? The government has its majority. There’s a 

give-and-take. That’s why rules are important, Mr. Speaker, so 

that you know how, at the end of the day, the will of the public 

has been heard and understood. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing across 

the way here is that the members opposite, demonstrating that 

majority is not good enough for them, Mr. Speaker, has created 

a situation whereby the message that we — Saskatchewan — 

who have been leaders in this nation for years, are willing to 

take a step backwards, Mr. Speaker, to benefit the elite, the 

strong, the majority. 

 

We have worked hard, Mr. Speaker, to get rid of that sense of 

what is wrong in the world. Mr. Speaker, we have worked hard 

over the years, and this government in four months and a couple 

of minutes in this motion have ensured, Mr. Speaker, that this 

matter that’s important to the public has been taken away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listened to this debate over the course of 

the last three days. I have looked at the members opposite as 

they’ve been listening to words that have been spoken on this 

side. I know, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite are 

embarrassed by what they have done. They look embarrassed 

by what they have done, Mr. Speaker. And I think they should 

be embarrassed, Mr. Speaker, by what they have done — this 

attack, this attack on the public rights . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — This attack on the public rights to participate in 

the democratic process, a right that is enshrined in the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s not the long hours that we are opposed to, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not the long hours that we are opposed to. It’s not the work 

that we are opposed to. It’s the right of Saskatchewan people 

that we are defending, that we are protecting, that, Mr. Speaker, 

we are standing up for yesterday, the day before yesterday, and 

today, Mr. Speaker. And I guarantee you that every one of my 

colleagues will be standing up for the rights of Saskatchewan 

and Canadian citizens every time we have a chance. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a sad day for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the . . . Order. Order. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment: 

 

That all the words in clause 1 be deleted and be replaced 

with the following: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the daily 

meetings and adjournments of the sittings of the Assembly 

on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall be 10 a.m. 

to 1 a.m. with a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The question before the 

Assembly is the motion as amended. Is the Assembly prepared 

to take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

amended motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Standing vote, call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 20:27 until 20:58.] 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion that reads: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures for the sittings of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of the 

first session of the twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

And this motion is as amended, reading: 

 

1. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 
daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be 10 a.m. to 1 a.m., with a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 

p.m.; 

2. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn on the 
following times when convened: 

on Thursdays: 2 p.m. to 12 midnight, with a recess 

from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

on Fridays: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 

3. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 
adjourn earlier than the adjournment times specified by 

this sessional order; and further, 

 

That the provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day after its adoption and shall expire 

upon the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day of the first session of the 



April 9, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

Those in favour of the amended motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 30] 

 

Stewart 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Do members want to stay till 1 a.m.? 

You can continue to participate in the debate. At the present 

time, we have called for a vote on the motion. I ask for your 

silence. 

 

Elhard Bjornerud Draude 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris D’Autremont Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Huyghebaert 

Brkich Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Reiter Bradshaw 

Harrison McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amended motion please 

rise. 

 

[Nays — 17] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Broten 

McCall Wotherspoon  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amended motion, 

30; those opposed, 17. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion as amended carries. This House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:01.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 725 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 725 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 725 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Vimy Ridge Day 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 725 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 726 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 726 

 Leader’s Dinner 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 726 

 Congratulations to Oskayak High School 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 726 

 Return of Spring 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 

 Quick Moves 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Station 20 West 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 729 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 729 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 730 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 730 

 Legal Fees and Services 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 731 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 731 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 732 

 Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 733 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 733 

 Ruling Regarding Question of Privilege and Application of Closure 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 734 

MOTIONS 

 Closure of Debate 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 735 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 735 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 752 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 775 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 775 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 775 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 736 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 738 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 741 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 744 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 747 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 750 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 754 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 756 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 759 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 762 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 770 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 772 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 775 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 778 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 781 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 785 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


