




















































Hansard: November 13, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 12A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1655 

 November 13, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

very pleased to introduce to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly some special guests who are joining us 

today and are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are here 

representing the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils 

which is celebrating its 40th anniversary this year. 

 

The organization has also just recently received a prestigious 

national award which we will all hear about a little bit later. Mr. 

Kevin Korchinski is the acting executive director of OSAC 

[Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils], and with him 

are Jennifer Schell McRorie, the visual and media arts 

coordinator, and Margie McDonald, the operations coordinator. 

Please join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I simply want to 

extend greetings as well as the minister, from the opposition, to 

the members of the arts community who are here today. We 

recognize the very significant contribution that you make to the 

life of this province, and we thank you very much and welcome 

you here to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you it’s my privilege today to introduce a 

group of people who are representing the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute on the publication of the Stories of Our People: A 

Métis Graphic Novel Anthology, which you’ll hear about later. 

 

There are members of this group from Yorkton — we have 

Jeanne Pelletier and her daughter Johanna. Can you give us a 

wave? From Regina we have elder storyteller, Norma Walsh, 

and elder storyteller, Joe Welsh. From Saskatoon we have 

Carrie Saganace — he’s an illustrator — Darren Préfontaine, 

David Morin. And this group are joining us today and we’re 

looking forward to a bit of a discussion later. And I know that 

the stories will be very interesting to many people in this 

province. So I’m asking everyone in the legislature to please 

help me welcome everyone to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to acknowledge with my colleagues opposite the staff of 

GDI [Gabriel Dumont Institute] and the storytellers and 

community members that are here, and welcome to the gallery. 

And I would ask all members to welcome the Métis members 

that are here and community members that are here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan families 

that are struggling to be able to afford or struggling to be able to 

find quality child care for their children. 

 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the increased cost of living and the sporadic 

increases on the minimum wage. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents from Maple 

Creek, Gull Lake, Abbey, Ituna, Melfort, Saskatoon, Tisdale, 

Star City, and, Mr. Speaker, Pleasantdale. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians 

Excel at Beijing Games 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

this morning to pay tribute to a group of people who are shining 

examples of citizenship and sportsmanship. 

 

There were 34 Saskatchewan members of Team Canada who 

represented our province at the 2008 Summer Olympics and 

Paralympics in Beijing, China. This morning we honour them 

with the pride for their accomplishments in life and on the 

world stage. Through the example they set, we hope the youth 

of Saskatchewan find the encouragement they need to lead 

healthy, active lives, overcome obstacles, and excel in their 

personal endeavours. 

 

In every Olympic and Paralympics year since at least 2002, our 

province has honoured Team Canada members hailing from 

Saskatchewan. While I do not have the time to tell all the stories 

of this year’s, I would like to share a few with the members of 

this House and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Earle Connor set a new record of 12.32 seconds in the 

100-metre sprint at the Summer Paralympics Games in Beijing, 

winning gold. This is Earle’s second Paralympic gold and he 

won gold in 2000 Sydney as well. Amy Alsop and Shawna 

Ryan were teammates on the national goalball team at the 

Beijing Paralympics, a team that finished fifth in the world. 

Erin Cumpstone was the catcher on Canada’s softball team 

which finished fourth at the Beijing Olympics. And Jake Wetzel 

was part of the Canadian men’s eight rowing team that won 

gold this summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a legendary sports broadcaster once said, “Sports 

do not built character. They reveal it.” Saskatchewan’s 

Olympians and Paralympians are shining examples of strength 

of character. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation Philanthropy Awards 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to rise to speak about the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. On 

Friday, November 7, I was very pleased to be in attendance for 

the presentation of the foundation’s annual Philanthropy 

Awards. 

 

Three special groups were honoured for their commitment to 

raising much-needed funds for the Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

and the Five Hills Health District. The first recipient was 

Horizon Running Club, headed by Dawn Luhning, for their 

annual Moose Jawg which is held each Canada Day and has 

raised thousands of dollars for the Health Foundation. 

 

Mosaic was the second honouree for their dedication in 

fundraising and the company’s involvement in our community, 

and in particular the recognition was given for Mosaic’s support 

of the Moose Jaw Foundation’s telethon. 

 

The third recipient was the Kinsmen Foundation for a 

tremendous donation of $150,000 towards renovations of the 

new intensive care unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was wonderful to join with other guests, 

including my colleague from Moose Jaw North, in honouring 

these three generous organizations. The community of Moose 

Jaw and the surrounding area will benefit immensely from the 

hard work and perseverance shown by the agencies and their 

volunteers. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members join me in 

recognizing the efforts of the Horizon Running Club, Mosaic, 

and the Kinsmen Foundation, along with Kelly McElree, 

executive director of the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

National Award to Organization of 

Saskatchewan Arts Councils 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

today to inform the members of the Assembly about a recent 

honour awarded to the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils, commonly known as OSAC. The volunteer president 

of this organization, Ms. Lori Glauser, resides in Yorkton. She 

was not able to join us today but we welcome the members of 

OSAC staff who were introduced earlier by the member from 

Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

OSAC, founded in 1968, is proud to be celebrating its 40th year 

in operation, Mr. Speaker. It receives funding through the 

Saskatchewan Lotteries Trust for Sport, Culture and Recreation. 

Together OSAC, their member arts councils, and a total of 500 

volunteers work tirelessly to bring theatre performances, visual 

art exhibits, and workshops to rural communities. Their work 

means that approximately 100,000 rural residents and 

schoolchildren are able to enjoy many of the high-calibre 

cultural experiences normally seen in the larger centres. 

 

Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, November 7, the National Arts 

Centre announced that OSAC was receiving the award for 

distinguished contribution to touring. This award is a 

prestigious one and is particularly welcome in OSAC’s 40th 

anniversary year. My colleagues and I would like to 

congratulate OSAC and all of its volunteers across this great 

province on receiving this award. 

 

To quote Ms. Glauser: 

 

“For 40 years OSAC has been making the arts an integral 

part of the lives of the people of Saskatchewan and this 

award is a terrific anniversary gift . . .” 

 

Once again, congratulations to OSAC for making culture a vital 

part of the community life in Saskatchewan. 



November 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Olsen Family Recognized 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 8 

Prince Albert had a very special birthday party and family 

reunion. The brothers Olsen — Lloyd, 88; Louie, 86; Lawrence, 

82; and Edward, 78 — along with their sister, Laura Kirkness, 

84, gathered with their family and friends to celebrate the 90th 

birthday of their big brother, Leonard. 

 

It’s not often that the Olsen family has the opportunity to be at 

the same event at the same time, so this was very special for 

them and they shared many stories and reminisced at length 

about their youth. 

 

What makes this family gathering even more special, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that the four eldest Olsen brothers — 

Leonard, Lloyd, Louie, and Lawrence — all enlisted during 

World War II and served their country proudly. The Olsens 

know how fortunate they are that all four brothers survived the 

war and are very well aware that not all families were as 

fortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in extending 

greetings to Leonard Olsen on his 90th birthday, and in 

expressing gratitude to the Olsen family for their great 

contributions to the freedom that we all enjoy so much today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Métis Publication Short Listed at 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. As a person of 

Métis heritage, I would like to take the time today to 

acknowledge a recent accomplishment of the Gabriel Dumont 

Institute in Saskatoon. GDI is a non-profit educational training 

and cultural institution owned by the Métis people of 

Saskatchewan. Its publishing department is the only Métis 

publisher in Canada that exclusively publishes Métis-specific 

books and cultural resources. 

 

It is also important to note, Mr. Speaker, that six of this 

publishing group’s recent efforts have been nominated for this 

year’s Saskatchewan Book Awards. One of these books, Stories 

of Our People: A Métis Graphic Novel Anthology, was short 

listed under the First Peoples category. This book, the first 

Métis theme graphic novel ever produced and published by the 

Métis people, this groundbreaking anthology, includes legends 

that have been passed on through oral traditions in the Métis 

community and weaves elements of Cree, Ojibwa, and 

French-Canadian cultures. This novel includes stories about 

flying skeletons, werewolves, and three Métis tricksters, along 

with many other characters and images that are important to the 

Métis people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three of the elders who contributed their enticing 

stories for this wonderful book are here with us today: Jeanne 

Pelletier, Norma Walsh, and Joe Welsh. Carrie Saganace took 

each myth and illustrated it as a unique visual tribute to each 

elder’s story. 

 

Based on the values and importance of preserving the Métis 

culture and of listening to the stories of our elders, I am pleased 

to acknowledge and show great respect to this recent publishing 

accomplishment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge Arts Council Enhances Quality of Life 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, La 

Ronge is a community of people who reach out to one another. 

One fine example of community involvement is the La Ronge 

Arts Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year the La Ronge Arts Council hosts three 

stars involvement, shows that feature various musical 

performances. Although it sometimes isn’t possible due to 

space limitations in certain community venues, the council 

makes every effort to ensure the communities of La Ronge, Air 

Ronge, La Ronge, the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and all other 

opportunities to host these performances in these communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, La Ronge Arts Council also works in partnership 

with five schools in the area to raise funds for junior concert 

series shows that tour in the fall and spring. Schools as far north 

as Grandmother’s Bay have benefited from the partnership, Mr. 

Speaker, and it has allowed many young people in the North to 

be exposed to various forms of art they would not otherwise 

have the opportunity to experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

acknowledging the contributions of La Ronge Arts Council to 

enhance the quality of life in the North and in thanking its 

members for their time, dedication, and hard work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

World Diabetes Day 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

tomorrow, November 14, is World Diabetes Day. Mr. Speaker, 

this disease is a major health issue across our province for 

people of all ages and from all walks of life. This year the focus 

of World Diabetes Day is on raising awareness of the impact of 

diabetes on children and adolescents. 

 

The Saskatchewan children’s insulin pump program, Mr. 

Speaker, provides insulin pumps free of charge to children 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

under the age of 18 who qualify for the program. We also 

provide assistance with the cost of pump and supplies. 

 

As well, under the children’s drug plan, children 14 and under 

pay no more than $15 per prescription for drugs and diabetic 

supplies covered under the Saskatchewan formulary. In this 

province, diabetes supplies are provided at no charge to 

children less than 18 years of age under family health benefits, 

as well as to the beneficiaries under supplementary health. Our 

provincial diabetes plans allows primary health care teams and 

diabetes teams to work collaboratively to improve delivery of 

services and continually to care for people living with diabetes. 

 

Education is also critical. Several educational resources have 

already been developed and I’m pleased to tell you that four 

new patient resources to support people living with this disease 

will be available soon. Mr. Speaker, fellow members, please 

join me in officially recognizing World Diabetes Day. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Notification Policy 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing admitted to the media 

that the policy that he had been referring to for weeks in this 

House is actually not a policy at all. It is quote “an interim 

protocol.” Would the minister like to take this opportunity to 

correct the record and apologize for repeatedly making incorrect 

statements in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for his question. Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it 

time and time again in the Legislative Assembly — the interim 

policy, Mr. Speaker, was to the deputy minister to the senior 

officials, Mr. Speaker. And that policy is exactly what was 

implemented and worked last Friday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m very proud to say that the public safety was taken in 

consideration as it was supposed to be. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Property Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families and 

businesses are incredibly strained financially. The province 

however is flush in cash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will this government do the 

right thing and make good on its promises of substantial, 

long-term, property tax relief? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 

very clear in our election campaign and since becoming elected 

back on November 7, 2007. We’ve made it clear that we wanted 

to follow a rebate program to ensure that there would be 

immediate relief. The former NDP [New Democratic Party] 

talked about status quo not being acceptable for years and years 

and years, and did very little about that. Mr. Speaker, we did 

something. In the last budget that the Minister of Finance 

proposed, we have spent over $159 million, Mr. Speaker, on 

property tax relief. Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosetown is 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is we said we 

were going to use a rebate program as a short-term measure. 

We’re doing that. Over 150 million, as I’ve indicated, is the 

amount of money that we are currently rebating to property tax 

payers. What we’re also looking at, Mr. Speaker, is a long-term 

solution. And the member from Rosetown is working on that. 

He has been consulting across the province — in fact even 

outside of the province — to determine what might be a 

long-term strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this 2 per cent increase just 

doesn’t fly with the Saskatchewan public. With reassessment in 

2009 many property owners will pay far more in the coming 

year on their property taxes. Some of these homeowners are 

seniors on fixed incomes that have been in their homes for 

many years and want to remain there, but they can’t afford to 

pay more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party now tells us that any 

permanent solution will have to wait until the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose issues his report. So, Mr. Speaker, the obvious 

question to the minister: when will the report from the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose be presented to the minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to the member, we’ve 

been very clear on that. The report is expected in the month of 

January 2009. I have said that to the media. It’s been published. 

And I’ll say it again so that the member fully understands that 

the report will be in my hands in January 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore this government, this caucus will have 

the opportunity to deliberate on that report. I understand that 

there will be a number of options that will be proposed in that 



November 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

report. The member is working on that right at the moment and 

that report will be in our hands in January. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to have in place a permanent 

plan for dealing with property tax in a very short order. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, that may in fact involve the spring budget, as was 

indicated by the Minister of Finance yesterday if that member 

would have been listening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I think we’ll clarify it for the 

Saskatchewan public, Mr. Speaker. On this topic the Premier 

told the media on October 21, I quote, “We’re not going to wait 

till an election year to do the right thing.” The province has the 

resources to act now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister — and he kind of talked around in 

circles a minute ago, but we’d like him to be clear — will the 

recommendations of the member for Rosetown-Elrose’s report 

have an impact on next year’s budget? I’ll be more clear. Will 

the next provincial budget include the permanent solution to the 

property tax issue? Very simply, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member is 

relatively new in this Assembly. And I’m sure a member, like 

for instance the member for Saskatoon Nutana, might be able to 

help him, might be able to indicate to him that we have been 

very forthright in telling the public what we’re doing. Mr. 

Speaker, I think I made it very clear that the report will be in 

our hands in January 2009 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It seems that the line of questioning is 

generating a lot of debate, but only one member’s been invited 

to speak to the floor, address the floor. I recognize the Minister 

of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

guess the comment yesterday about the fact that questions 

directed to me seemed to irritate the opposition and seemed to 

get them rather, rather annoyed, Mr. Speaker. In fact listen, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s even tough to hear my own words. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think I’m very quiet in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member, I have indicated the report will be 

considered in 2009. The Finance minister has indicated that if 

the financial conditions of this province allow us to proceed 

with something in maybe more than one year, we are going to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I ask him to stay tuned, the spring budget is around the 

corner — I believe about 120 sleeps. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Natural Gas Rates 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people know 

that when the price of natural gas rises, the government gets 

richer. At the same time, Saskatchewan people get poorer 

because it costs more to heat their homes. 

 

Previous governments in Saskatchewan have shared the energy 

revenues with Saskatchewan ratepayers, most recently in 2005 

when the government unveiled a short-term assistance program 

called Energy Share. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the Sask Party’s plan for 

helping Saskatchewan families struggling to keep pace with 

rising energy costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As all 

members know in this Assembly, SaskEnergy does not make 

any money on the sale of natural gas. They monitor the markets, 

they hedge where appropriate, and they make sure that 

Saskatchewan residents have the lowest . . . pay the lowest 

possible cost. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents over 

the last 12 months have paid the lowest cost for natural gas in 

the country — a job well done by SaskEnergy on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s this government’s intention to ensure that people pay the 

lowest taxes in the country as well and have the highest 

exemption. And that’s why we announced the elimination of 

80,000 people off the tax roll some two weeks ago, retroactive 

to January 1, 2008. We are helping each and every individual in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the government has an historic 

surplus and a lot of it is thanks to energy revenues. And a lot of 

families can’t afford to wait until next year which is the earliest 

they’ll see any benefit from the government’s tax measures. 

 

On November 3, the Alberta government announced that 

Albertans will be saving $27 on their November gas bill, thanks 

to that province’s natural gas rebate program. At the same time, 

the Saskatchewan Party increased SaskEnergy rates by nearly 

$20 per month for the average customer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why does the government continue 

to rest on 60 per cent of an historic $3 billion surplus instead of 

giving Saskatchewan ratepayers a break? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in the months of May 

and June and July, when Alberta residents were paying 11, 12, 

up to $13 a gigajoule for gas, people in Saskatchewan were 

paying $6.51 because of the well-managed SaskEnergy and 

their hedging program. Mr. Speaker, as members know, there is 

a gas cost variance account, that when the sale of gas is above 

the price that is charged will be in a positive manner, and that 

will be reviewed on a twice annual basis. And that’s the way 

it’s been for quite some time, and that’s the way it will continue 

to be. 

 

I referenced in my previous answer, Mr. Speaker, about the 

great pride we take in eliminating 80,000 people off the tax list. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada 

confirmed what this government is doing and what this 

government will be able to do in the future when they say that 

Saskatchewan is booming. Real GDP [gross domestic product] 

is forecast to be 5.2 per cent in 2008 and leading the country by 

3.6 per cent in 2009. 

 

More help will be on the way for Saskatchewan residents. They 

will lead the country, Mr. Speaker, and this government will 

help them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that our energy 

resources are feeling a boom, Mr. Speaker, but the consumer of 

energy in Saskatchewan is not feeling the benefits. Mr. Speaker, 

the Alberta natural gas rebate program provides rebates during 

the winter months whenever the price of natural gas rises above 

$5.50 per gigajoule. Thanks to this government, the average 

Saskatchewan consumer is now paying $8.51 per gigajoule — 

$3 more. If this government had a program similar to the 

Alberta natural gas rebate program, Saskatchewan consumers 

would be getting a rebate, a rebate of approximately $40 a 

month instead of an increase of nearly $20 a month. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask members to allow the member to 

place his question. The member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why won’t this 

government follow the province’s past practice and Alberta’s 

current example and use some of its energy resources to provide 

Saskatchewan families with relief from high utility costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic. I 

don’t know if all members remember that NDP campaign 

pamphlet from not so long ago. We’re not going to follow 

Alberta; we’re going to lead Canada — remember that one, Mr. 

Speaker? That was something there. That’s very interesting in 

light of the information. 

Mr. Speaker, to the question that the hon. member poses, the 

hon. member knows that SaskEnergy does not track the 

financial circumstances of each of its customers, Mr. Speaker. 

They know that the best way to ensure that relief goes to those 

that need it the most is through the tax system. I think all 

members will agree on that. And that’s what we were doing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And according to The Conference Board of Canada, that’s 

where we will be able to take this province into the future. 

Again I quote, “The economy is doing so well that the 

provincial government announced significant financial relief 

and increased infrastructure spending which will aid and bolster 

growth in 2009.” 

 

That’s what this government’s doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Sale of Crown Land 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 4, the 

Minister of Agriculture and Food assured this Assembly that in 

developing the new policy on Crown land sales to producers, he 

had consulted quote “all over the province of Saskatchewan.” 

That’s on page 1561 of Hansard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: could he be a little more specific? Which 

groups or individuals did he consult with before enacting this 

policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite I would just like to explain 

how the Crown land sale lease works. And First Nation and 

Métis ag Crown lessees will have the same opportunity that 

anyone else does in the province. The discount will apply to 

those same lands. Mr. Speaker, I might also inform the member 

that duty to consult is only triggered on vacant Crown land, and 

the land we’re selling here is occupied by lessees all over the 

province, whether it’s First Nations, Métis or farmers or 

ranchers across the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the program does not interfere with treaty 

land entitlement negotiations. They’re separate from this land. 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry is also committed to fulfilling the 

treaty land entitlement obligations. And as I said before, the 

program is only for producers currently leasing Crown land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well it’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker. There 

are a lot of sweet words right now, but how is it that the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations stated in a news 



November 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

release of November 6 that quote “. . . the Province of 

Saskatchewan did not consult with First Nations before 

announcing plans to sell off Crown lands to lessees”? 

 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-chief 

Delbert Wapass points out that many First Nations have an 

interest in various Crown Lands pursuant to TLE [treaty land 

entitlement] and specific claim settlements. He states, and I 

quote, “You would think that these settlements arising out of 

Treaty rights to land would have obligated the Province to 

discuss this new program with First Nations prior to 

implementing it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, again to the minister: why did he fail to meet the 

duty to consult with First Nations before implementing this new 

program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I repeat what I said before: duty to consult is only 

triggered on vacant Crown land. The land that we’re selling 

here is occupied land by farmers, ranchers, First Nations, Métis 

across the province that have utilized this land and sometimes, 

many cases, 33-year leases. So duty to consult does not apply to 

this land. 

 

I might remind the member opposite, in 1991 the NDP when in 

government also sold about 600,000 acres of lease land across 

the province. So we’re really not reinventing the wheel here. 

We’re continuing the program with an incentive to help move 

some of this land back into the hands of the producers all across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’ll tell you what we did when we were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. We settled 700,000 acres of treaty 

land entitlement, and again a lot of that figured into Crown 

land. 

 

So I’d ask the minister to try and explain something for me. The 

minister’s seatmate is the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations. That minister is responsible for ensuring that every 

government department meets its duty to consult. And I’m just 

wondering, Mr. Speaker, are they on speaking terms? Are they 

not? You know, are the notes coming now? Or is this just 

another example of what the minister was talking about last 

spring when he said, and I quote, in opposition I could say just 

about anything I wanted and a lot of occasions I did? 

 

To the minister: how did this happen? How did it not occur to 

him to consult with the FSIN and other Aboriginal groups 

before introducing this policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to clarify to the members 

opposite, yes I’m on good speaking terms with my seatmate and 

we discuss these issues, and the duty to consult is on Crown 

vacant land. And I also want to make sure the member knows 

that the Minister of Agriculture has verified that lands under 

TLE selection are not included in the sale program and that the 

First Nations in the future, when lands become privately held, 

will remove any requirement to resolve leasehold interests 

before purchasing land. 

 

And I really wonder how the member opposite can talk about 

the duty to consult. When they were in government, they didn’t 

even bother talking to them about the guidelines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in an article entitled 

“Party’s sincerity called into question,” well-known agricultural 

columnist Kevin Hursh had this to say about the Sask Party’s 

commitment to the cattle and hog industry, and I quote: 

 

The Sask. Party government has been largely ineffectual in 

stemming the downturn in the cattle and hog industries. 

The new government has actually been less supportive 

than the previous administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine that. The Sask Party less supportive than 

the former NDP. To the Minister of Agriculture: how do you 

explain that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that comment is almost laughable if it wasn’t so 

important though to rural producers across this province for the 

last 16 years under an NDP government. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

were in power for 16 years. They downloaded on 

municipalities, they raised the education tax on farmland, they 

totally ignored rural Saskatchewan when it came to any kind of 

support that they could put out there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind that member opposite that it 

was brought to my attention this week what they really think of 

rural Saskatchewan. And it’s a commentary in an NDP 

newsletter in December 2007, Mr. Speaker. And I want to quote 

out of that newsletter, and it goes on to talk about the Premier 

becoming Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and talking 

about his rural redneck base out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now we know, Mr. Speaker, why that opposition party is in 

opposition when they have an opinion of the 230,000 rural 

voters in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in his article Mr. Hursh said, 

and I quote: 

 

The beef cow herd in Saskatchewan is shrinking [away] 

rapidly . . . and the provincial government isn’t doing 

much to stop the bleeding. 

 

There’s even less action in support of beleaguered hog 

producers. The Sask. Party seems content to watch the 

industry whither away. 

 

He went on to describe government agricultural initiatives as 

low-budget items. With $2 billion in the bank and the livestock 

and hog industry shrinking in front of his eyes, why is the 

Minister of Agriculture refusing to provide these producers with 

any meaningful, immediate support? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hursh may 

think they’re low-budget items, but $40 million additional 

going into the crop insurance program . . . I might add, a crop 

insurance program that the previous government cut the 

coverage and raised the premiums for five consecutive years 

after 2002, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the water program that we’ve got going on in the 

Southwest, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite might call it 

low-budget items, but I’ll tell you one thing: it’s $15 million 

more than the previous government put into southwest 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, for three or four years, 

southwest Saskatchewan’s had a drought ongoing under that 

opposition party when they were government and they paid 

absolutely no attention to them. So I don’t know how, Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite, the member for Nutana, has the 

nerve to get up and criticize us for what we’re doing as 

low-budget items when they did absolutely nothing for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — During a November 5, 2008 interview, the 

minister admitted that when he was the Ag critic, he used to 

lobby for farm support comparable to Alberta all the time. 

When asked why he’s not giving producers the support he 

lobbied for when he was in opposition now that he’s in 

government, and he said, and I quote, “A number of times you 

have said exactly the opposite of what you were saying today.” 

 

So to the minister: was he wrong when he was calling for 

support payments when he was in opposition, or is he wrong 

now when he’s in government and will not provide aid for those 

livestock and hog producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind 

the member opposite that when I was talking about making an 

ad hoc payment, it was exactly the same time that they were 

gutting the crop insurance program. If her memory serves her 

well, the previous minister of Agriculture would never sign 

onto the AgriStability or the CAIS [Canadian agricultural 

income stabilization] program . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. I recognize 

the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I might also remind the member opposite in the last 

2007 election campaign they had absolutely no dollars designed 

for agriculture land for the education tax rebate. Where was 

that? If they were so concerned about rural Saskatchewan and 

money for farmers, how come they weren’t putting anything in 

for the education tax rebate, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that 

livestock and hog producers need immediate aid. And he has 

said, and I quote: 

 

A farmer out there would naturally want an ad hoc 

payment. They’re stressed out there, and I would be the 

first to admit that. 

 

Even the Premier realizes that livestock producers need money. 

When questioned after the recent first ministers’ meetings, he 

said there are sectors in the West like the cattle industry that are 

feeling a significant pinch. Well, Mr. Speaker, not only has the 

minister admitted livestock producers need immediate cash 

assistance, the Premier is also calling on the federal government 

for assistance for livestock producers. 

 

Will the minister, with $2 billion in the bank, commit to 

providing immediate cash support to this rapidly shrinking 

industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I once again want 

to remind the member opposite that it’s only 11 months that 

we’ve been in power right now. Eight months ago the cattle and 

hog industry came to me and asked for a loan program. The 

industry asked for a loan program. What did we do, Mr. 

Speaker? We provided $90 million — $60 million on the cattle 

side, $30 million on the hog side. That was some . . . 

 



November 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I think what you have to 

do is check with the cattle producers. Did they ask? You have. 

Well then you would know that they asked for the loan 

program. The hog producers asked for the loan program. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we provided that. We’ve done additional things 

like the water program, education tax rebate, gopher rebate 

program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve got a good start. Are we 

finished? No, we aren’t. There’s more to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

moved that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2) be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, I would like to ask leave of the Assembly on 

behalf of all members who have special responsibilities and 

privileges to introduce guests today to be granted leave of this 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for a special 

Olympian recognition ceremony. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure 

to bring to your attention that we have with us today, seated in 

the Speaker’s gallery and on the floor of the Assembly, we have 

22 Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians from the 2008 

Olympic and Paralympic Summer Games in Beijing, China. By 

leave of the Assembly, I will call upon the Deputy Premier and 

the Leader of the Opposition for remarks, and then I will 

recognize the members of the Assembly as they introduce their 

constituents. The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this past summer the world joined together to celebrate the 

Olympic and Paralympic Games in Beijing. The theme of this 

year’s Olympics was One World, One Dream. 

 

Our province of Saskatchewan is home to many athletes that 

share that vision and were able to experience it first-hand in 

China. Today we are honoured to have these fine Olympians 

here in the legislature. They represent the true spirit of our 

nation and our province — one of pride, dedication, and 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan I 

want to welcome these athletes to their legislature and let them 

know how proud, as a government and a province, that we are 

of their performance in Beijing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of athletes who participated in 

the Olympic and Paralympic Summer Games in Beijing who 

could not be here today. At the conclusion of the members of 

the Legislative Assembly introduction, I will take my place 

again and speak to those who could not be here today. We want 

their names to be recorded and recognized as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome these fine 

individuals to their legislature this morning. Thank you very 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming and recognizing the 

Olympians who are with us today. 

 

If memory serves, Mr. Speaker, we had a similar recognition in 

2006, recognizing the athletes who participated in the Winter 

Olympics in Italy. And if memory serves, I believe we were 

joined that day by 16 individuals. Today I believe we’re being 

joined by 22 individuals and will recognize another 12 who 

could not be here. That is I think, Mr. Speaker, very telling. The 

Saskatchewan presence at this Summer Olympics was, I 

believe, the largest Saskatchewan presence that we’ve ever seen 

at any Olympics and Paralympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of us, when we’d seen our athletes walk 

into those Olympics and when we watched them walk into 

Beijing with those Canadian flags on, we knew full well that 

behind those flags were a little bit of green and gold from the 

Saskatchewan flag. And you made us all feel that somehow we 

were there too, and we were very, very proud. 

 

So I’m very pleased to join the Deputy Premier, look forward to 

the recognition ceremonies that will happen in the rotunda, and 

welcome you here to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very honoured to 

introduce Ms. Amy Alsop, who represented Canada in goalball 

at this year’s Paralympic Games in Beijing. Amy is already a 

Paralympic veteran, having competed in three Paralympics, 

winning two gold medals, one in Athens and one in Sydney. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

member for Rosthern-Shellbrook, I am honoured to introduce 

Mr. Earle Connor, who won gold in the 100-metre sprint at the 

Summer Paralympics Games in Beijing, finishing in a record 

12.32 seconds. This is Earle’s second Paralympic gold. He won 

gold at the 2000 Paralympics in Sydney as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member 

from Humboldt, I’m honoured to introduce Ilana Duff, who 

won a bronze medal in the women’s wheelchair athletics 

100-metre race at Beijing Paralympics in a time of 17.69 

seconds. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to introduce Ms. 

Lisa Franks, who represented our province and our country at 

the Beijing Paralympics this summer where she and her 

basketball team ranked fifth in the world. She has previously 

won a total of six gold medals and one silver at the Sydney and 

Athens Paralympics. Mr. Speaker, on a personal note, Lisa is 

my neighbour and I know the 800 block of Main Street is 

hugely proud of this young Paralympian. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to introduce Mr. 

Clayton Gerein, who has participated in every Paralympic 

Games since 1984, including this year’s Paralympic Games in 

Beijing, and has won a grand total of 15 medals. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for 

Regina Lakeview, I am honoured to introduce Ms. Georgette 

Reed, who took part in the Paralympic Games this summer as 

coach for our national athletics team. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to introduce Ms. 

Jacqueline Rennebohm, who competed in swimming at this 

year’s Paralympic Games in Beijing. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

honoured to introduce Ms. Shawna Ryan, who represented 

Canada for the first time at the Paralympic Games in Beijing as 

part of our national goalball team which came in fifth place in 

the world. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 



November 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 

introduce Mr. Jeff Toth, who participated in the 2008 

Paralympic Games as a swimming coach for Team Canada. So 

please welcome Mr. Toth here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today to 

introduce Mr. Roger Archambault, who took part in the Beijing 

Olympic Games as a sport services officer for our national 

team. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to introduce Mr. 

Don Bates, who served as the pitching coach for Canada’s 

women’s softball team at the Olympic Games this year. As 

such, he was part of one of the strongest softball coaching staffs 

in the world. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

honoured to introduce Mr. Al Bodnarchuk, who took part in the 

Beijing Olympic Games as a massage therapist for our national 

team. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — On behalf of the member of Saskatoon 

Sutherland, I am pleased to introduce Ms. Erin Cumpstone, the 

catcher on the Canadian softball team which came in fourth 

place at the Olympics this summer. She also played for our 

national team at the Olympic Games in Athens 2004. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I also recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — On behalf of myself and our constituency, I 

am honoured to introduce Ms. Kelsie Hendry, who represented 

Canada at the Beijing Olympics in pole vault. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member from 

Eastview, I’m pleased to introduce Ms. Dione Meier, who 

played on Canada’s softball team which came in fourth at this 

summer’s Beijing Olympics. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — I am honoured, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

member for Regina Lakeview, to introduce Ms. Carla Nicholls, 

who attended her first Olympics this year as a track and field 

coach for Team Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

honoured to introduce to you, to the Assembly, Mr. Cory 

Niefer, who served as Canada’s rifle coach at this year’s 

Olympic Games in Beijing. Mr. Niefer is also a national 

champion rifle shooter and the national team coach and he’s a 

former army cadet from Yorkton. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview, I’m pleased to introduce Mr. Jake Wetzel, 

who is part of the Canadian men’s eight rowing team that won 

gold at the Olympics in Beijing this summer. He was also part 

of the Canadian men’s four rowing team that took the silver at 

the 2004 Olympics. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to introduce Mr. Frazer Will, who represented Canada in the 

men’s 60-kilogram division in judo at the Olympics in Beijing. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there are 15 Olympic and Paralympic team members who could 

not be here with us today who’d I’d also like to introduce in 

their absence. I ask the members to help me show our 

appreciation for these men and women once I have introduced 

them all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the following Olympians and Paralympians could 

not be with us today: Mr. Phillip Allen, Paralympic team 

services officer; Mr. James Avery, pitcher for the men’s 

Olympic baseball team; Ms. Nancy Brawley, Olympic diving 

chef d’équipe; Mr. Doug Charko, meteorologist for the 

Olympic team; Mr. Kevin Graham, men’s Olympic water polo 

team; Ms. Rachelle de Jong, women’s Olympic rowing; Mr. 

Graham Olson, videographer for Paralympic swimming; Mr. 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2008 

Terry Puhl, manager of the Olympic baseball team; Mr. Robin 

Randall, goalie for the men’s Olympic water polo team; Mr. 

Reuben Ross, men’s Olympic diving team; Mr. Ivor 

Schledewitz, chiropractor for the Olympic team; Mr. Darren 

Stolz, Paralympic team coordinator for our national team; Ms. 

Karen Van Nest, women’s Paralympic air pistol shooting; Ms. 

Amy Vermeulen, women’s Olympic soccer; and Ms. Alexandra 

Wrubleski, women’s Olympic curling . . . women’s Olympic 

cycling — we’re in the summer sports, not the winter sports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although they could not be here today, let us now 

in the presence of their fellow teammates show them our 

appreciation. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and through 

you and to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce a group of grade 7 students from Pilot Butte school 

who are sitting in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 

their teacher, Ms. Shelly Riffel. This group is here today to join 

us in honouring our Saskatchewan Olympians and 

Paralympians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this group of hard-working students has just 

completed an in motion project making posters of ways that 

they can keep active. Pilot Butte School encourages all of its 

students to participate in sport, to stay active, and eat healthy. 

 

Perhaps these students were inspired by Mr. Ruben Ross, 

Saskatchewan Olympian, and Mr. Clayton Gerein, 

Saskatchewan Paralympian, who are both from the great 

community of Pilot Butte and are here with us today. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming the grade 7 class from Pilot 

Butte School, and their teacher, Ms. Riffel. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So that we 

might participate in the program, and not to endure any more 

sitting of the House, we would ask to adjourn debate. I’m sorry, 

Mr. Speaker, to adjourn the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 10:59.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1655, 1664, 1666 

  Calvert ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1655, 1664 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1655, 1664 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1655 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1663 

  Krawetz.......................................................................................................................................................................... 1663, 1665 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1664, 1665 

  Yates ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1664, 1665 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1664 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1665 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1665 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1655 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians Excel at Beijing Games 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1656 

 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Philanthropy Awards 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1656 

 National Award to Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1656 

 Olsen Family Recognized 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1657 

 Métis Publication Short Listed at Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1657 

 La Ronge Arts Council Enhances Quality of Life 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1657 

 World Diabetes Day 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1657 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Notification Policy 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1658 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1658 

 Property Tax Relief 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1658 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1658 

 Natural Gas Rates 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1659 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1659 

 Sale of Crown Land 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1660 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1660 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1661 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1663 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1663 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


