




















































Hansard: November 27, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 20A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1891 

 November 27, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce my other daughter, Lacey Wilson. 

She’s pursuing her communications disorder degree at Minot 

State, North Dakota. And so I’m very pleased to have her here 

today. And the other lady on the right is my daughter-in-law, 

Katie Wilson. And she has her degree at the U of S [University 

of Saskatchewan], majoring in animal science. So they’re both 

good farm girls. 

 

And because it’s Agribition, I’d like to mention they’re both in 

4-H . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, and Katie is due 

with my first grandbaby. 

 

So I’d like everyone to give them a warm welcome to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, in your gallery, a 

good friend of mine, Don McCallum from Cut Knife. 

 

Don is not only a good friend, he’s also a long-time colleague. 

He’s the current president of the RM [rural municipality] 

administrators’ association. And I’d ask all my colleagues in the 

House to please give him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloyd. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you I’d like to introduce you to the Paradise Hill 4-H Club. 

They have made the long trip down here. Every spring my 

family think it’s a highlight to go to the achievement day at Fort 

Pitt. So I’m very pleased they’re here. In fact they’re the first 

group who has made the long journey from Lloydminster, so 

I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to introduce them. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions on behalf of 

the residents of Saskatchewan regarding minimum wage and 

the indexing of minimum wage. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed people of, residents of the province 

of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today as well to present a petition. This one is in support of 

affordable housing for Saskatchewan seniors. I’d like to read 

the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary 

education. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students’ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union, and 

First Nations University of Canada Students’ Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Gifting of the Horse 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

Tuesday a special ceremony took place at the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre. It was the Gifting 

of a Horse Ceremony, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Gifting of the Horse Ceremony is the highest honour that 

First Nations people can bestow on an individual. The recipient 

of this high honour, Mr. Speaker, was Corporal Tim Schwartz, 

an RCMP officer. He received it from the Itittakoose family for 

all the help that he gave to the family after the killing of their 

son, Michael, which happened in September 2007 in Fort 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

It’s believed, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first time that an RCMP 

officer has received such a high award. What made this special 

day for Corporal Schwartz extra special was the fact that his 

parents, Don and Joan Schwartz, could be in attendance. 

 

Don and Joan Schwartz are constituents of mine. They live in 

the community of Southey, but in order for Tim’s dad, Don, to 

get to this ceremony, the family had to help him from his 

hospital bed in the Pasqua Hospital so that he could see his son 

receive this award. And I know it meant the world to Tim’s 

father Don to see his son receive this special award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I regret to inform the Assembly that Tim’s father 

Don passed away early this morning. I visited him on 

Wednesday night, and he told me how grateful he was and how 

special it was to be there with his son. He’ll be sorely missed by 

his family and all of us that knew him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Church Offers Hospitality 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, 

November 22, I had the pleasure of attending and speaking at a 

breakfast hosted by West Portal Church, which is located in the 

heart of Saskatoon Massey Place on 33rd Street West. While I 

do not attend this church, many of my constituents do. I truly 

appreciated the opportunity to connect with people I had not 

met before, as well as the chance to have more lengthy 

conversations with some of the people I already had the 

pleasure of meeting. 

 

While our province is a diverse place, sometimes the rule of six 

degrees of separation is more like two or three when meeting 

new people in Saskatchewan. This became clear to me through 

the conversations I had that morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the many faith communities in Saskatchewan play 

an important role in making our province a great place to live. 

While all faith groups help to provide spiritual meaning to their 

members through friendship, teaching, and ritual, these diverse 

communities also share an outward focus on the broader 

community. West Portal Church is no exception to this reality, 

and their invitation to me is part of their larger effort to stay 

engaged and better understand the community they live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Pastor Steve Savage for the 

opportunity to speak with West Portal Church community, and 

thank all of the breakfast attendees for their hospitality last 

Saturday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Festival of Trees Supports Meadow Lake 

Hospital Foundation 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 

the Meadow Lake Hospital Foundation for what could be 

described as the Meadow Lake social event of the year. On 

Saturday evening, the citizens of Meadow Lake demonstrated 

their support and their huge generosity at the annual Festival of 

Trees. During this gala event, a live auction was held with cash 

donations, hundreds of people attending, and raising nearly 

$36,000. 

 

The Festival of Trees is a huge undertaking by the Meadow 

Lake Hospital Foundation and a huge success towards health 

care, demonstrating our community’s great commitment. Every 

year the event gets bigger and better due to the hard work of the 

Hospital Foundation board and others. Board members include 

Norman Deutscher, Don Marsh, Gerry Pohl, Dr. Colin Honish, 

Sally Carlson, Marilyn Goll, and Donna Ritco. 

 

Words are hard to find that would adequately describe the pride 

of the community for the efforts towards this cause. Thank you 

and congratulations to the Meadow Lake Hospital Foundation 

for the success of this event, and grateful appreciation to the 

businesses and citizens who supported the cause so generously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

St. Joan of Arc School Leadership Conference 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last week, my 

colleague from Regina Rosemont and I had the privilege and 

pleasure of being invited to participate in the St. Joan of Arc 

School leadership conference. 

 

The program involved four presenters who gave presentations 

on communications from four perspectives: community 

leadership, religious influence, female member of the 

legislature, and the effect of logos. The presentations were 

informative, interactive, and in some cases quite humorous. 

 

One such example was an experiment to see how, when a 

message is passed along through many people, it can take a 

very interesting turn. The message started out as — with 

apologies to the member for Regina Rosemont — quote “Trent 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

Wotherspoon likes to read Captain Underpants.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the message changed at one point to read quote “Trent 

Wotherspoon likes to count his underpants.” 

 

The students came to understand that our own beliefs, 

influences, and experiences cause us to understand what we 

hear in different ways. The students were energetic and 

engaged, and I’m proud to report that I saw examples of many 

future leaders of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Joan of Arc School is a prime example of the 

wonderful and creative initiatives that are being undertaken 

every day by people who have such strong influence and impact 

on our children. I would like to invite all of my colleagues to 

commend the principal, Anne Lutz, and all of the teachers, 

presenters, and students who took part in a very successful 

leadership conference at St. Joan of Arc School. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Outstanding Citizen Recognized 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in 

the House today to recognize an outstanding Saskatchewan 

resident. Grant Kook of Saskatoon has a long history of 

community involvement in our city. On November 12, I was 

pleased to attend this year’s B’nai Brith silver dinner where his 

commitment and dedication to our city and province were 

recognized. The B’nai Brith We’re Proud of You Award is 

given annually to a Saskatoon citizen who provides an 

exceptional level of volunteer service to the city. Grant Kook is 

certainly a very worthy recipient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Grant Kook has served as director of the 

Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation for the past seven 

years and is currently the vice-president of sponsorship for the 

2010 world junior hockey committee. He has volunteered in a 

significant capacity with a number of important organizations 

and events, including the 2008 Mike Weir Miracle Golf Drive 

for Kids, the 2006 Potash Corporation Vanier Cup, the 2004 

Nokia Brier, and the Heart and Stroke Foundation of 

Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, barely scratches the 

surface. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Grant Kook on receiving this 

prestigious award, and I ask all members to show their 

appreciation for the efforts that Grant Kook has made to our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Keewatin Onitonikewuk Search and Rescue 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, KOSAR [Keewatin 

Onitonikewuk Search and Rescue] is a ground search and 

rescue organization that works with RCMP with a common goal 

of locating missing persons. It was formerly recognized as a 

non-profit organization in 1997. 

Mr. Speaker, the success of KOSAR is dependent on the efforts 

of a large number of volunteers. It is thanks to them that 

KOSAR has been instrumental in success of over 100-plus 

searches that have taken place over the last 11 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actual searches are conducted by groups called 

hasty teams made up of concerned and committed people from 

communities of Stanley Mission, Hall Lake, Grandmother’s 

Bay, Sucker River, Air Ronge, La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the development and success of KOSAR is linked 

to the vision and leadership of people such as the late Big Jim 

McKenzie and the late Jack Pevach, who seen a necessity for a 

search and rescue service to take action to meet the need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without the generous support of organizations 

such as La Ronge credit union, Lac la Ronge Indian Band, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Cameco, AREVA, and 

numerous others, KOSAR could not carry out its important 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

executive, the board of directors, the hasty teams, and all 

volunteers of KOSAR for their dedication and hard work and in 

recognizing the important role they play in ensuring the health 

and safety of citizens and visitors to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Natural Resources and Economic Development 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] didn’t get it a year 

ago when the people of Saskatchewan voted for change, and 

they still don’t get it today. 

 

A man the members opposite hold in high esteem has written a 

book. In that book, former NDP premier, Allan Blakeney, shed 

some light on how he would respond to record demand for 

Saskatchewan’s natural resources. And I quote: 

 

Don’t make the mistake of selling something like oil for 

the benefit of getting economic development. Most of the 

economic development from oil ends up in Calgary or 

outside Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he obviously hasn’t spent any time recently in 

many of the constituencies served by members of this side of 

the House. Thanks to a record demand for Saskatchewan oil and 

gas, we are seeing more economic activity than we have in half 

a century. 

 

To Mr. Blakeney and the members opposite: welcome to 2008 

where our government is taking steps which ensure 

Saskatchewan people do benefit from the sale of our natural 

resources through historic tax cuts, record debt reduction, and 

the largest ever infrastructure investment in Saskatchewan 

history. All this, Mr. Speaker, making the quality of life better 

for all the citizens of this great province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Permission to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

your gallery are 27 students from the fine city of Moose Jaw. 

They’re grade 11 and 12 students from Peacock, and they’ll be 

observing the procedures today. 

 

Accompanying with them is their teachers, Keisha Mohr, Carrie 

Kiefer, and Mike Alexanderson. And I’d the Assembly to make 

them welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Homes for Foster Children 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 

reported last month that children are being housed in hotel 

rooms because many of the province’s current foster homes are 

crowded and can’t take any more children. At the time the 

minister minimized the problem, telling the media that only one 

child has been put up in a hotel room since June. 

 

We now know that there’s been at least 12 in the last year, 

seven of those in October alone, and the problem is getting 

worse. In fact I’m told that there’ve already been nine in 

November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services: does the 

minister believe that a hotel room is an appropriate place to 

raise a child? And why did she try to minimize the seriousness 

of this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I told the 

media at the time, I absolutely do not believe that a hotel room 

is an appropriate place to raise a child. However we must 

remember that they’re in a safer place for that one night or two 

nights than they were in the situation that they were removed 

from, and the ultimate safety of the child is of primary 

importance to this government. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there was one youth, one 14-year-old youth 

housed at the time that I had that interview, and then after that, 

in October, there was a family of six children. They were 

housed for a short period of time in a hotel and then reunited 

with their family once the situation was corrected. 

 

Have I admitted to a shortage in foster families within this 

province? Absolutely I have. It is a concern. I have talked about 

it with the Children’s Advocate. I have talked about it with 

Vice-chief Guy Lonechild with FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. And we are continuing to try to 

address the issue through a number of initiatives. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hotel rooms are not 

the only temporary accommodation the ministry has been 

forced to arrange for these children. I’m told that some of these 

children have been placed in a daycare centre for several days at 

a time. In one case a child lived in a daycare centre for five 

weeks. That is not the purpose of daycare centres, Mr. Speaker. 

Daycare centres are places where children can be housed for 

hours at a time. A daycare centre should not become a child’s 

home for days or weeks at a time. 

 

To the minister: why are some of these province’s most 

vulnerable children living in a daycare centre? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The answer is, Mr. Speaker, because 

there was a file that was neglected for a very long time. And so 

when I became minister, I was using methods that was used by 

the previous government, which is emergency housing for 

children to keep them safe. It’s not something that the NDP 

were not doing when they were the government. And what did 

they do to expand capacity? Not a lot. 

 

We now have the PRIDE [parent resources for information, 

development, and education] course implemented for foster 

families to help them with support. We have also — which is 

unprecedented in our country — we have incorporated a First 

Nations element within that training to help families understand 

the culture of First Nations, even if we can’t always place First 

Nations children in First Nations homes. We are going to 

aggressively try to recruit but also retain foster families. And 

we are looking at group homes, expansion in group homes for 

youth. Mr. Speaker, we are trying to address a problem that’s 

been neglected for a very, very long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these are the facts. In 2007, 

Mr. Speaker, the former NDP government set aside five and a 

half million dollars to create new group home and facility 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

spaces. It’s been more than a year since this money’s been set 

aside, Mr. Speaker, and this minister has made some 

announcements, including funding for Egadz to purchase two 

new homes, but most of that money has never been spent. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: what is this minister’s plan 

for increasing the number of spaces for children at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The plan is 

to continue to give as much support as we can to our existing 

foster families. It is to work with the leaders, both First Nations 

with the Foster Family Association who is working diligently. It 

is to provide more supports for our foster families, and it will be 

in expanding in group home situations for youth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we now know that on several 

occasions child protection workers have been forced to provide 

24-hour care and supervision for children in temporary care 

facilities. Many of these children are deeply troubled, and 

having to adjust to several different caregivers in the span of a 

few days isn’t helping. Concerns have been expressed that this 

situation puts the safety of both children and workers at risk. 

 

To the minister: what is she doing to address the safety 

concerns of both children and the hard-working child protection 

workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to assure everyone that 

the children are safe, and to imply that the workers are not 

keeping them safe is appalling, Mr. Speaker. Those children are 

being kept safe by very, very, very competent workers. 

 

It is not against the collective bargaining agreement with the 

workers. And yes, they are working in some of these emergency 

facilities. Dales House has taken over some of the emergency 

work, and there was a time period where we used Social 

Services workers to look after the children while Dales House, 

which is a community-based organization, were able to train 

and hire more workers to handle the caseload. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Term Length for Elected Officials 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the 2008 SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] convention passed a resolution requesting that the 

term for municipal councillors in Saskatchewan be extended 

from three to four years. On November 18, the minister told this 

Assembly that he’s decided not to change the length of office 

for urban and northern municipal and school board officials at 

this time. 

 

To the minister: why is he rejecting a recommendation adopted 

democratically at the last SUMA convention? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure 

after such a long time to be finally able to address the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow about municipal affairs. 

 

We’re not abandoning any resolution from SUMA at all. We 

recognize that the folks from SUMA and the folks from New 

North certainly support the idea of extending municipal terms 

and school board terms from three years to four years. On the 

other hand, in the way of doing public consultation, we found 

some contrary views and other folks that aren’t entirely 

convinced that changing the terms are the right thing to do. 

 

So what does a responsible government do, Mr. Speaker? The 

responsible government says, let’s sit down and talk with these 

folks a little bit longer and come to the right conclusion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s second reading 

speech, he spoke of others who have expressed concern, much 

the same as he just has now. Mr. Speaker, we can’t help wonder 

who these other folks are or who these some people might be. 

So to the minister: is he consulting? Who has he consulted 

outside of the municipal and education sectors before deciding 

to reject SUMA’s request, and just who are these other folks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Golly, Mr. Speaker, who are they 

kidding? You’ve got to wonder who writes this stuff. The 

people that we’re asking are the people who live in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a foreign concept to the 

opposition, obviously. That’s why they’re there; that’s why 

we’re here. We decided that the respectful thing to do would be 

to ask the public of Saskatchewan what do you in fact think of 

this interesting proposal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition 

believe in consulting with the general public as well as the 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

stakeholders directly affected with the policy changes. We’re 

concerned that this government’s definition of stakeholders 

seems to be vague at best. To the minister: why would they 

consult people other than the people directly affected and the 

duly elected municipal leaders who voted for and presented this 

recommendation? Again who are the other folks or the some 

people that they’re taking advice from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just because it’s 

written on a page doesn’t mean you have to read it. I would put 

it this way simply and clearly. The people that we’re consulting 

are twofold. The folks that are elected, the elected 

representatives of SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] and the New North and 

also another interesting group of people called the public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s as simple as that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

AgriStability Program 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, AgriStability is moving from 

Regina to Melville — well maybe. Agriculture Canada has said 

and I quote, “Since the proposal has not yet been fully assessed 

or agreed to, we do not have an assessment of the impact which 

the provincial delivery proposal would have on jobs in 

Winnipeg and Regina.” 

 

To the minister: normally small details such as an agreement by 

both parties are in place before an announcement is made, 

before a Throne Speech refers to it, and before the minister tells 

the House that the federal government is going to cost share this 

move. Can you please tell us why you have announced this 

before you have an agreement with the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, why I have announced this is because I have had 

conversations on a number of occasions, a number of meetings 

with the federal Minister of Agriculture who is committed to 

assist us with moving the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 

stabilization] AgriStability administration to Saskatchewan, in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, to go as far as to even cost share in the 

movement of the program back. 

 

So we also are in negotiations with the federal government to 

make sure this is a smooth transaction, and that’s the 

negotiations that are taking place today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has been 

very busy making an announcement about the possibility of 

making an announcement. How is the minister . . . why is the 

minister telling us that he’s moving AgriStability from Regina 

to Melville when the federal government hasn’t formally agreed 

to it? Can the minister please indicate when the federal 

government is going to officially agree to this move? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 

I’ll go by whatever the federal Agriculture minister says, and he 

has committed to cost share and support us in that movement. 

Mr. Speaker, the federal minister is in charge, and I go by what 

he says. 

 

But the member is right, Mr. Speaker. We have made a number 

of announcements over the past year, far more than the NDP 

opposition did in 16 years. Let’s do a little review of all those 

announcements, Mr. Speaker. Crop insurance review, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s an announcement I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve made a number of announcements. Another 

announcement we made was bringing AgriStability 

administration to Saskatchewan. The member is aware of this. 

Why are we doing that? Because the NDP wouldn’t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not so sure that these questions actually have 

anything to do with agriculture. I think they may have more to 

do with the member for Nutana’s leadership bid and the 

anything-but-Link campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — . . . confidence in the Agriculture critic. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, livestock producers are in crisis. They’ve asked 

for immediate financial aid, and the minister has given them a 

big fat nothing. In response to their requests for aid, the minister 

has said he’s helping them by bringing AgriStability back to 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s no agreement in 

place to move AgriStability to Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the minister so desperate to convince livestock producers he’s 

doing something for them that he’s making an announcement 

before he has any agreements in place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member has 

paid close attention to what the leaders of the cattle industry in 

this province are saying, I’ll remind her of some of the quotes: 

 

Saskatchewan’s cattle producers are pleased with 

Agriculture minister Bob Bjornerud’s announcement last 

week to bring the administration of AgriStability — 

formerly known as [the] CAIS [program] — home to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Hextall: “One of the first things that cattle 

industry representatives requested from . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m going to get the Minister of 

Education up here. His voice projects better. Order. I recognize 

the Minister of Agriculture to complete his comments. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, another quote. And I 

quote from Jack Hextall. He’s the president of the SCA 

[Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association]: 

 

“One of the first things that cattle industry representatives 

requested from the newly elected provincial government 

last November was to bring the administration of 

AgriStability home to Saskatchewan . . . And we applaud 

. . . [the minister for doing that].” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I have a quote for the minister. And here’s 

the quote, and it came this morning from a producer that lives in 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. And I quote: “This program isn’t 

doing anything for us, no matter where it’s located.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve spoken with livestock producers 

about the reality of this program. This program does nothing for 

livestock people who are in a financial crisis, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when is the minister going to get on the telephone or 

fly to Ottawa along with his backbenchers that represent the 

livestock industry and change the program so that the program 

works for livestock producers in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is without a 

doubt one of the most amazing questions I have ever heard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, who helped design that 

program? It was the three or four past NDP Agriculture 

ministers who were non-existent at the table and wouldn’t fund 

the program. Mr. Speaker, they helped design the program that 

the member opposite seems to have so much problem with.  

 

We’ve been in power one year and we’re dealing, Mr. Speaker, 

with 8,000 unprocessed AgriStability applications. That didn’t 

happen just this year, Mr. Speaker, that’s been going on for 16 

years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has spent the 

entire session looking in the rear-view mirror, Mr. Speaker. 

There are 4.5 million cattle that are coming down the road, and 

he better look out, Mr. Speaker, because he just might get run 

over. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what has the province done for livestock 

producers? Nothing. What has the federal government done for 

livestock producers? Nothing. What is AgriStability doing for 

livestock producers? Nothing. When is that minister going to 

get out of his chair, go to Ottawa, and change the terms of the 

program so that it works for people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure but maybe 

Link should be writing the questions over there. The ones these 

members are asking aren’t all that good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite just what 

cattle prices are this year and just what cattle prices were last 

year. And the member should pay attention because she’s going 

to need this in her leadership campaign if she’s going to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, D1, D2 slaughter cows in ’04 were on average 

about $281 per head. In ’08, $548 per head. So if there’s a crisis 

today, there was a crisis in ’04, ’05, ’06, and ’07. What did the 

members opposite do? Absolutely nothing because of course 

they were ignoring rural Saskatchewan. Now they’ve got a 

leadership campaign going on, and they’re going back out to 

rural Saskatchewan to actually see if they do have any support 

left at all out there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Purchase of Fuel-Efficient Vehicles 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Working with rural 

Saskatchewan, working with producers, the former NDP 

government, with much success, built a biofuels industry in this 

province. And so, Mr. Speaker, my questions relate to that 

development, and they are first to the Minister of Government 

Services. I would invite the Minister of Government Services to 

stand . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the members to come to order so 

that we can hear the question placed and the answer, the 

response to the question. I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Minister of 

Government Services to stand in the House this morning and 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

describe for the people of Saskatchewan his government’s 

policy respecting the purchase of environmentally friendly, 

flex-fuel E85 vehicles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I remember the former administration’s efforts to deal 

with ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. I remember the 

announcement out at Belle Plaine where the former premier, the 

current Leader of the Opposition, went out to make the 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, just before the election. And what 

was the net result of that, Mr. Speaker? It was a hole in the 

ground with two scoops from the backhoe and a big sign. And 

that was it, Mr. Speaker. There is no ethanol industry at Belle 

Plaine, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is no Broe ethanol 

industry, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask members one more time to come to 

order, or we will just bypass the rest of question period. The 

member for Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, apparently the minister doesn’t 

know the policy of government around E85 flex-fuel and 

fuel-efficient vehicles because he didn’t mention the policy. 

And apparently he doesn’t know that there is a very large 

ethanol plant at Belle Plaine, Saskatchewan called Terra Grains, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well if the minister doesn’t know the policy of the Sask Party 

on this issue, let me share it with him. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

quote from the Sask Party campaign document, their platform 

under go green. The Sask Party pledge to quote “. . . ensure that 

all new vehicles purchased by the provincial government are 

hybrid or high fuel efficiency vehicles.” 

 

And as recently as the Sask Party convention, the minister was 

asked the very same question in the context of his own 

convention, and he reported to the delegates at their convention, 

quote “. . . that vehicles that run on gas are all E85 vehicles.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask the minister responsible: 

is it the fact that all new vehicles purchased by this government 

and being driven by ministers of the Crown are today E85 

fuel-efficient vehicles? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I was saying, there is no Broe ethanol industry out 

at Belle Plaine. There is an industry though that my colleague, 

the Minister of Energy, made an announcement about that is up 

and running, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are purchasing E85 flex-fuel vehicles in the 

fleet as we replace, but not all vehicles are, Mr. Speaker. But all 

of them are in the top 20 per cent of efficiency in their classes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have looked at the hybrids. They are not as 

efficient as they need to be for our use, because we operate 

mainly on the highways. In fact as even the former premier, Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition had a hybrid vehicle 

which he traded off, Mr. Speaker, for one of the new, 

high-efficiency Jeeps that we have now in the fleet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are meeting our mandate of purchasing 

vehicles that are in the top 20 per cent of fuel efficiency in this 

province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 

this: that a vehicle is provided to the Leader of the Opposition 

— that’s been a long tradition — and in fact the central vehicle 

agency did provide to me one of the Jeep Liberty 3.7-litre V6 

vehicles. When it was drawn to my attention, Mr. Speaker, by 

my staff, that this vehicle in fact did not match the policy of 

government, the central vehicle agency were kind enough to 

provide me with a vehicle that does match the policy of 

government. 

 

Now we’ve got a very interesting situation here. The New 

Democratic Party caucus and the New Democratic Party leader 

is supporting the Sask Party’s policy around vehicles. But the 

Sask Party and its cabinet is not supporting the Sask Party 

policy. 

 

So the question, Mr. Speaker, is: when will the Sask Party begin 

to support and adhere to its own policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Affairs. 

 

Support for Northern Communities 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 

colleague across the House asked a question and I wasn’t able 

to respond the other day, and I’m now tabling the answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is very excited about the 

opportunities in Saskatchewan, and specifically in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I want to address some of the issues that we 

as a province are providing northern people. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is investing $6.3 million 

over four years into the northern career quest program. And it’s 

part of the federal government and provincial government and 

industry partnership that’s actually $33 million for skills and 

Aboriginal development, and it’s going to affect 1,500 

Aboriginal people. 

 

Last year Meadow Lake Tribal Council received $1.67 million. 

And you know that last year this government, in the first year 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

that we became government, we spent 30 per cent more on 

highways and infrastructure in the constituencies of 

Cumberland and Athabasca than the NDP did in their last year 

when they were government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I want to remind the House and remind 

ministers that ministers should respond to the question that’s 

placed, and then ministers can respond to the notice that’s 

given. So I’m going to recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Purchase of Fuel-Efficient Vehicles 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are indeed following the government’s mandate of 

20 per cent top fuel-efficient vehicles. We are purchasing 

flex-fuels, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

use of the vehicles, the former administration were 

urban-centric or they flew, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our members live across rural Saskatchewan. We travel on 

gravel roads and snowy roads, Mr. Speaker. There is a safety 

factor involved there, so in practical Saskatchewan realities, Mr. 

Speaker, we are providing vehicles for the use by both the 

Leader of the Opposition and the ministers that suit 

Saskatchewan’s need for fuel-efficient vehicles and safe 

vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Saskatchewan Credit Rating Upgrade 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to offer some excellent news to this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan. After barely one 

year in office, Mr. Speaker, our government has received a 

credit rating upgrade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — That’s right, Mr. Speaker. Standard & 

Poor’s today boosted Saskatchewan’s long-term rating for the 

province from AA to AA positive with a stable outlook. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This is independent confirmation that 

our government is on the right financial path, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re being recognized for an emphasis on paying down debt 

in a responsible manner and overall strong financial 

performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me share with the Assembly some of the 

comments S & P [Standard & Poor’s] made in its November 26 

news release. They said that “The upgrade reflects [and I quote] 

strong financial results in fiscal 2008 and a low-and-steadily 

declining debt burden . . .” The release goes on to say quote 

“Saskatchewan produced what we believe are standout financial 

results in fiscal 2008 (year ended March 31), with a very strong 

operating and after-capital surpluses.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this S & P release also says, and I quote, “The 

stable outlook reflects our expectation that the province will 

continue to generate solid operating surpluses . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ll ask members to come to 

order so that the minister can present his ministerial statement. 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — “The economy is expected to 

decelerate albeit at a slower pace than that experienced by the 

rest of the country.” And S & P has also cited strong economic 

performance, a strong labour force, and an increase in 

population as contributing factors for the upgrade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, some might wonder 

what does a credit rating upgrade really mean. Credit rating 

upgrades are significant because the higher the credit rating of 

an issuer, in this case the province, the lower the cost of 

borrowing. As well a higher credit rating attracts a broader 

group of investors who can purchase Saskatchewan issues. The 

higher the rating, the lower the risk. Also certain investors 

require minimum credit ratings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, credit rating upgrades provide independent, third 

party validation that we’re managing our finances in a 

responsible way on behalf of Saskatchewan people. Our 

government is working hard for the people of this province, and 

they’re seeing results through debt paydown, tax cuts, 

enhancements to social programs, a commitment to boost our 

infrastructure to support our booming economy, and numerous 

other initiatives. 

 

We’re seeing high employment rates, population increases, and 

prediction that we’ll lead the country in economic this year and 

next year, Mr. Speaker. This upgrade is just the most recent 

good news in a very long list of good news relating to 

Saskatchewan since we’ve taken office, Mr. Speaker. And we 

look forward, we look forward to good news continuing as long 

as we’re the government of this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to begin by expressing my appreciation to the minister for 

the courtesy of providing me with a copy of his statement prior 

to the House convening today. 

 

I was interested and struck at the outset by the minister’s 

comment that after barely over — I guess that’s more than — 

one year in office, our government has received a credit rating 

upgrade. I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that prior to this 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

government assuming office, the previous government 

experienced no less than 16 credit rating upgrades over a period 

of 12 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So I think, given the massive surplus 

that this government inherited, given the oil-generated revenue 

explosion that we’ve seen in the course of the last year, I think 

that Saskatchewan people expect no less than this credit rating 

upgrade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also interested to note that the minister says, 

“This upgrade is just the most recent good news in a very long 

list of good news relating to Saskatchewan since we’ve taken 

office.” Now I just want to underline that “since we’ve taken 

office,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the implications of that, that there was no good news 

before the government took office, Mr. Speaker. And I would 

say, if that’s the position the government’s taking, then they are 

attempting to rewrite history. The fact of the matter is that we 

were seeing the high employment rates the minister was 

speaking of before they assumed office. We were seeing the 

population increases before they assumed office. And 

Saskatchewan was leading the country in economic growth 

before they assumed office, Mr. Speaker. And of course they 

inherited that huge surplus, Mr. Speaker, to start things off on a 

good footing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they may seek to rewrite history, but the fact 

of the matter is it was the NDP that led this province from 

bankruptcy to a boom, Mr. Speaker. And we’re all hopeful that 

they don’t reverse that direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the last time that there was 

a ministerial statement with respect to a credit rating upgrade in 

this Legislative Assembly was in 2002, in May 2002. And at 

that point, the Minister of Finance indicated that Saskatchewan 

had received yet another credit rating upgrade. These things 

became par for the course. We expected no less in those days 

because of the financial management of the NDP government. 

 

But here was the very curious and interesting response of the 

Sask Party member at that time who stood up to respond to the 

minister, and here is what he had to say: “This, Mr. Speaker, is 

a really good example of why we need to have summary 

financial statements in place in this province.” 

 

And without getting into the details of that, Mr. Speaker, I just 

note the irony that yesterday, the government members of the 

Public Accounts Committee said no, no, no, we don’t want any 

summary financial statement planning in this province, and 

voted down a motion to that effect, Mr. Speaker. So another 

case of them having a great idea in opposition, but bad in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the credit rating upgrade is good news for the 

people of Saskatchewan, but the government’s over-the-top 

rhetoric does nothing but to diminish their credibility, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Provincial Communication System Enhancements 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members 

are correct — more good news. As you know, in the recent 

Throne Speech our government announced its commitment to 

ensuring that our provincial communication system meets the 

growing education, health, and business needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have personally spoken with many residents 

across the province who have indicated that it is imperative they 

have access to high-speed Internet and improved digital cellular 

coverage. I know many of my colleagues on both sides of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, who have heard them as well. 

 

We’ve been listening, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 

pleasure of joining the Premier and Robert Watson, president 

and CEO [chief executive officer] of SaskTel, for this historic 

announcement, Mr. Speaker. Within three years, 100 per cent of 

Saskatchewan residents will have access to SaskTel high-speed 

Internet service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — A historic announcement indeed 

for the people of Saskatchewan, for SaskTel, and for this 

government, Mr. Speaker. We have also announced that 

SaskTel digital cellular coverage will expand to 98 per cent of 

the population in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in order to achieve 

these goals, the Government of Saskatchewan is providing $90 

million in funding to SaskTel to complete a three-year, $129 

million infrastructure program — quite a commitment to the 

Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a result of this investment, SaskTel will undertake the 

following infrastructure programs over the next three years. 

SaskTel will upgrade the underlying backbone infrastructure to 

create an enhanced transport network to provide basic 

high-speed Internet access to 187 communities. SaskTel will 

also expand the existing community network by doubling the 

speeds to institutions and adding approximately 90 new 

communities to the existing 256. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will also be an expansion of the last mile 

rural broadband infrastructure, using fixed wireless and satellite 

technology, to achieve 100 per cent coverage across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And SaskTel will improve cellular 

coverage by adding approximately 50 new digital cellular sites 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With this investment in Saskatchewan, SaskTel will provide 

residents with one of the best communications systems in the 

world. This historic investment aligns very well with the new 

Saskatchewan-first policy, Mr. Speaker. We’re investing in our 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

own province to provide residents of Saskatchewan with the 

latest in communication technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I thank SaskTel management and 

staff, past and present, for building a world-class network that 

we enjoy in this province today. I have full confidence that 

SaskTel employees will rise to this new challenge and build an 

even better network that will help us deliver continued 

prosperity and a better life for people in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. My first words are 

thanks to the minister for sharing his ministerial statement prior 

to question period with me. I appreciate that. My second words 

are thanks to the president of SaskTel, Robert Watson, for his 

kind words about the New Democrats’ involvement in setting 

this up. My next words are thanks to the minister and the 

Premier who both reiterated exactly that same thing, and I 

appreciate their acknowledgment that this is a continuation of a 

program initiative that was started under New Democrats, and 

they were both very generous in that. I thank them for that. 

 

I want to not least of all thank the good people that work at 

SaskTel, the people that actually make this happen and have 

built the sweetest little telco in the universe right here in 

Saskatchewan. And of course all the hard-working staff at 

SaskTel deserve our thanks and our praise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good public policy decision, and it further 

cements Saskatchewan’s reputation as a leader in the 

telecommunications and technology delivery areas. The work 

that was undertaken by the NDP and now the expansion of that 

work by the Sask Party is in fact good news for investors, for 

small businesses, and people wishing to make Saskatchewan 

home, whether they’re in our urban or our rural areas, Mr. 

Speaker. This announcement underscores the value of our 

publicly owned Crown corporations and the critical role they 

play in providing the needed services, particularly in rural and 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll close where I entered. I want to thank the 

minister, the Premier, SaskTel for this good news 

announcement that was made yesterday and then the ministerial 

statement today. It is in fact good news for all of Saskatchewan, 

and congratulations. Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 74, The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and 

Repeal Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/Loi corrective (lois 

bilingues) de 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 75, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal 

Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 75, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and 

Repeal Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 76, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 76, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act, 2008 (No. 2) now be read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 603, 

The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 

moved that Bill No. 603, The Reporting of Federal Transfers 

Act be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — With leave later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Leave is not granted. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table 

the Business and Financial Plan of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answer to 

question 132. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to question 132 tabled. 

 

[11:00] 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Government Initiatives 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks I will be making a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the many initiatives 

undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan which 

ensure that all Saskatchewan people, including our most 

vulnerable, benefit from our new-found prosperity. 

 

To talk about this, Mr. Speaker, I have to go back a little bit in 

time. I’ll be focusing most of my comments on one initiative 

that’s taken up a huge part of my life in the last year, as my 

beautiful wife and daughters could attest to. And that’s 

speaking about the community-based organization regional 

gatherings that we ended up having over the last two weeks in 

September. 

 

And to tell that story, Mr. Speaker, we have to go back to 

mid-October of ’06 when I, as a nominated candidate, we had a 

caucus meeting in Yorkton. And what we agreed to do is to 

have a lunch with a group of people in Yorkton. And what we 

decided to do was have a lunch with the community-based 

organization sector from Yorkton. 

 

And through that luncheon, Mr. Speaker, some very interesting 

things happened. The way it all folded out, we ended up having 

12 or 14 CBO [community-based organizations] representatives 

and other employees come to that luncheon. And we ended up 

doing . . . I did a little bit of an opening remark and the Premier 

— now Premier, then leader of the opposition — did some 

opening remarks. And after the luncheon we invited all the 

attendees of the luncheon to get up, state their name, state the 

name of their CBO, the disciplines that they serve, and maybe 

some challenges that they may have. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at the end of that portion, the leader of the 

opposition then, our now Premier, again stood up and 

recognized every person, remembered their name, remembered 

their CBO name, remembered the discipline, and addressed the 

challenges and offered solutions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after that meeting I had a very encouraging 

conversation with I would call the leader of the 

community-based organizations’ secretary in Yorkton. And his 

comments to me I found quite startling. He told me that he was 

so encouraged by what he had witnessed that afternoon because 

in his years and years — in fact decades, Mr. Speaker — in that 

background, he had never been paid much attention by, never 

mind the opposition but the government of the day as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And I found that quite startling. As the government of 

the day, the members across sort of waved the banner and the 

flag of being there for looking after the most vulnerable and the 

needy in society. 

 

One thing we recognized from the community-based 

organization, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . Let’s look at first the 

reasons they exist. Well if we look at the reasons the CBO 

exists, Mr. Speaker, usually there’s a need identified in the 

community. And you get a group of people with a heart for that 

need, a heart for the community. They step forward. They 

develop a program. You know, they might access some 

government funding. They might access community funding, 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

and they’ll serve that need and fill that purpose. 

 

And the reason they’re so good, Mr. Speaker, is they’re very 

efficient, and they’re very effective. And we as a government, 

we realize no government can really do it alone. The job is just 

too large. You have people on the front lines that have a heart 

for that type of work. They have a heart for the different issues. 

Many are involved with those issues in their personal lives. 

They might have a disabled child. They might have, like in our 

case, we had a child with cancer, where we get involved with 

the Cancer Society . . . many different people that are involved 

for the reasons that they should be involved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you have a very efficient, effective group of people that have 

a real interest in what they’re doing — not a government 

department that does it just because it’s a job. And government, 

Mr. Speaker, by nature, is slow to react, not nearly as efficient. 

And one quote I’ll steal from our Premier that I thought was 

quite profound, a statement he said over the past few months, 

Mr. Speaker, in fact during the summit process was: 

 

We’ve got to realize that the CBO sector does a lot of the 

heavy lifting in the province when it comes to human 

service delivery. It is staffed by 6,000 heroes that show up 

every day. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one comment that happened after relaying 

those comments of that initial, what I would call the initial CBO 

gathering in Yorkton was that I relayed these comments to the 

leader of the opposition, the now Premier. And he said, you 

know, in opposition it’s very difficult to get things through. 

You can advocate and advocate, but the government of the day 

has to accept that place that you’re trying to get to. But if we 

should ever form government, he said to me, we will have to 

look at this more in-depth. We’ll have to do this on a grander 

scale and really listen to the concerns of these front-line 

workers and help them help us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we were successful in the election, and I consider the 

Premier’s first promise carried out was that very promise that 

he made or that commitment he made to me, in fact, October 

11, 2006. He contacted me shortly after the election, asked me 

to assume the duties as Legislative Secretary to the Hon. 

Minister of Social Services from Humboldt. He asked me to aid 

her engaging the CBO sector in a more positive manner than 

they’ve been accustomed to in the past, to foster positive 

working relationship. 

 

He requested a CBO summit of human service delivery 

stakeholders to get feedback, identify their challenges, possibly 

offer solutions, and ask them for solutions. We could work 

towards supporting them in their work, so we could help them, 

as I said, Mr. Speaker, help us to deliver the important services 

to the people of the province, their clients being among the 

most vulnerable that we have in our society. 

 

A lot of naysayers said they thought it couldn’t be done, much 

too difficult, much too big a job. How do you facilitate 

hundreds if not possibly 1,000 people? It was a large job to 

organize this undertaking, Mr. Speaker, to say the least. Our 

initial thing that we had to do was identify who we’re talking 

about. We were talking about hundreds? We were talking about 

thousands? We identified, Mr. Speaker, well over 1,000 specific 

human service delivery CBOs in the province. 

 

We developed a database with the help of a legislative intern, 

did a lot of work, and over time the ministry took over and kept 

adding to the names and the data on that database. And a lot of 

help from others involved the former member from Saskatoon 

Northwest, Ted Merriman. The former minister of Social 

Services under the NDP approximately a decade back, Mr. Bob 

Pringle, was brought on for his input, knowing from decades 

back — for years back — the challenges that Social Services 

faced, the CBO sector faced. And Mr. Pringle, now being in the 

CBO sector, had a lot to offer. 

 

The staff was unbelievably supportive, Mr. Speaker, and 

worked hard. The minister’s chief of staff, an amazing amount 

of work that he undertook. He covered my back on numerous 

situations. The MAs [ministerial assistant] in her office, others 

involved through the ministry, and the organization of the 

project was unbelievable. 

 

We brought on a facilitator by the name of Bob Chartier, with 

an open-space concept, where we soon realized that one large 

summit wasn’t going to be very doable. It was very hard to 

undertake, hard to facilitate. But if we were to do five regional 

gatherings, we’d downplay or lower the costs of this summit. 

We would be more effective. We’d have more engaged 

conversation and address more of the concerns, have a lot more 

time for the people involved to speak. The five regional 

gatherings we decided on was in the five social service regions 

of the province: Saskatoon, Regina, North Battleford, Prince 

Albert, and Yorkton. And, Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to 

have the summit process end in Yorkton being, as I believe, it 

was the birthplace of the start of the whole CBO summit 

process. 

 

One thing, we got comments from a lot of the members 

involved, attending the summits. They were very excited and to 

this day still talk about the fact that the Minister of Social 

Services not only ended up attending for a portion of the day 

each day of the summits, but spent the majority of her day at the 

summits engaged with the attendees unless otherwise took away 

for meetings relating to the summits. 

 

The Premier as well, he attended in Yorkton, and I say the 

birthplace of the summit process as I see it. The Premier, it 

worked out that he was able to attend in Yorkton, although I 

have one bone of contention with the Premier at this Yorkton 

summit, Mr. Speaker. When I compared my opening remark 

notes with what he was going to present, I thought we were all 

on board, but as he spoke to the people at the summits, he pretty 

much destroyed my speaking notes. I had to cross off, cross off, 

cross off, and before I was done, it was a pretty minimal 

opening But personally I’d rather listen to the Premier speak as 

to myself. 

 

Through this process, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, and the 

Minister of Social Services laid the groundwork and the 

foundation for a lot of the work that has been done to date. 

Although the process was led by the Minister of Social 

Services, it represented all ministries involved with human 

service delivery in the province. 

 

In our budget in the spring, we announced a 2.3 per cent 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

increase to support the CBO sector. And granted this wasn’t 

enough to aid all the issues at the time, Mr. Speaker, but it was 

what we could do at the time, a promise we could live up to and 

commit to and carry through with. Shortly after, in September, 

to go into effect October 1, was a 7 per cent lift to the CBO 

sector of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, surprisingly enough, you know, granted 

there is still issues with funding and wages in the CBO sector, 

and I did hear some negative comments about this 

announcement concerning the political timing which, you 

know, granted you could argue that, I suppose. But I thought, 

you know, it’s quite strange when you consider it. If you want 

to analyze the political timing of an event like that, my personal 

view is I think we’d have been better off holding off on that 

timing. Let’s just hold off on that announcement of money. 

Let’s just keep it in the bank, and we’ll wait until, we’ll wait 

until, you know, we have the summit process over with. We’ll 

let this one item overshadow the whole CBO summits. And 

when the summits are over, we’ll come out. We’ll announce 

this funding, and we’ll pat ourselves on the back. We’ll look 

like political geniuses and move on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that would defeat the whole purpose of the 

summits. That would overshadow the summit process. We 

would have had a lot of the really important issues other than 

the funding go unnoticed. So, Mr. Speaker, we thought better to 

go ahead of time, get this out of the way. We won’t let this one 

subject overshadow the summits. We can get to the grassroots, 

some of the other issues that are affecting the CBOs that 

weren’t normally identified. We wanted to be proactive and 

reactive. And as I said, we didn’t want to let this one thing 

overshadow all of our summits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the open space format was questioned and how effective 

would that be, coming to this type of a thing without an agenda. 

I had a lot of doubters saying what’s this going to be, like an 

open space thing. You’re going to come with a three-piece suit, 

do a PowerPoint — this is what we’re going to do — thanks for 

coming out and not much consultation. But when I relayed to 

the attendees that what we need is for to you to come with what 

you know, your experience, we’re going to develop the format. 

We’re going to develop the agenda from the ground. We’re 

going to talk about what you want to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to talk about your issues. We’re going to address 

your challenges, and we’re going to move forward with your 

input, which I would say, Mr. Speaker, is a true, true 

consultation process. 

 

And I would gauge the reactions, Mr. Speaker, of these summits 

by one person, a very respected member of the Yorkton CBO 

community. He came up to me after the last Yorkton summit — 

he had got the feedback from a few of them — and he said, you 

know, Greg, coming into this thing I had some very high 

expectations. So, Mr. Speaker, I was waiting for the other shoe 

to drop and I said, well how do you think we did? His answer to 

me — Greg, you guys have far surpassed my expectations. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one person from the CBO community that I 

would take the word over most other people involved in this, 

especially the members opposite. 

 

And I know we’re setting the bar high. We are setting some 

fairly lofty goals. But if we come up short for some reason, Mr. 

Speaker, we can analyze, we can learn, we can adjust, and we 

can move forward. We’ve got to set targets. We’ve got to set 

our targets. We know where we’re coming up short. We can 

adjust, we can move forward and keep continuing to help those 

community-based organizations in the province. 

 

I’m just going to touch on a few of the things briefly, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have accomplished in the short time, some of 

them directly related to the CBO summits. We now see that we 

have a lot of measures to assist low-income family and people. 

The 2008 tax credit will not affect their income tax credits. 

They will not be clawed back. Tax credit will be excluded from 

the calculation for social assistance benefits. Mileage rate under 

the Saskatchewan assistance plan will be increased 5 cents per 

kilometre and will increase with the price of fuel. Increases for 

basic monthly home heating fees, actual utility costs to be paid 

on monthly billings. 

 

Thirty thousand dollars in the way of a contact information site 

with the United Way of Saskatoon and the Saskatoon Food 

Bank for people around the province to access these very 

important services. Money going towards shortening or 

eliminating 440-person wait-list for residential day and 

specialized programs. $27.8 million to go towards projects for 

capital funding projects. A new income assistance plan that will 

specifically give money to social assistance recipients that will 

not get off social assistance, that are disabled, some dignity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have pages and pages here that I’m just not going to get to at 

this time, Mr. Speaker. So as my time is coming to a close, I 

want to allow my colleagues from both sides of the House to 

comment on all the positive initiatives undertaken by our 

government. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the numerous initiatives 

undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan which 

ensure that all Saskatchewan people, including the 

province’s most vulnerable, benefit from our new-found 

prosperity. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Yorkton: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the numerous initiatives 

undertaken by the Government of Saskatchewan which 

ensure that all Saskatchewan people, including the 

province’s most vulnerable, benefit from our new-found 

prosperity. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure 

to speak on this motion. It’s an important one as the 

government puts forth its plan. Of course we’ve listened to the 

Throne Speech and over the past several weeks we’ve seen 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

what their initiatives are. And there are several, and we 

definitely have some questions about them. 

 

Before I get into my formal comments, I do want to make some 

comments about the first speaker’s remarks about the CBO 

summit. He was the Legislative Secretary for that, and I was 

able to attend all of them, and I thought that they were well 

designed. 

 

But there were some questions. And of course we want to make 

sure the record is correct on this because the feeling may have 

been out there that if this was the first time the CBOs ever got 

together, it’s not quite the case at all. In fact for several years 

there was a voluntary sector initiative. In fact that was a 

national initiative, not just one that was happening in 

Saskatchewan. Again where there is an issue of rebranding and 

rewriting history, the voluntary sector initiative was a very 

successful initiative of getting groups together right across this 

province who were involved in making Saskatchewan what it 

is. 

 

One record or one initiative that was very well received by the 

CBO sector was our work around board liability that we had 

passed a few years ago — very, very important. And I 

appreciate the comments of the member talking about the 

announcement of increased funding which happened the week 

before and the questions around the timing of that. And they 

clearly left the impression with many of the workers, if not all 

the workers, that they were going to be seeing significant wage 

increases. And we understand that’s not the case, that it’s really 

left up to the individual CBO, and they may or may not be 

getting what they truly deserve. 

 

And one of the points that I heard clearly over and over again 

was the question around vision, the lack of vision, any kind of 

strategy, any kind of overarching world view from this 

government about how they would think the CBOs should serve 

this province. It seems to be an ad hoc thing. 

 

I appreciate the database the member talks about, and I’m 

wondering if he’s going to be sharing it through the 211 

initiative they’re talking about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when I was preparing for this I was struck 

by the resolution that “. . . most vulnerable, benefit from our 

new-found prosperity.” It reminds me of a cartoon that I saw in 

The StarPhoenix this summer. And it’s sort of the like the old 

classic ransom note and different letters cut out, and it says, 

Dear Tenant: We’re doubling your rent. Send more money. 

Meet our demands or else. We know where you live. 

 

Well it would be funny except the case is it’s so, so true for 

many people in Saskatchewan. And this is the fact of the matter. 

People are facing difficult times in the months coming, and so 

we have to disagree with this resolution quite forcefully. People 

are concerned about how, in the case of having boom times 

here, some people are being left behind. 

 

I want to share a couple of letters and some quotes from people 

in my riding, but I’ve got letters from Regina, across the 

province, and in fact we heard about Estevan this past week, the 

pressures that are being faced there. 

 

Here’s somebody who writes that they just received notice “. . . 

my rent is to go from $730.00 to $960.00 a month on February 

1, 2009. On February 1, 2008 my rent went from $610.00 to 

$730.00.” She goes on to say: 

 

They said our rent increase would be comparable to 

similar apartments in our area. We have no exercise or 

party room and my rent is now higher than a one bedroom 

suite in an apartment, a block away, that has both an 

exercise and a party room. Some thanks after residing here 

for 30 years. 

 

I also received another note. This one was on October 31. And 

it says, and I quote: 

 

When I moved in, March 1997, my rent was $477 a 

month. In ten years, my rent had increased . . . slightly 

more than $100 a month. However, January 2007, my 

monthly rent jumped over $100 to $690, which is what it 

is now. According to the notice I received this week, my 

monthly rent will be $960, which is a $270 or 39% 

increase from what it is today. Suffice to say my wages 

have certainly not followed that trend. 

 

Furthermore [she goes on to say], I find it ironic, the 

notice of rental increase arrived the same day Brad Wall 

sent out a mailing saying how wonderful life is in 

Saskatchewan. In view of the current lack of affordable 

housing, I’m seriously considering leaving this province. 

 

Perhaps this gargantuan rent increase is part of the new 

owner’s latest tactic to empty out the building to move 

forward with the condo conversion. 

 

She goes on to say that she asked me to raise this in the 

legislature. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, who are all these Saskatchewan people? We 

know there are seniors who are facing issues on fixed income, 

housing, and energy. We know those are people who are living 

with disabilities, dealing with issues, particularly around access. 

We’ve heard issues around paratransit, families face issues 

around daycare, and we’ll be speaking more about that. 

 

Students are facing issues around tuition — that’s a huge issue. 

Aboriginal people face a whole host of challenges, including 

child care, training, housing, and that type of thing. And one I 

find particularly interesting is the emerging immigrant 

community, some of the challenges that they’re facing. They’ve 

been promised an awful lot in this province, and they’re not 

feeling the same benefits that many others are. 

 

But what are the common threads through this whole 

discussion, Mr. Speaker? Well I think there are three: energy, 

food, and housing. These are the three that people are feeling 

significant challenges in months ahead as we come into the 

second winter of this Sask Party government. 

 

Of course within energy, we see SaskEnergy raising their bills 

some 27 per cent. Our government, when we were in power, 

had a bundle that guaranteed the lowest rate, the lowest utilities 

in Canada. They thought that was a gimmick but I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, it affected everyone. 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

Food. What about food? Here we saw a mean-spirited 

government here in the core communities of Saskatoon, yank 

the funding for Station 20 West, the Good Food Junction. Here 

is something that they could point to and say, we’re doing 

something. Well they certainly proved . . . I’ll point it as 

something that they didn’t do, and people are very, very 

concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this House I’ve been raising daily the 

issue around seniors and affordable housing. People have been 

raising the issue around students and the housing in the North 

and this government has been pretty quiet about that. Not any 

new money, any new money in any kind of building new 

affordable housing in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the research is clear. Mr. Speaker, the 

research is clear and I have quite a bundle here. This is the 

research around poverty in Saskatchewan. These reports have 

come out in the last six months. We have the report, A Question 

of Prosperity: Poverty in Saskatchewan came out in June. 

 

Here’s an interesting one that I think the members opposite 

would find very interesting. This is called, Beyond Freefall: 

Halting Rural Poverty. It came out of the Senate. And who are 

one of the main co-authors? The Hon. Leonard J. Gustafson. 

Many of these people would know that gentleman. 

 

And what are some of the issues? Well one of the first ones is 

developing a national poverty reduction strategy. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about the health disparity 

report that came out. We’ve heard, as well, about the Campaign 

2000 report that came out last week. And just yesterday, the 

report that came out from the HungerCount 2008 on Tuesday, 

November 25. 

 

And I am alarmed by this, Mr. Speaker. It talks about 

Saskatchewan continues to have one of the highest percentages 

of child food bank clients. One of the most startling things is 

that the primary . . . And this is new. There’s been a significant 

increase in the number of households reporting employment as 

a primary source of income, with an increase from 7 per cent in 

2007 to 12 per cent in 2008. That’s almost doubling, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well clearly what we need is an anti-poverty strategy This 

government has done several ad hoc programs but nothing like 

a strategy or a vision to eliminate poverty in this province. The 

time is now. They have the resources. And that is the reason I 

cannot support this resolution, Mr. Speaker. It is seriously 

deficient in terms of asking for a vision of how we’re going to 

solve these challenges in our communities right across this 

province. The time is now, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask all 

members to defeat this resolution. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my distinct pleasure to rise in the House today and speak in 

support of this motion. But first I would like to congratulate the 

member from Yorkton for the hard work he did in organizing, 

along with the Minister of Social Services, the CBO summit. 

 

It has often been said, Mr. Speaker, that a society can be judged 

on how it treats its weakest and most vulnerable members. It is 

important for our government to take the necessary actions and 

steps to ensure that no one is left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the year since the Saskatchewan Party was 

chosen by the people of our province to form a government, we 

have seen historic growth. Saskatchewan is leading the country 

in economic and population growth. We are enjoying 

unprecedented prosperity. Demand for our natural resources is 

at an all-time high, which has resulted in record revenues. Mr. 

Speaker, we are a shining jewel afloat in the sea of economic 

uncertainty that is washing over other provinces and nations. 

 

So far the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy has shielded us 

from the turbulence being experienced by many others. Now 

that is not to say that we do not face our own unique challenges 

such as the rising cost of living. In a growth economy such as 

ours, prices for many things such as gas, groceries, rent, and 

mortgage payments, they are increasing. And for many of the 

people, these costs are just about unmanageable. For others, it is 

difficult. They present a serious challenge. 

 

Our government is committed to ensuring that the benefits of 

our new-found prosperity will be shared by all Saskatchewan 

residents including our most vulnerable. It is important that 

low-income individuals and families, disabled persons, seniors, 

and children, to name just a few, receive the assistance they 

may need. 

 

I would like to speak this morning, Mr. Speaker, about some of 

the initiatives undertaken by our government to ensure that no 

one gets left behind. Affordable housing is a serious challenge 

for some of our Saskatchewan residents. Now shelter is a basic 

human right, and it is an issue this government takes very, very 

seriously. And to that end, we established the task force on 

housing affordability, Chaired by a former Saskatchewan Party 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], and a former 

NDP Social Service minister. 

 

This task force made several recommendations, many of which 

our government is quickly implementing. Our government has 

increased the shelter allowance for social assistance recipients 

and indexed it to the cost of living. The increase in shelter 

allowance under Saskatchewan assistance program and 

transitional employment allowance were in response to rising 

cost in the average market rent. 

 

We are providing further protection for renters through 

amendments to The Residential Tenancies Act which will 

require landlords to provide six-months notice prior to a rent 

increase on month-to-month rental accommodations. We have 

taken steps to ensure that communities are accurately 

categorized for purposes of establishing social assistance shelter 

allowances and, accordingly, rates. 

 

The income threshold for seniors who qualify for social housing 

has also been increased. As part of the largest ever single-year 

income tax, our government has dramatically reduced income 

taxes for the lowest to the moderate-income earners. The 

number of emergency shelter and transitional spaces has been 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

increased right across this province. We are working with 

post-secondary institutions to increase the supply of student 

housing on or near post-secondary campuses. 

 

Our government has committed to incorporating best practices 

and innovative ideas and design models when creating 

affordable housing for seniors and individuals with special 

needs. We are also taking steps to ensure energy-efficient 

building practices are incorporated into new or existing 

affordable housing units. We are paying attention. 

 

Our government is working with the federal government to 

ensure a new affordable housing agreement. In recent weeks we 

announced a change to the governance structure of the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corp to a board compromised of 

housing stakeholders across the province, including 

representatives from the municipalities. 

 

[11:30] 

 

For the past 16 years, Saskatchewan has trailed most every 

other province and territory in the level of financial support 

provided to our seniors. Now our government, it’s committed to 

supporting the people who built this province and have taken 

steps to address this inequity. For the first time since 1992, 

benefits under the seniors’ income plan are increasing. This 

19.5 million initiative will raise the maximum monthly seniors’ 

income plan benefit from 90 to $190 for single seniors, and 

from $72.50 to $155 for each member of a two-pensioner 

household. 

 

The number of eligible seniors will also more than double from 

10 to 20,000. Now that increase returns the programs to 1992 

levels, the time of the last increase, which amounted to only $10 

a month. Seniors are some of our society’s most vulnerable. 

 

So too are many of our children, and they are what we consider 

our most precious resource. Our government is also taking steps 

to ensure our children and grandchildren receive the support 

they need. 

 

Our government recently announced tax cuts that will have a 

major impact on low- to moderate-income families. The $4,000 

increase to the basic personal and spousal exemptions has the 

potential to either save them thousands of dollars or remove 

them from the tax roles altogether. The child tax credit has also 

increased by $2,000. 

 

A new low-income tax credit replaces the, increases the 

Saskatchewan sales tax credit. Recipients of social assistance 

programs will be able to keep any of the 2008 tax refunds that is 

generated by the historic tax cuts that we announced earlier this 

fall. 

 

The 2008 income tax refunds and tax credits received through 

the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit will also be excluded. 

 

Parents receiving social assistance now have access to new 

parent support workshops from the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. Community-based 

organizations, including agencies that help families, receive a 

funding increase of 7 per cent annualized to help with salaries 

and operational costs. Our government has made the largest 

ever increase in Saskatchewan’s employment supplement 

maximum benefit levels. Income cut-off levels have also been 

increased. We introduced a new children’s drug plan to ensure 

that families pay only $15 for drugs listed on the Saskatchewan 

formulary and those approved under the exceptional drug status. 

 

Beginning in 2009 tax year, the active family benefit will help 

families with the cost of extracurricular activities for our 

children. Our government provided new funding for school 

lunch and anti-hunger programs in our community schools. The 

child care subsidy program received funding for 500 new 

spaces announced in the 2008 and 2009 budget. 

 

Now our government is maintaining its commitment to fund 

267 million in child care, in early childhood initiatives, over 

four years. In order to meet the demands of a growing province, 

we’ve provided 1.7 million in new funding for 500 additional 

child care spaces. There are now more than 10,000 licensed 

spaces in this province. 

 

An early learning enrolment grant averaging $10,000 per centre 

was provided to all child centres in March 2008. Now this grant 

will also be available to new centres and spaces, 2008 and 2009. 

One point seven million was provided to child care centres in 

April 2008 to support an average of 4 per cent wage lift for 

every childhood education. Our government is committed an 

additional 2 million in funding for pre-kindergarten program, 

bringing the total investments to 9.6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m committing today to people of Saskatchewan, 

this government will continue to listen. We will continue to take 

action to help the most vulnerable in our province. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be able to stand and make comments 

on the motion that was put forward, addressing how the most 

vulnerable in our society benefit from the new-found prosperity 

within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that outcomes and future success of 

our citizens and our families can be directly impacted by some 

of the conditions that we experience in our lives, whether that’s 

something as basic as nutrition. Children need proper nutrition 

so they can learn better in school. I mean we can put forward 

many different research papers that will put credence into the 

comments that I’m making. 

 

Also housing: if young children and families have a stable 

housing situation, you will also see improved outcomes in the 

education of that child, of the behaviour, and it will ripple 

through society. We will see less instance of acting out and all 

kinds of behaviours that will result from that, but from the 

instability in their home life. 

 

When we talk about outcomes and we talk about that so 

important, ever so important early beginning in life, the thing 

that really rings true for me is that these youngest citizens of 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

our lives truly do need us to take the responsibility to provide 

the best circumstances possible for them to succeed to have that 

important good start. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I can always remember reading a book 

when I was a young mom and my kids were little. My sister 

actually passed it along to me, and it was called Children: The 

Challenge. And while it went through kind of the expectations 

of changes in our children, and what we could expect to see 

over a number of years till they hit their early teens, one thing 

was always stuck with me, that from zero to three, zero to five 

in some research, the basic personality of our children will be 

established by what influences them during that time, what 

influences are available to them at that time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this used to be a big source of support for 

me when I was going through those teen years, and my 

daughters were having troubles, as teens always do. And I used 

to think, oh my goodness. I hope I did something right from 

zero to five or zero to three, that they would grow out of this, 

and that they would have those good basics that you need to be 

successful throughout your life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we think of those in our province and 

those in our communities that are struggling, for me one of the 

simplest and clearest paths that we need to take is to make sure 

there is child care spaces and facilities, not just in the large 

urban centres but also in smaller urbans, in rural communities, 

where these are also very important, and in the North. Mr. 

Speaker, we have to look at the whole province and make sure 

that those services are there for our littlest of citizens and our 

most important. They may be the smallest, but they’re also I 

think the most important. And when we look at, well what’s the 

things that need to be done? And people will talk about creating 

child care spaces. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve stood in the House and made those 

comments also. But I also understand that there’s a great deal 

more that goes into it than just creating a space. There also has 

to be the proper early childhood educators that are there in the 

facility to be able to run programs for the children to make sure 

they are getting some of those very early but good influences. 

We see many demands on families where both parents, or if it’s 

in the case of a single parent, there’s a need to enter the 

workforce. We’ve heard many comments about the labour force 

shortage across Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan has one of the highest attachments of women 

with children five and under, the highest attachment of that 

group to the workforce. So where do their children go? What 

kind of care are they getting? And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, 

when your children are in good care, stable care, and you are 

comfortable with the arrangements you’ve made, you’re also a 

much better employee. You’re more comfortable when you’re 

at work. It’s not a constant worry about where are my children, 

what are the kids doing today? So, Mr. Speaker, it goes much 

broader. But really for those littlest of citizens in our province, 

we need to make sure that there are adequate, affordable child 

care spaces available across the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that in our last year of government, 

the former government, we put in place a broad program that 

addressed a number of areas to make child care successful. We 

know that’s it’s not, as I said, as easy as just creating spaces. 

But we need to also look at the depth of the subsidy and the cost 

and the affordability. There’s also issues with recruitment and 

retention of workers. And there’s also things as basic as 

nutrition grants, with the rising cost of food; also parenting 

supports, and some very basic issues. With today’s increase in 

the real estate market, we also need to be sure that there is 

capital investment for child care facilities and pre-kindergarten 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while it is an area that we need to really address, 

I’m afraid that it always or often gets pushed to the background, 

that it isn’t put as a priority. It isn’t given the level of support 

and the level of prioritization that it truly needs. Because we 

can talk . . . These little folks, they’re the ones that are going to 

be impacting our society quite quickly, and we need to make 

sure that they are a priority from the early days right through 

until they are contributing members of our society. 

 

And I keep questioning, what are we seeing right now? In our 

last year of government, Mr. Speaker, we introduced 1,040 

child care spaces across the province. And since that time, since 

that 1,040 of the last year of . . . Now the member opposite’s 

howling. You know, if she wants to get up and join in the 

debate, I wish she would. But she is inaccurate, the comments 

that she’s making. In the last year of our government, and the 

paperwork is there, there was 1,040 child care spaces 

established in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a small step, but it’s a big step for 

making sure that resources are there. So now we see this new 

government, huge amounts of surplus cash at the ready but no 

focus and no dedication to increase child care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget they stood in this House and 

committed to 500 new child care spaces across the province, but 

how many have they initiated? How many of those 500 have 

been put in place? Five hundred? No. Four hundred? No. One 

hundred? No. They committed to 500, but there has been zero. 

Zero of those child care spaces have been actually put in place 

and up and running. In fact this is so slow and there is so little 

focus on those youngest and most vulnerable in our community 

that they re-announced it in October in the Speech from the 

Throne. Now they twisted it a wee bit. In the budget they talked 

about 500 spaces. In the Throne Speech, focusing on next year, 

they talked about $1.7 million being put in place for our 

youngest and most vulnerable of citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit of a shell game. And I truly hope that 

with the needs that are out there, we look at the disparity in 

conditions between those that are living a more comfortable life 

to those that are struggling in our province. They are being left 

behind in a number of areas: housing, education, health care — 

you can look at a number. 

 

Now one of the members opposite says, 80,000 off the tax roll. 

Well you can look at various research, and there was comments 

in the paper not that long ago. If you are low-income, tax 

credits do not help you if the money isn’t there. Now the 

member scoffs at it, but he really needs to do some reading and 

do some background. 

 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many areas where we could 

improve the lives of those most vulnerable. And it’s not by 

cutting low-cost programs like the dental sealant program that 

was done when they first came to power. And it’s not like 

cutting a benefits program for vulnerable low-income workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they need to take a good look at the programs and, 

in many cases, low-cost programs that can truly have an impact 

and make a difference for those most vulnerable in 

Saskatchewan’s society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and an honour to 

speak to the motion before us today to address how all of the 

people of this province will benefit from our new-found 

prosperity.  

 

It is of special interest to me as I have experienced, as you’re 

aware, an impoverished and de-franchised youth. I later went on 

and have a degree in Social Work and sociology, and have 

worked with people across this nation suffering addictions.  

 

With that being said, Mr. Speaker, it was not until I had the 

privilege and the honour of being elected as a member of the 

Saskatchewan Party government that I had the opportunity to 

see policies and programs be developed that actually addressed 

the issues experienced by the most vulnerable people in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this past year I have served as a member of 

the government caucus Standing Policy Committee on Human 

Services. This committee is assigned to such policy areas as 

health, education, corrections, and social services. In the past 

nine months, we have met with over 45 stakeholder groups in 

Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Prince Albert. We 

have travelled to tour their facilities and actively engaged in 

discussion with their program organizers right on their sites. It 

has been the committee’s vision and its goal to hold positive 

and productive stakeholder meetings that are mutually benefit 

to everyone involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have encouraged groups to set aside any 

flowery rhetoric and be as open and as direct with us regarding 

their concerns as they feel comfortable. We have asked them 

what they view as barriers and what they foresee as possible 

solutions. We have talked, debated, and discussed — with each 

of the groups — key priorities and have more importantly 

listened to their concerns. The committee has empathized and at 

times given stakeholder hugs after they have shared with us 

some of their very difficult and personal stories and 

experiences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are real groups representing real people who 

are in real crisis. This type of vulnerability knows no political 

barriers. It is part of the human condition, and this government 

has addressed this by providing a real, human response. This 

response is to assure that everyone in the province of 

Saskatchewan shares in the current prosperity regardless of 

their income level or social situation. This current government 

did not just talk about ideas. They made a firm commitment to 

the people of Saskatchewan and have taken numerous steps to 

fulfill this promise. 

 

Before I share some of this government actions, I would like to 

address the claim by the opposition that this government 

neglects Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable and poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is only fair that we first look at the NDP’s 

history and chronic neglect of social services in this province. 

There has been no increase in shelter rates in 15 years, no 

increase in the general living allowance for food and clothes for 

over a decade. There were 440 people with disabilities on the 

wait-list to receive necessary residential or day programming 

services. In 1992 people with disabilities did not have to wait 

for services because no wait-lists existed. No increase in the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan since 1992. There was inadequate 

support for foster homes and other supports for children in the 

care of ministries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the opposition needs to be reminded that 

the ’40s and ’50s are over. Tommy Douglas is no longer the 

leader of their party, and if he was, it would be fair to say he 

would be shocked and appalled at their social policies and track 

record. 

 

Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP list on their website 

only 17 points on how they made life more affordable for 

people in this province and how everybody benefited from their 

strong economy during the 16 years that the NDP were in 

power. Yes, Mr. Speaker, only 17 points — accounting for 16 

years — of which two points are having the lowest car 

insurance rates in Canada and designating a new statutory 

holiday in February. Mr. Speaker, not everyone even has the 

means or the ability to own a car in this province in order to 

benefit from that program, and a new statutory holiday only 

benefits those who had jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to really understand how out of touch the former 

government was in regarding social issues, it may be helpful to 

revisit August 2007 when it was reported in The StarPhoenix 

that the former government felt it was prepared for the housing 

boom that people would benefit from. The former government 

then discovered a housing crisis in Saskatoon and reported that 

the shelter rate would increase $5 and the rental housing 

supplement would increase $6 to address this concern. Yes, 5 

and $6, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP even publicly recognized 

that this would not help some of the renters who were facing 

over $100-a-month-rent increases. It is a terrible thing in this 

world to encourage false hope in others. This unethical 

treatment by the former NDP government towards the 

vulnerable people of this province is appalling. 

 

While it’s very difficult for governments to legislate ethics and 

morality, they can, however, choose to act. The Saskatchewan 

government has in fact acted with respect and empathy and 

understanding and a commitment to solve problems. During the 

last election, Mr. Speaker, the Premier often mentioned that 

hope beats fear. Since the Saskatchewan government was 

elected last November, we have invested 1.1 million for 

transition houses and sexual assault centres to strengthen 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

services to women who are victims of domestic violence. 

 

We purchased two homes in Saskatoon through Egadz that 

provided vulnerable youth stable and supportive places to live. 

Increase in Saskatchewan employment supplement to help low- 

to moderate-income working families with the cost of raising 

families. Increase to child subsidy to ensure that licensed child 

care is affordable for Saskatchewan parents. Provided $500,000 

for school lunch and anti-hunger programs in community 

schools. Provided $400,000 to process 320 000 kilograms of 

pork that was donated to food banks across the province. 

Created and quickly responded to, through the task force in 

housing affordability, to ensure affordable housing to keep pace 

with the province’s economic momentum. 

 

Developed the new primary health bus to provide health care to 

inner-city residents, those with the greatest barriers to accessing 

care. Increased shelter allowance and rental housing 

supplements to adjust to both the average mark of rental rates, 

helping Saskatchewan families deal with the growing cost of 

living. Increased income thresholds for seniors to qualify for 

social housing programs up by 19 per cent. 

 

Increased per diem rates to CBOs operating in emergency 

shelters, immediately benefiting those in crisis with an increase 

of 60 per cent for individuals and 20 per cent for families. 

Committed 2.4 million in Regina to Harbour House furthering 

our commitment to help those who are homeless and at risk by 

providing safe and secure and affordable housing. 

 

Eliminated 440 on the waiting list for people with mental 

disabilities. Introduced the children’s drug plan. Implemented 

new case management system to ensure the safety of children in 

care. Implemented PRIDE training and foster care 

programming, including First Nations and Métis, with a 

component to strengthen the caregiving system that currently 

exists that will meet the many needs of our children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is so much to go on about what this 

government has done in such a short period of time compared to 

the rhetoric of 16 years from the opposition. 

 

As an MLA from Saskatoon, it’s important to me that 

investments were made and are made in the core 

neighbourhoods. We announced 16.3 million for two projects in 

the Pleasant Hill neighbourhood in Saskatoon alone: 8.3 million 

dedicated to build a new St. Mary Community School, daycare 

and wellness centre; the second project for an allocation of $8 

million towards the development of affordable housing with 

local community groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, the opposition constantly goes on, well 

we didn’t have the money. Well they had enough money to 

grow government by 30 per cent to the largest level of 

government in this country. They had enough money to invest 

millions of dollars outside of this province — hundreds — and 

lose hundreds of dollars. They had enough money to invest in 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] and lose millions of dollars, but they didn’t have 

enough money to invest in our children and the most vulnerable 

in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this motion as the most comprehensive 

attack on child poverty in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to join 

in on the debate today, Mr. Speaker, on the motion that was put 

forward by the government side. A pleasure, Mr. Speaker, not 

because I agree with this motion, not because I think that this 

motion hits the mark, but rather the opposite, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe that this motion does not accurately reflect what has 

been occurring in this province over the past year of this Sask 

Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of affordability, there are certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, items where this government over this past year, 

when they’ve been carrying on the tradition of what has been 

occurring over the past years, areas where they have gotten 

things right. I will grant them that, Mr. Speaker. But there are 

many areas, many areas, Mr. Speaker, where they’ve missed the 

mark, many areas, Mr. Speaker, where they’re dropping the 

ball, many areas where they’re failing to realize what the 

immediate needs are for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, preceding me, from the opposition side, we 

heard from the member from Saskatoon Centre who went on for 

some . . . very well went on speaking about the housing needs. 

We also heard from the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

discussing child care needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I get into my comments, I do want to make a few 

introductory comments. It was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, 

to see the scripted speeches by the members opposite, from the 

three government backbenchers on that side, Mr. Speaker. The 

scripted speeches, very unlike some of the members there, and 

I’m curious as to why these messages were so scripted. I can 

just imagine the three members, perhaps the member from 

Northwest saying to the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley, saying to the other member from Yorkton, come on into 

the boardroom. And I think they spent the night with scissors 

and glue and they went through the stack of Sask Party news 

releases, Mr. Speaker. They cut out these news releases, pasted 

them together, and decided that’s what we’re saying tomorrow 

in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that instruction, that instruction to keep it scripted, 

to keep it tight, is consistent with what they’ve been doing since 

the beginning of their time here in government, Mr. Speaker. 

Comments related to remarks I made a couple days ago about 

rewriting the way things are, rewriting the history. The member 

from Northwest likes to bring up 16 years and for some time the 

members opposite have been promoting a number of myths as I 

believe it, about what occurred and why we are in the current 

position where spending decisions on programs to help people 

are able to be made in certain areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to address the area of how the 

Sask Party government is failing students. I would like to 

address how the Sask Party government has missed the mark on 

a number of student issues, Mr. Speaker. When times are going 

well, Mr. Speaker, we know from recent reporting that the 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

province is sitting on . . . has billions of dollars at its disposal, 

Mr. Speaker. When times are going well, we believe that the 

boom times should be benefiting everyone and that clearly 

includes students, Mr. Speaker. It includes many groups but 

students cannot be forgotten in this mix. 

 

What we’ve seen to date, Mr. Speaker, is a failing of meeting 

students’ immediate needs. The immediate needs that are 

facing, for example, university students that are paying tuition 

at Saskatchewan institutions. We’ve seen some focus on the 

retention end, Mr. Speaker, basically accomplishing the things 

that the previous NDP program was already doing. And we’ve 

seen some changes on the retention end of things to make the 

Sask Party program more like the NDP program. 

 

But what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is the failure of the Sask 

Party government to address education issues on the 

accessibility front end of education, to address the issues of 

students who need to pay tuition, who want to pursue training in 

this case at the universities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that financial times are quite 

strong in the province, what we see from this government is a 

step backwards, a step in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:00] 

 

For a number of years students in this province have been 

enjoying the benefits of a tuition freeze that was put in place by 

the previous NDP government, and a tuition freeze that was put 

in place in co-operation with the universities, Mr. Speaker. I say 

that because this is a point that the government side fails to 

clearly state to students, fails to clearly state to people. The 

NDP tuition freezes of years past were fully funded tuition 

freezes, so they were tuition freezes with dollars attached. 

 

In the Sask Party’s own literature of last year, Mr. Speaker, the 

one year where they continued on in the right direction, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of maintaining the tuition freeze, in their own 

documents they stated $25.5 million as the cost of that tuition 

freeze. The Sask Party government knows how much the tuition 

freeze . . . what expense that tuition freeze is. Mr. Speaker, 

despite the fact that they know how much that tuition freeze is, 

they are choosing to pass that burden on to students. 

 

It was some months ago, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Advanced Education floated the idea out to students that the 

tuition freeze would be lifted. One can only assume, Mr. 

Speaker, given the vague floating of this idea, the way he stirred 

up concern among the student population, that the $25.5 million 

will be picked up by the students. 

 

Now the minister floated the notion of a tuition management 

system. Now what this tuition management system is, Mr. 

Speaker, is a mystery to everyone in the province. It’s a 

mystery, Mr. Speaker, because in typical fashion, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — It seems like we have a number of members 

who would like to enter the debate with a lot of information. 

And we’ll allow the member from Saskatoon Massey Place to 

finish his comments, and then we’ll allow other members in. 

The member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I do thank the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone for helping me with my dress here, but I will 

carry on with my speech as time does march on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we saw on the issue of a tuition management 

system is a bunch of question marks. We have a situation where 

the minister floated an idea without providing the details. The 

minister floated an idea without providing assurances to the 

students that they indeed would have a role in this process. 

We’ve had an idea that has been floated, but we have not had 

the facts. 

 

We have not had any sort of evidence given to students to allow 

student unions to feel that their concerns are indeed being 

heard. To me that suggests, Mr. Speaker, that this idea of the 

tuition management system is an idea that is being made up on 

the fly, an idea that has not been properly thought out, but an 

idea that is being created just sort of as the weeks go by. Maybe 

a bit of work here, a bit of work there, but no clear articulation 

of what this tuition management system is. So it leaves students 

wondering what will this tuition management system be, what 

sort of input will they have to ensure that education can remain 

accessible and affordable to students. 

 

On an ongoing basis, I’ve had the privilege of presenting 

petitions, Mr. Speaker, organized by student unions here in the 

province who are speaking to these issues, who are concerned 

about the issues of accessibility for all students. 

 

So the member from Moose Jaw talked about the need for child 

care spaces. The member from Saskatoon Centre spoke about 

the need for increased focus on housing. Two clear areas where 

the Sask Party government is failing the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my comments have been limited to the area of 

student concerns and student needs. And in my opinion, what 

we’ve seen, we’ve seen a decrease in affordability for students, 

and we’ve seen an increase in debt. And that’s what the end 

result of this process will be with the tuition freeze being lifted. 

 

We’ve seen a decrease in affordability, and we’ve seen an 

increase of uncertainty among the student population. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen a decrease in affordability, but an increase 

of confusion among students because of the lack of clarity that 

this government has explained their proposed tuition 

management system. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting 

this motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Debate has completed and on the 65 minutes. 

We now have 10-minute question. I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the member from Saskatoon Centre. Now over the past year, 

every time we’ve had an announcement, we’ve heard a lot of 

we were planning to do that, we were just going to get to that. 

And no doubt the members opposite are very aware these 

groups have been asking for help for years. 

 

The members across must have been aware of the plight since 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

they were government and would have been getting inquiries. 

There is a difference between knowing the problem and doing 

something about it though, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 

say they didn’t have the money on hand that the province has 

now. And this is true. There’s a lot more money in the 

provincial coffers right now. But they did however have 

hundreds of millions of dollars with which to do something but 

chose to do little, if nothing. 

 

The member referred to the St. Mary School project or the 

inner-city projects in Saskatoon’s core, where they chose to 

fund a new investment in a new project in the then premier’s 

area. My question is, why did they bump and re-announce the 

St. Mary’s School project for nine years before going ahead 

with this other project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we were busy building the 

economy of this province. And many people . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . They can laugh. They can laugh, but a lot of 

people have remarked how this government seems to have 

discovered oil the day after the election. The same with potash. 

 

No, a lot of things were happening, Mr. Speaker. We did a lot 

of good work, especially in the core communities when you talk 

about White Buffalo — a lot of good work. 

 

But I have a real problem, this government in their ad hoc 

approach to how they do things in this province, and this is 

really a problem. People are saying if you get to the minister 

first, you’ll get something. But there’s no big vision, no big 

plan. I have a real concern about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — The member from Yorkton just said that 

there’s a difference between knowing and doing, and so I find it 

an interesting point that he made. I’d like to ask the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley if, in that vein, there’s a 

difference between knowing and doing, why is it that housing 

wasn’t mentioned in their election platform even once? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Well thank you very much. I appreciate the 

question from the member opposite, but I’m a female not a 

male, and so maybe he can remember that. 

 

One of the things that I’d like to talk about is the important 

things that we have addressed. We have addressed housing. 

You know, I had the wonderful opportunity to represent the 

minister at a sod-turning session at Maple Leaf Estates. Again 

there we were, we were looking at innovative ways of providing 

very affordable and moderate housing to the most needy in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I would like to ask the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. I’d like to know why, with the hundreds of 

millions of dollars that they lost outside of this province in bad 

investments, the hundreds of millions of dollars in schemes like 

SPUDCO, why they made announcement year after year, 

including the last year before the election, how they were going 

to build St. Mary’s School, and then postponed it eight years 

down the waiting list? And how they were to back project 

Station 20 that was pork-barrelled with a number of NDP 

people on the board, that quite frankly was five times 

overinflated for what it’s worth, and yet at the same time ignore 

a commitment to the city of Saskatoon for housing? So I would 

like to ask him how they could neglect the inner city of 

Saskatoon and our most vulnerable in their greatest need. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting 

thing. These folks keep going back to talk about Station 20 as if 

it was one of their proudest moments. And I think they should 

be totally embarrassed and shamed, ashamed of what they did. 

You know, with the amount of fundraising that’s going on 

around Station 20 and the fact that there were $250,000 

invested in the research to make sure that project worked — 

$250,000 — and they call it pork-barrelling. I think the people 

of Saskatoon and this province will be very interested to read 

the comments of what that member has called those people 

involved in that comment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re very happy about the kind of work that 

we’ve done in the inner cities and right throughout this 

province. You know, they talk a lot about the food banks and 

things like that, and they talk about the different supports. Are 

they actually delivering on that, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question for the member from Regina Qu’Appelle. The people 

of Saskatchewan are dealing with ever-increasing costs of 

housing and utilities. So I want the member to explain why the 

government cancelled the lowest cost utility bundle with a 20 

per cent energy increase. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much for the question from the 

member opposite. Now one of the things that we are very 

pleased with is the financial support that we are providing to 

members of our society who are the most vulnerable. And so in 

fact, we have not come up with ad hoc programs, but rather, in 

fact, through the Ministry of Social Services, we have planned 

very well programming to ensure that people who, and residents 

who are having some difficulty in paying those fees, are helped. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I would like to ask the same member from 

Saskatoon central. Our government is working hard to build a 

better life for Saskatchewan’s seniors. We recognize that many 

of our seniors are on fixed incomes and are struggling with 

dealing with higher costs. We have put into place free eye 

examination, free chiropractor, reduced deductions on 

prescription plans. They’re now eligible for SIP [seniors’ 

income plan]. We would like to know why the members 

opposite are so against this assistance of our seniors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I assume I’m the same member. But I’m very 

happy to answer this question because, you know, when the 

minister made her ministerial statement . . . And many of us 

applauded the initiative. We think it’s an important initiative 

but it’s very important it’s done well. 

 

Seniors don’t have an error of margin. And we’ve seen that, 

how this file’s been handled. I am very happy to hear that their 

rent won’t be clawed back in Sask Housing units. That’s very 

important. 

 

But the other day in committee I raised this concern, which is a 

very important issue. Many seniors, many people who are 

working, invest their savings in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

And you’re familiar with that; that was one that was started in 

the ’80s. They have been saving their money for over 20 years. 

Here’s a group that is very vulnerable to having a clawback.  

 

And the minister did not deny that night that they may be in fact 

facing a clawback. Because they’re only getting maybe $100. 

The most from the annual report is $300, but it’s averaging 

$100. That’s very vulnerable. These people — some 1,400, 

1,500 people who are collecting income from Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan — may be seeing that money clawed back. And I 

think that’s something that side should worry about. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 

from Yorkton. In light of the strong financial position that our 

economy is in, why is the Sask Party government forcing at 

least $25.5 million on the backs of students, and when will the 

Sask Party government provide more details about the tuition 

management system? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can’t claim to know a whole lot about the Advanced 

Education file; I’d have to go to my hon. member from 

Saskatoon for that. 

 

What I can comment on, Mr. Speaker, though, is a lot of the 

initiatives we have done to save money for the people of the 

province. We’ve done historical tax cuts that provide income 

relief or extra income for all people of the province. We have a 

$20,000 tuition rebate program to address the tuition cost of 

students that stay and work in the province. And through other 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker, there’s more money coming to more 

people across the province through a lot of the announcements 

of the Throne Speech. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

opposite from Saskatoon Centre. For the past 16 years 

Saskatchewan has trailed most other provinces and territories in 

the level of financial support to our seniors. In fact in the past 

the NDP government wanted to raise the long-term care fees for 

seniors . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 75-minute debate. 

 

[12:15] 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Motion No. 3 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 

to move and speak to a motion in respect to affordability. And 

the motion reads as follows: 

 

That due to this government’s spending choices, which are 

ignoring the government’s major responsibility to address 

the immediate needs of the Saskatchewan people such as 

high utility rates, high property taxes, dropping of the 

tuition freeze, and the lack of affordable housing and child 

care, this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 

Premier and his government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are fond of now casting 

their minds back not to their first year in office so much, Mr. 

Speaker, as the time immediately preceding that. And in this 

Chamber, on the part of the government, we have so often heard 

revisionism and revisionist history take the place of action, and 

rhetoric take the place of policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of my favourite examples of that is, when confronted 

with the $800 million in equalization payments that all 

members of this House at one time agreed was owing to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and members on this side of the House 

still believe are owing to the people of Saskatchewan but 

members on that side of the House only believe are owing when 

there’s a Liberal government in Ottawa. They do not believe 

they’re owing when there’s a Conservative government in 

Ottawa. 

 

And when we raise or when anyone raises, Mr. Speaker, the 

surrender, the surrender to Ottawa by the Premier and by the 

Premier’s Saskatchewan Party government, there’s talk of this 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

special relationship and how much this special relationship has 

brought to the people of Saskatchewan. And we get a little bit 

of revisionist history from across the way as well, Mr. Speaker, 

at that time. 

 

One of my favourites — and the Premier’s done this once; 

maybe he’s done it more than once, but at least once — in 

exchange for this $800 million a year, Mr. Speaker, we are to be 

very pleased with $10 million more for the synchrotron. And 

then he follows that with saying, and the previous government 

got nothing. Well except, Mr. Speaker, except the synchrotron. 

And that is typical. That is typical of the government revisionist 

history because of course whenever they talk about anything 

obtained or added to a program or an institution that existed 

within the province of Saskatchewan, they in the next breath 

have to pretend that what they added to had never existed, Mr. 

Speaker, because of course they’re the only government that has 

done anything at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one of my favourites. I mean they praise 

now accomplishments that they previously denigrated. They are 

now proud of policies that they previously attacked, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This morning we had happy news in this House. We had happy 

news. Not only did we have a credit upgrade, Mr. Speaker, we 

had, I think, the first Conservative Party credit upgrade in the 

history of our province. Everybody in Saskatchewan should be 

pleased. Some are astounded, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

once-in-a-lifetime event, at least so far, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the members opposite want to look at recent history, and 

we should look at recent history, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

has been a have province now, Saskatchewan has been a have 

province for about five years, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Finance wonders why we are not more excited about 

Saskatchewan being a have province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve been excited about Saskatchewan being a have province 

for about five years. The excitement has only spread to the 

Saskatchewan Party recently, Mr. Speaker. They were not so 

pleased about it year after year after year when they were in 

opposition. Now suddenly they’re pleased. I think we should all 

be pleased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But while we’re walking down memory lane, let’s not go back 

too far. It’s an easy question. When was the last time, when was 

the last time that Saskatchewan was a have province and the 

most affordable place to live in Canada? The year before they 

were elected, Mr. Speaker. That is the last time that was the 

case, Mr. Speaker. In the three or four years prior to the election 

of the Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan was both a have 

province and the most affordable place to live in the country, 

Mr. Speaker. That is no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is talk about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I can pause while the Minister of Education makes his 

comments. Mr. Speaker, I believe I have the floor. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There has been a little more 

conversation going on. I would ask the members to recognize 

the member that has the floor. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan have 

heard the reading out of statistics, some of which are months 

old, that establish quite clearly that Saskatchewan has had a 

boom. And many people in Saskatchewan are wondering in 

how this boom has affected them, why their circumstances have 

not changed, why their circumstances have become worse, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as we proceed into the winter coming, as we proceed into 

this winter there is a need for immediate relief on a number of 

fronts for many, many people in Saskatchewan because their 

lives are less affordable than they were before the boom, Mr. 

Speaker, and before this Saskatchewan Party government took 

power, Mr. Speaker. Many of us will go home for the holidays. 

Some will go homeless for the holidays, Mr. Speaker. And that 

is the developing truth in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The government has inherited a $2 billion surplus. The Finance 

critic, when the Saskatchewan Party was opposition, was fond 

of talking about a mountain of money. Well compared to the 

surplus on which this government sits, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Sutherland, the Finance critic of the day, the 

current Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, was making a molehill into a 

mountain of money. This indeed now is actually a mountain of 

money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite now don’t call it a slush 

fund. They call it an insurance policy, Mr. Speaker. Now what 

is an insurance policy for? Is it an insurance policy for people 

facing ever-increasing rents, Mr. Speaker? Well no, it is not. Is 

it an insurance policy for people facing ever-increasing utility 

rates, Mr. Speaker? No, it is not. Is it an insurance policy for 

people who are looking for real property tax relief? No, it is not, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, is it an insurance policy for students 

concerned about rising tuition costs? Rising housing costs? 

Rising expenses while they are going to school? No, it is not, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s not an insurance policy for any of those people, Mr. 

Speaker. It is an insurance policy for the members opposite. It is 

a political insurance policy leading up to the next election. 

While the clouds gather on the horizon, and we understand what 

the global economic situation is, Mr. Speaker, who gets insured, 

Mr. Speaker? Is it the renters? Is it the taxpayers? Is it the 

homeowners? Is it the students? Is it the people on fixed 

incomes? No, Mr. Speaker, it is not. 

 

It is the government that gets the insurance, Mr. Speaker. They 

get to sit on the insurance policy. And as people are wondering 

how they’re going to pay their rent, how they’re going to stay in 

their homes, how they’re going to heat those homes, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a government that is smug and snug with 

their insurance policies. And the government has its insurance 

policy; the people of Saskatchewan do not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is time for the Saskatchewan Party to get off of their 

mountain of money and help the people of Saskatchewan, and 

to work to keep Saskatchewan affordable. With Saskatchewan’s 

resources paying big dividends to the Government of 

Saskatchewan, it’s time for the Sask Party to give some of it 

back to the Saskatchewan people, and to give some of it back 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

before this winter gets colder and darker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They gave back only 10 per cent with their tax cut, and that’s 

not coming this winter, that’s not coming this year. They are 

sitting on 60 per cent of the surplus — $2 billion in the bank. 

 

The utility rates are going up 20 per cent — 27 per cent in the 

case of SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, 5 per cent or more in the case 

of SaskPower. The minister isn’t very forthcoming, Mr. 

Speaker, not very forthcoming at all about what they are. 

 

In the past, in the past, Mr. Speaker, when there were much 

smaller surpluses than this, when there were much smaller 

surpluses than this during the 16 years of NDP government, 

there was a payback, a rebate to Saskatchewan people to cover 

their heating costs over the winter, Mr. Speaker. That was the 

circumstance. That was the case, and that was done when the 

surplus was much less, when the resource revenues were much 

less, when the energy revenues were much less. That was the 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker. That is the circumstance in 

Conservative Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As this winter comes, the effect of the policy in Conservative 

Alberta will be that Albertans will be receiving a rebate on their 

natural gas rates of $40 while people in Saskatchewan will be 

paying a 27 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only was this the past practice of NDP governments, not 

only is this the practice of the Alberta government, it was what 

the opposition called for when they were in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party called for when they were in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. Say anything in opposition; do nothing 

in government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the circumstance. 

 

Housing costs are going up in some cases 50 per cent. People 

are getting successive rent increases. The NDP calls on the 

government to provide property tax relief, not only property tax 

payers directly as home owners, but to renters as well. And the 

response from the government, Mr. Speaker, is resounding 

silence, as was the call for natural gas rebates from the 

opposition to the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rents are skyrocketing. Saskatoon is tied with — wait, Mr. 

Speaker — Vancouver for the fourth lowest vacancy rate in 

Canada. The rental supply is dropping. The cost of rent is going 

up. People are crowding together, Mr. Speaker. We will not be 

surprised if domestic violence rates and health disparities 

continue to increase if these intractable problems cannot be 

addressed when we are crowding people together, tighter and 

tighter and more and more people in smaller and smaller spaces, 

because we cannot address, the government will not address, 

the housing crisis in our province. 

 

Property taxes are on the rise. And I know, and I’ve commented 

here before, Mr. Speaker, that a number of people in Saskatoon 

Meewasin voted for the Saskatchewan Party believing that there 

was going to be not a study of property tax, not talk about 

property tax, not maybe some suggestion about what they might 

do about property tax in June of 2009, but that there would be 

relief for property tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, they are 

disappointed, and there’s no question about that. There’s no 

question about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government applied a 10 per 

cent rebate to municipal property taxes. The Saskatchewan 

Party that’s campaigned on this issue, campaigned on this issue 

quite stridently, 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker — 10 per cent, 2 per 

cent; 10 per cent, 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Agriculture minister has won the award for being the most 

honest member across the way. The press, the press I think 

awarded that to him when he said, “In opposition, I could say 

just about anything I wanted and I did on a lot of occasions for 

12 years.” 

 

Now the Canadian Taxpayers Federation has always seemed to 

me to be sort of a cat’s paw for the Saskatchewan Party in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They would raise an issue. If it took fire, 

the Saskatchewan Party would raise the issue. If they raised an 

issue and it didn’t catch fire, Mr. Speaker, well we’d get 

silence. It was quite remarkable. 

 

The Canadian Taxpayers Federation is I would think fairly 

sympathetic to the members opposite and to their . . . The 

Canadian Taxpayers Federation I think is fairly friendly to the 

members opposite. And this is what they had to say about the 

government’s performance, Mr. Speaker, quote “Lots of 

opposition thunder, no government rain.” And I think that sort 

of sums up what we have seen from the transition. Say anything 

in opposition, do nothing in government. Do nothing in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Saskatchewan had long been known as the most affordable 

place to live, of the quality of life that simply could not be beat. 

And at the time, at the time, a have province and a most 

affordable place to live in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The momentum, the boom, has brought about challenges that 

the government is not quite willing to address, Mr. Speaker. 

The needs of Saskatchewan people have always been there, 

there’s no denying that. The opportunities aren’t always there, 

Mr. Speaker, but the opportunity is certainly there now, Mr. 

Speaker. What is lacking now is not either a need to be filled, or 

the opportunity to fill it, Mr. Speaker, if the insurance policy 

was meant to protect Saskatchewan people instead of the 

Saskatchewan Party and the Saskatchewan government, Mr. 

Speaker. The ability to address the need is certainly there. What 

is lacking is the will and the vision to apply the opportunities, 

the resources available, to the need that is there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So soaring interest, utility rates, rising rents, rising housing 

costs, increasing tuition, and from the government on these 

immediate needs, nothing, Mr. Speaker. Nothing of substance 

whatsoever, except revisionism instead of action; rhetoric 

instead of policy. 

 

Information released by the Association of Regina Realtors 

shows that on a year-to-date basis the average price of a home 

in Regina was up 47 per cent over the previous year, and the 

property taxes will rise with that, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

fortunate people in Saskatchewan are actually people who of 

course owned their homes before these property prices started 

to go up. And, Mr. Speaker, they are the fortunate ones. Now 

when they look and wonder how their children are going to get 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

into the housing market, I think they have some concerns. 

 

We also have some immediate concerns around property taxes, 

Mr. Speaker. A concern amongst a number of people of 

Saskatchewan — people who can afford their rent, even; and 

people who can afford their homes; and people who can afford 

their property taxes — it’s what’s happening to their 

neighbours, and the increasing concern, increasing issue, the 

crisis of homelessness in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d like to read from a couple of stories that were in major 

newspapers in Saskatchewan. And from Tuesday, October 28, 

2008, from The StarPhoenix in Saskatoon. Quote: 

 

It used to be unusual for anyone with a job to show up at 

the YWCA crisis shelter in Saskatoon, looking for a warm 

place to sleep. 

 

Those days are gone — and more than ever, the shelter is 

forced to turn homeless women and their children away 

because it has no room for them, says executive director 

Barb Macpherson. 

 

“Quite regularly there is one person staying in the shelter 

who is working,” she [told The StarPhoenix] . . . ” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I know it’s Thursday, and most 

members are kind of anxious about going home and having 

some fun, but there’s a little more conversations going on, and 

I’m having trouble hearing the member that has the floor. So I’d 

ask that the members carry their conversations on behind the 

bar. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — With all respect to the Minister of Education, 

I have some comments to make about the homeless in 

Saskatoon, and I’m going to make them. And I know he hasn’t 

heard any of it so far. So I know he wouldn’t have wanted to be 

interrupting while I was saying this, and I’m sure he won’t want 

to now. 

 

“Quite regularly there is one person staying in the shelter 

who is working,” she . . . [told The StarPhoenix] in an 

interview Monday. “We’re also seeing more families — so 

moms with their kids who had housing, but then rent gets 

jacked up and they can’t afford it so they buy groceries 

instead of paying the rent, and then they get evicted.” 

 

During the course of its last fiscal year — from June 2007 

to June 2008 — the 38-bed shelter on 25th Street gave 915 

people a temporary place to stay while they looked for 

new accommodations, including 403 children . . . 

[according to] the organization’s recent annual report. 

 

In a typical year, the number of people turned away for 

lack of space at the YWCA would be about the same as 

the number taken in, but last year the number turned away 

exploded by more than 50 per cent, reaching 1,468. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take a break from the quotation for a moment. So 

in the midst of the boom, Mr. Speaker, in the midst of the 

boom, there’s a boom in the use of the crisis shelter in 

Saskatoon. I go on quoting from the article: 

 

“Homelessness has been growing in this city in recent 

years and it has been further impacted by Saskatoon’s 

economic boom that saw last year’s rental increases 

reaching 13.7 per cent over the previous year,” 

Macpherson noted. 

 

“And people are also staying (at the shelter) longer 

because it’s taking them longer to find the housing they 

need and get back into the community.” 

 

Women who bring their children to the YWCA for 

emergency shelter have often just made the decision to 

leave an abusive domestic situation, Macpherson noted. 

Rather than sending them back onto the street with 

nowhere to go when the shelter is full, staff help make 

arrangements through other social agencies such as the 

Salvation Army. 

 

In some cases, Social Services ends up covering the costs 

of a night in a cheap motel room — hardly a long-term 

solution [but, Mr. Speaker, as we heard earlier today, the 

government’s solution to foster children as well]. 

 

“Say you’re a single mom with three children under the 

age of four and you’ve just escaped violence in the home,” 

she said. “What you need is counseling and some supports. 

Can you imagine being in that situation, stuck in a hotel 

along with your kids, and nothing else?” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this problem has not gone away since 

October. And I could read a similar article from the 

Leader-Post about the Regina crisis centre. And perhaps I’ll 

have an occasion to do that, Mr. Speaker, before I’m done my 

remarks. This situation hasn’t changed, Mr. Speaker, and all the 

glad-handing and backslapping on the other side today about 

the economy, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t address or even show 

concern for the issue of people not having homes in 

Saskatchewan. It’s not Vancouver, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

Victoria, Mr. Speaker. This is a hard place to be homeless. 

 

And when there are suggestions proposed by this opposition as 

to how to address this matter and particularly rent relief, the 

answer from that government is resounding silence, Mr. 

Speaker. It is resounding silence. 

 

For years in opposition, Saskatchewan Party demanded an 

immediate solution to property tax, saying that enough study 

had occurred and it was time to act. Once elected however, the 

tune changed. Say one thing in opposition; do something else or 

do nothing in government, Mr. Speaker. Suddenly more study 

was needed, and the Premier appointed the Rosetown MLA to 

further study the issue and further study the issue and further 

study the issue. And we may not see this study before we rise 

next spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, property tax relief was provided. 

The opposition said 10 per cent was insufficient. Now they’re in 

government, 2 per cent is obviously sufficient. 

 

And if you can afford your home and if you can afford your 

rent, Mr. Speaker, winter is coming. Under previous NDP 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

governments there would’ve been a plan for relief for high 

natural gas rates. If you were in Alberta, there would be a plan 

for relief for high natural gas rates. But in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no plan. There is no relief, Mr. Speaker. There 

is no relief. 

 

The opposition Saskatchewan Party, a year ago and prior to 

that, liked to talk about how they would run the Crowns on a 

businesslike basis. Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the result for 

Saskatchewan people? The result is that when natural gas is at 

$6.50 a gigajoule, the Saskatchewan people under a 

businesslike operation by the Saskatchewan Party are paying 

$8.50 a gigajoule. 

 

Now I know how the gas variance account works, Mr. Speaker. 

I know how that works, Mr. Speaker. I do; I do. But the result 

to Saskatchewan people is that they’re paying more than the 

resource fetches on the market. That’s the result of having a 

businesslike government that’s going to do things differently. 

 

In fact they say, well you know we’re not going to do things 

differently. And there’s a whole group of fronts we’re not going 

to differently on, but the one thing they are going to do 

differently is they’re not going to provide any relief. They’re 

not going to provide the relief that an NDP government would 

provide in a similar circumstance, Mr. Speaker. So we have a 

20, 27 per cent increase on natural gas, Mr. Speaker, going into 

this winter — no relief coming from this government. No 

intention of providing relief, Mr. Speaker, although we continue 

to call for it. We continue to call for it, Mr. Speaker, and we 

will not stop calling for it. 

 

And on the electricity side, Mr. Speaker, well the minister isn’t 

very forthcoming. At least 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, at least a 5 

per cent increase in electricity. I suspect a great deal more. 

There is considerable appetite on the other side of this House, 

on the government side of the House, to talk about how we 

should make electricity. There’s a lot of appetite for a debate by 

the government on how we’re going to produce electricity. 

There’s very little appetite for a discussion by the government 

on how we are collectively or individually going to pay for that 

electricity, Mr. Speaker, which is a very important part of a 

discussion. How you make it, yes, I think that’s important, Mr. 

Speaker. How we’re going to pay for it, that’s also important, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let’s look at a couple of examples. We have the stated 

position of the government that we will have in Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask members to cease from 

shouting from their desks. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

have the stated position of the government that we should have 

in the province of Saskatchewan — and we may hear more 

about this later on today, and perhaps that’s where some of the 

members opposite want to rush off to — that we should have in 

this province one or two privately owned nuclear reactors, with 

the investment in infrastructure to deliver the electricity from 

those reactors to the people of Saskatchewan, and for export 

apparently, Mr. Speaker, to be paid for by the people of 

Saskatchewan. So private profit, public investment. 

 

How much is this going to cost the people of Saskatchewan for 

their electricity bills or other subsidies, taxes, however they’re 

going to pay for it? Mr. Speaker, nothing forthcoming. A lot to 

say about how we’re going to make it, Mr. Speaker, not too 

much forthcoming about who’s going to pay and how much, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is in a context of rising utility rates. 

Anyways, Mr. Speaker, we have this prospect. 

 

Then another example of how the government is much more 

willing to discuss how we make electricity than who is going to 

pay for it, and that’s clean coal, Mr. Speaker. The national 

government looks like they’re going to be in the very happy 

position where they’re going to have a project that’s going to 

cost a billion and a half dollars minimum — minimum, Mr. 

Speaker, a billion and a half dollars. And they can have that 

project. 

 

It’s going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, help them meet 

their Kyoto protocols or international obligations the national 

government can point to, Mr. Speaker. And the beauty of it for 

the national government is at least $1 billion of that is going to 

be paid for by the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker — this 

national project on national targets — because the provincial 

government no longer has targets, Mr. Speaker. They 

abandoned their targets. But we still have national targets on 

greenhouse gas emissions. The national government is going to 

get to meet them, and the Saskatchewan people are going to pay 

for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is the math. This is the math. This is math because 

we’ve a $1.4 billion project, assuming no cost overruns. We 

have $240 million coming from the national government. Prime 

Minister Harper says no, not a penny more — no cost overruns 

being paid for by Ottawa — no more than the $240 million. So 

that $1.2 billion being paid for by the Saskatchewan people. 

 

So what’s the math on that, Mr. Speaker? That’s $1,000 — 

$1,000 or more for every man, woman, child in the province of 

Saskatchewan for this national project. And for the rest of 

Canadians who have been receiving the benefits of equalization 

payments that we should have been receiving, $800 million, for 

the rest of Canadians who have been receiving that money 

when Saskatchewan people have not, oh I think less than $10, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Listen. If you got the Saskatchewan equalization tax cut of 

Quebec, a 700 million tax cut, $700 million tax cut in Quebec 

and we didn’t get our $800 million in equalization, you’re going 

to have to pay, oh maybe $8 for this national project, this clean 

coal project, knowing that the people of Saskatchewan will 

have to pay over $1,000 each man, woman, and child for that 

project, Mr. Speaker. That’s it. 

 

And the Premier should take, the Premier should take the 

kick-me sign off, the Stephen-kick-me sign off his back, and 

should have it emblazoned in bronze and put on the Premier’s 

office, Mr. Speaker. They should say, kick us, Stephen, kick us 

because we’re going to pay. We’re going to pay $1,000, man, 

woman, and child for this national project so that the national 

government can look good on greenhouse gas emissions. We’re 

going to do that. 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

[12:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I mean, it is just amazing, you know. On 

nuclear energy, private profit, public investment. On clean coal, 

political points in Ottawa, we’ll pay the bill here in 

Saskatchewan. That’s just fine, Stephen. Kick us. Kick us, Mr. 

Speaker. In the face of rising utility rates, it’s very interesting 

that the government has such an appetite for discussing how 

we’re going to make electricity but don’t really want to talk 

about who and how we’re going to pay for it, Mr. Speaker — 

not at all, not at all. 

 

Now I’ve discussed housing and the lack of housing, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve discussed rent and the lack of relief for renters. 

I’ve discussed utility rates and the refusal of the government to 

provide relief with funds that they have available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — And I want to turn to the circumstance that 

our students find themselves in, Mr. Speaker. And you know, 

all the things I’ve said about the lack of housing and increasing 

rent and the government’s refusal to act on the housing crisis, 

on the homelessness crisis, Mr. Speaker; the government’s 

refusal to act on rents and to provide rent relief, Mr. Speaker; to 

provide real property tax relief, Mr. Speaker; the government’s 

refusal to provide any relief on utility rates or devising ways of 

making Saskatchewan people pay more for somebody else’s 

benefit, Mr. Speaker — all these impinge upon students, who 

don’t have high incomes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you want to add, this government wants to add, Mr. 

Speaker, on top of all that, increased tuition costs, Mr. Speaker. 

Now since the ’70s the proportion of cost paid for by the 

student for his education have steadily risen, and it got to the 

point, Mr. Speaker, where that proportion was as high and great 

as it had been at its highest in the Great Depression, perhaps 

being at its lowest in the ’70s, during the government of Allan 

Blakeney which one of the members opposite was so critical of. 

This cost the students their own education as a portion of the 

total cost . . . [inaudible] . . . risen. And arguably, Mr. Speaker 

— arguably, some Bachelor of Arts students were paying the 

entire cost of their education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well no one is more an advocate of university economy in this 

House than me, I don’t think. And I understand the university’s 

reluctance to acknowledge that the negotiated monies that were 

available under the NDP administration to keep tuition level 

with a freeze. But for the purposes of shorthand, I’m going to 

call it a freeze, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, there was a freeze 

on tuitions. And one of the reasons I’m going to call it a freeze, 

Mr. Speaker, is because not only was that the effect for 

students, but that was a word that I think everybody 

understands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we don’t have a freeze any more. Now tuitions can rise. 

And the Minister of Advanced Education says he has a tuition 

management system, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister is very fond of speaking in matrixes and synergies and 

paradigms. With the minister, matrixes and synergies are a 

paradigm a dozen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the students can’t live in his matrixes. They can’t eat his 

synergies, and they can’t pay their tuition with his paradigms. 

And it’s not the job of a minister, Mr. Speaker, it is not the job 

of a minister to try to sound clever. It’s the job of the minister to 

try to act intelligently, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Advanced 

Education fails in the former in any case, and doesn’t even try 

in the latter case, Mr. Speaker. When . . .  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I know that we’re getting 

close to going home, but if the members keep persisting on 

shouting from their chairs, there could be a couple members 

going home a little earlier. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, when the students last winter 

held a day on campus in Saskatoon at the University of 

Saskatchewan to bring attention to housing concerns that they 

had, Mr. Speaker, city councillors attended. Members of the 

opposition caucus attended. The Minister Responsible, the 

Minister Responsible for Advanced Education did not, did not 

attend, Mr. Speaker. The minister who lives in Saskatoon, 

represents a seat in Saskatoon, did not attend. The minister does 

not like to attend events where he actually has to answer 

questions, actually has to answer questions, Mr. Speaker. He 

doesn’t. He doesn’t. 

 

Now I have some, I have some advice for the minister when 

he’s explaining what the tuition management system is, Mr. 

Speaker. I have some advice for him from Winston Churchill. 

Now I know Winston Churchill is only considered one of the 

great orators of the 20th century, and I know that he won a 

Nobel Prize for Literature, but he may still have a lesson for the 

Minister of Advanced Education. And Prime Minister Churchill 

said, “Broadly speaking, the short words are the best . . .” Mr. 

Speaker. And freeze is a short word. It is a word that 

illuminates. It is a word that doesn’t obscure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The language of the Minister of Education is always designed 

to obscure that either he doesn’t understand the policy of the 

government or he doesn’t want to explain the policy of the 

government. And that’s how we get into the situation, Mr. 

Speaker, where we have the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour rising in this House and implicitly 

arguing that musical therapists are essential to clearing the 

highways in the winter in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

the kind of action and the kind of information we receive from 

that minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But going into this winter, going into this winter, university 

students facing higher rents, higher heating costs — these are 

the ones that can find a place to live, Mr. Speaker — and now 

thanks to the Minister of Advanced Education’s new paradigm, 

new paradigm, the tuition management system, they’re going to 

be facing higher tuition as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is, this is the record of inaction. This is the record of 

revisionism and rhetoric that we have from the government 

after a year in office. We have a situation where Saskatchewan 

remains as it has been for four or five years, a have province, 

Mr. Speaker, but now no longer, no longer, as was the case a 

year ago, a year ago, Mr. Speaker, when there was a 

government willing to provide rent rebates, to provide property 

tax relief to renters and homeowners, when there was a 



November 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

government willing to soften the blow of natural gas increases. 

Their record is clear, Mr. Speaker, on all those. When there was 

a government willing to pay for a tuition freeze — because an 

affordable, accessible, non-quality education has no value, Mr. 

Speaker — it was fully funded. A year ago, those were the 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker. This was a have province. But it 

was a have province that was the most affordable place to live 

in this country.  

 

So Saskatchewan is still a have province, and we all hope, we 

all hope sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that it remains a have province. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is no longer the most affordable place to 

live in Canada. Housing costs are as high here as they are in 

Calgary or Vancouver, Mr. Speaker. At one time they were the 

highest in the country. Rents have increased dramatically over 

the last year. The supply of rental accommodation has 

decreased, Mr. Speaker. The two are very connected, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When the government has to be forthcoming about what they’re 

going to do on utility rates, as they had to have been in the case 

of SaskEnergy, we find that they’re approaching 30 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re approaching 30 per cent. And when they 

are asked why they can’t follow the practice of previous 

governments who, with less money, provided relief — silence. 

When they’re asked why they can’t provide relief as the 

neighbouring Conservative province provides — resounding 

silence. And on the subject of electricity, Mr. Speaker, on that 

subject, they’re not even forthcoming on what the increases are 

going to be. 

 

But we’ve been almost promised that we are going to pay, the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to pay to make nuclear power 

profitable for somebody, Mr. Speaker. Nuclear power cannot 

necessarily be made easily profitable, but the people of 

Saskatchewan are being committed by the government to make 

it profitable. At what cost, Mr. Speaker? We don’t know. We 

don’t know. If the government knows, they’re not saying, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

But we do know the costs . . . well we know the minimum cost 

on clean coal and their commitments to keeping that special 

relationship a special relationship, Mr. Speaker. We thought and 

the Saskatchewan Party at one time thought that the $800 

million would be coming to Saskatchewan. Now it appears that 

it’s going to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to Ottawa to pay 

for what they should be paying for — a national project, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

So on every one of these fronts where, you know, the 

government likes to talk about this being this year country, on 

every one of these fronts, nothing is being done this year. 

Nothing is being done this year on rent. Nothing is being done 

this year on property tax. Nothing is being done to hold the line 

on tuitions. Nothing is being done to hold the line on utility 

costs. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, this winter, which some people face 

homeless, Mr. Speaker, which some people face desperate, Mr. 

Speaker, this year, this winter nothing is being done by this 

government because the insurance policy is not for people 

wondering where they’re going to live, how they’re going to 

pay the rent, how they’re going to heat their homes, how they’re 

going to pay their taxes, how they’re going to pay their tuition. 

That’s not who the insurance policy is for. Insurance policy is 

for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. That is their 2011 

insurance policy, Mr. Speaker, and nobody who needs it this 

winter is going to see a dime of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That due to this government’s spending choices, which are 

ignoring the government’s major responsibility to address 

the immediate needs of the Saskatchewan people such as 

high utility rates, high property taxes, a dropping of the 

tuition freeze, and a lack of affordable housing and child 

care, this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 

Premier and his government. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. And in the few moments left for me, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the revisionism . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before I read the motion, I just want 

to make one comment. On the blues that the members have, 

there was an error in printing, which I just want to let them 

know that this is the correct motion here and that it was just an 

error in printing. It wasn’t an error in the way that the motion 

was submitted. The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

made a motion: 

 

That due to this government’s spending choices, which are 

ignoring the government’s major responsibility to address 

the immediate needs of the Saskatchewan people such as 

high utility rates, high property taxes, a dropping of the 

tuition freeze, and a lack of affordable housing and child 

care, this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 

Premier and his government. 

 

Is the member . . . ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to put 

in an amendment to the motion, and the motion amended would 

read: 

 

That all the words after the word “That” be removed and 

the following be substituted therefore: 

 

this Assembly congratulates the government for its sound 

stewardship and spending choices and this Assembly 

enjoys the confidence in the Premier and his government. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River has 

moved amendment: 

 

That all the words after “That” be removed and the 

following be submitted therefore:  

 

That this Assembly congratulates the government for its 

sound stewardship and spending choices and this 

Assembly enjoys the confidence in the Premier and his 

government. 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 27, 2008 

I see that the time of adjournment has been passed. I will now 

say that this House stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1891 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1891 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1891 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1894 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1891 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1891 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1891 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Gifting of the Horse 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1892 

 Saskatoon Church Offers Hospitality 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1892 

 Festival of Trees Supports Meadow Lake Hospital Foundation 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1892 

 St. Joan of Arc School Leadership Conference 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1892 

 Outstanding Citizen Recognized 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1893 

 Keewatin Onitonikewuk Search and Rescue 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1893 

 Natural Resources and Economic Development 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1893 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Homes for Foster Children 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1894 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1894 

 Term Length for Elected Officials 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1895 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1895 

 AgriStability Program 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1896 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1896 

 Purchase of Fuel-Efficient Vehicles 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1897 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1898 

 Support for Northern Communities 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1898 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Credit Rating Upgrade 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1899 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1899 

 Provincial Communication System Enhancements 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1900 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1901 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1901 

 Bill No. 75 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

 Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1901 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1901 

 Bill No. 603 — The Reporting of Federal Transfers Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1902 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1902 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1902 

 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Government Initiatives 

  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1902, 1911 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1904, 1912 

  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1906, 1912 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1907, 1912 

  LeClerc .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1909, 1912 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1910, 1913 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1912 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1913 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1919 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


