




















































Hansard: May 08, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 40A  THURSDAY, MAY 8, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1257 

 May 8, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I have an apology to make. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cut Knife-Turtleford has 

asked for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, on May 5 during debate in the 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs, I made an extremely 

inappropriate remark directed towards the hon. member for 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. I have no excuse for this remark. I was 

wrong, and it shouldn‟t have been thought or said. 

 

Yesterday I sent a note of apology to the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow, and today I wish to withdraw that offensive 

remark and apologize to the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and all members of the Assembly. I also intend to 

apologize in committee the next time the committee meets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the Premier made a very moving 

statement in this Assembly talking about the need for all of us 

to take careful inventory of our words and our actions. I failed 

to live up to the Premier‟s direction in this regard. Therefore 

this morning, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve offered my resignation as 

Legislative Secretary to the Premier and he has accepted. I 

deeply regret any hurt my words have caused. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member for the statement, his 

apology, and his endeavour to also give the same statement in 

committee. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to introduce a class of constituent students from 

Saskatchewan education seated up in your west gallery. I‟d like 

to also welcome their teacher, Adam Alback, here today. I had 

the pleasure of meeting with these students a couple weeks back 

— and it‟s certainly my pleasure to host them in our Assembly 

here today again — had a really good discussion two weeks 

ago. I know they‟re looking forward to watching question 

period, and I ask all members of this Assembly to extend 

greetings. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you a retired lieutenant 

colonel, Harriet Sloan of Ottawa. Harriet Sloan graduated as a 

registered nurse in 1940. She joined the Canadian medical corps 

in 1941 and took employment in Regina at the military hospital, 

which consisted of several shacks joined together, where now 

we know as the Pasqua Hospital. 

 

Harriet was in Holland when peace was declared. Returning to 

Canada, she practised her nursing career within the military. 

Near the end of her career Hallie, or Harriet, worked part-time 

for the Canadian Nurses Foundation. She retired from the 

profession of nursing in 1982. Harriet returned in September 

2007 to commemorate the unveiling of the Nursing Sister statue 

which is located on our legislative grounds. 

 

Last night the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ 

Association] recognized, at the awards banquet celebrating RN 

[registered nurse] leaders, Harriet Sloan. She was awarded 

SRNA‟s honorary membership. Accompanying her in the 

House today is Brigadier General Cliff Walker, a retired 

member of the Canadian Forces. Please join with me in 

welcoming them to our Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, joining us in the east gallery are 21 grade 12 students 

from Aden Bowman Collegiate in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana. They are joined by their teachers Jeff Balzer 

and Katie Kehrig. 

 

I want to welcome them to the Assembly this morning. They 

arrived here at 9 o‟clock. I know that they‟ve had a tour. And I 

plan on meeting them immediately after question period to have 

a short visit, Mr. Speaker. So I would ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome these fine students from grade 12 in 

Saskatoon at Aden Bowman to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you in your 

west gallery are 51 grade 7 and 8‟s from St. George School in 

Saskatoon. And I think that they may be the finest looking 

group of young people in 7 and 8 out of Saskatoon. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Rachele Akerman, Lindsay 

Wawryk, Mark Kindrachuk, and Anita Romanoff. 

 

And I will challenge them to get ready to pose some tough 

questions — think of tough questions for me — when I meet 

with them later over a juice box and to try to explain what 

they‟ve just seen here in question period. 

 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You may wonder why 

we‟re all wearing our red carnations today. This is a day to 

recognize MS [multiple sclerosis] in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I‟d like to welcome people from the MS Society, up in 

your gallery, and thank them for the work they do on behalf of 

the thousands of people who have MS, and particularly in 

Saskatchewan. So welcome to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of Moose 

Jaw and the surrounding area which speaks to the need for 

improved health care in the Five Hills Health District. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide the funding for the 

expansion and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my constituents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions today in 

opposition to the government‟s Bill 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act, and Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade 

Union Act, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are from the residents of Battleford, Gallivan, 

Denholm, North Battleford, and Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the Sask Party‟s decision to axe 

Station 20 West in Saskatoon. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition, many of 

them are from my constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place 

from streets like Howell, 37th, and Madison. But there are also 

other people from Saskatoon who signed from the downtown 

area — 1st Avenue, 3rd Avenue — also on the east side, on 

Cumberland as well, and one individual from Martensville, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Mother’s Day 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

Sunday is Mother‟s Day, a day to reflect and celebrate the 

important role that our mothers play. Historically Mother‟s Day 

began in Britain as Mothering Sunday and was timed to 

coincide with the fourth Sunday in Lent. The North American 

holiday was loosely inspired by the British one and traditionally 

falls on the second Sunday of May. The first Mother‟s Day was 

celebrated on May 10, 1908, in West Virginia. 

 

For many, Mother‟s Day means breakfast in bed or a trip out for 

brunch. It is a day for flowers and cards, hugs and kisses and, in 

these days, interactive emails for those of us who may have 

waited until the last moment. Mother‟s Day is also the busiest 

day for the telephone companies. As Saskatchewan‟s 

population grows, so too do Mother‟s Day calls. SaskTel‟s 

projecting a 4 per cent increase this year with over 1 million 

long-distance calls attempted, expected this May 11. This is the 

first increase in the last five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for me, my own mother, Laurie Duncan, has 

played such an important role in my life and yet I don‟t think 

that I‟ve recognized her enough for the mother that she has been 

and continues to be for me and my siblings. Mr. Speaker, with 

two mischievous brats for sons by the time she was 20, and the 

mother to a chosen daughter a few years later, my mother 

provided a home for her children that all children should have 

— one filled with love, laughter, encouragement, and 

discipline. Lots of discipline, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we approach the second Sunday in May, I want to wish my 

mother and mother-in-law and to all the mothers in this 

Assembly a happy and restful Mother‟s Day. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



May 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

World Lupus Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, May 10 is World Lupus Day. 

Every day more than 5 million people worldwide struggle with 

the debilitating health consequences of lupus, a potentially fatal 

autoimmune disease capable of damaging virtually any part of 

the body. 

 

Nine out of ten people with lupus are women. Eighty per cent of 

new lupus cases are diagnosed amongst women ages 14 to 44. 

Lupus therefore often strikes young women just when they are 

beginning their post-secondary education, starting their careers, 

or starting a family. Long-worked-for goals are clearly thwarted 

at the eve of achievement. 

 

In its most severe form lupus can cause kidney failure, heart 

failure, or lung failure, impaired neurological function, strokes, 

heart attacks, and death. A majority of those affected must live 

with debilitating pain and profound fatigue which generally 

affects the quality of all their life. 

 

Despite enormous public health implications, lupus remains a 

dangerously underrated and underappreciated women‟s health 

issue. It is hoped that greater public awareness of this disease 

will bring about improved health care services, increased 

research, and ultimately a cure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Art Auction for Regina & District Food Bank 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday I had the 

pleasure of attending Filling Empty Bowls, the third annual art 

auction and fundraiser in support of Regina & District Food 

Bank which is hosted by Alfredo‟s Fresh Pasta & Bistro. This 

was a great event which had local artists donating bowls and 

other pieces of art to be auctioned off to support the Regina 

Food Bank. This was a fun evening for a great cause, raising 

over 21,000 for needy residents of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, food banks serve an essential role to those trying 

to make ends meet in the inner city. With increasing housing 

costs and food prices, it‟s important that we support our food 

banks so that vulnerable people are able to put good, nutritious 

food on the table for their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the former premier we saw food bank usage 

skyrocket by over 50 per cent. Well this is a new government. 

In our first budget, we provided an additional 5 million to 

support food banks and community-based organizations. And 

just last month our government came forward with over 

440,000 so that meat from Saskatchewan Pork could end up on 

food bank shelves where it will help the needs of thousands of 

people. 

 

Thanks to all of those who worked hard to put this wonderful 

art auction and fundraising event together. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Wings Over Wascana Nature Festival 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, where in the world can 

you meet Ozzie, a great horned owl, or learn about bats and 

bust some myths about these fascinating flying mammals, or go 

for a night hike or do some star and planet gazing? 

 

Where can you go for a bird walk with CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Radio‟s bird man, Trevor Herriot? 

Where can you go for a nature walk with John Acorn, the nature 

nut and television show host? Where can you meet Wilma the 

falcon, learn to build a birdhouse, or meet Sanders, a live 

burrowing owl, or for that matter dissect owl pellets? Where 

can you learn to do your own bird count and see a bird banding 

demonstration? 

 

Where in the world can you meet marsh monsters or visit an 

eco-friendly model campsite? Where can you learn to make 

your own nature journal or learn about landscaping with native 

plants, and have your face painted? 

 

Where, Mr. Speaker? Well it‟s very close to this Legislative 

Building and in the Wascana Centre. What I have been referring 

to are but some of the activities in and around Wascana Marsh 

during the Wings over Wascana Nature Festival taking place 

May 9 and 10. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wascana Centre is not only the setting for 

Wascana Lake, it is also home to Wascana Marsh, a thriving 

wildlife habitat and a federal migratory bird sanctuary. Please 

join me in recognizing the organizers of the Wings over 

Wascana Nature Festival for their efforts in opening our eyes 

and ears to an appreciation of our immediate natural habitat. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Long-time Family Owners Sell Regina Beach Café 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After 79 years 

of operation at Regina Beach, Butler‟s Fish & Chips will 

change hands. It‟s the end of an era. Rick and Dianna Butler 

have sold the café which has been owned and operated by 

members of the Butler family since 1928. In 1928, Maurice and 

Priscilla Butler moved to Regina Beach and rented, and then 

bought, the Blue Bird Café which had been built in 1920. At 

that time, there were flocks of bluebirds at Regina Beach, so 

even their house behind the café became known as the bluebird 

cottage. 

 

Many stories have been told, Mr. Speaker, over the years, about 

the café and the dozens of people who worked for the Butlers 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

and how much fun they had. This included Butler children, 

grandchildren, nieces, and nephews who were peeling potatoes 

from the time they were eight years old. 

 

And people would drive from miles around, Mr. Speaker, for 

Butler‟s fish and chips, including my own family, Mr. Speaker. 

Butler‟s café became a favourite hangout and gathering place 

that began to represent the community of Regina Beach. In fact 

it made the resort famous. If you said, let‟s have fish and chips, 

someone would immediately say, let‟s go to Butler‟s at the 

Beach. 

 

The Blue Bird Café sign still hangs above the café, but the 

Butler name is gone. I wish the new owners, Glenn and 

Veronica Lucas, much success and hope that the café will 

remain a favourite hangout and gathering spot for many years to 

come and continue to serve the same famous fish and chips. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Keepers of the Land 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In my 

continuing effort to highlight the northern keepers of the land, I 

would like to highlight a long-time fisherman and trapper from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. Angus Gardiner. Angus has been fishing 

since 1963 after his father, John Gardiner, taught him how to 

fish and trap and live off the land. Angus proudly points out that 

his grandfather, George Gardiner, was also a fisherman and 

trapper, and now he teaches his son Irwin how to fish and trap 

as well. Angus is very proud to say that he comes from 

generations of fishermen and trappers and families that have 

lived off the land for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Angus raised his family through fishing and 

trapping, and although he did work at a northern mine site for a 

year, trapping and fishing were in his blood and he could not 

stay away from the land. Angus and his family took from the 

land what they needed and left the rest. Angus Gardiner, 

fisherman/trapper from Ile-a-la-Crosse, has this message for all 

of us to hear, quote: 

 

Watch the land because when ducks die in the hundreds as 

they did in Alberta, it is a big worry. We eat and live off 

the land, so how you treat the land is important to 

everyone. Some of our people don‟t eat ducks or fish 

because they worry about chemicals or pollution. Trap 

lines and fur blocks also need to be respected. The noise 

and clear cutting chase the animals away and these 

animals will not come back. In the 1960‟s we had 

thousands of caribou in our area and we took what we 

needed to live and that was it — today there are no caribou 

in our area anymore. So do things differently and please 

respect our land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all need to hear what Angus Gardiner, 

fisherman and trapper from Ile-a-la-Crosse, tells us, and we all 

need to pay attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Sherbrooke Nursing Home Experience 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to share with you 

and through you a very moving story about the human 

condition. This past Saturday I attended a fundraiser for 

Sherbrooke nursing home. Sherbrooke nursing home is in my 

constituency and it cares for level 3 and 4 patients. These 

patients need the highest level of care as they are dependent on 

others for their basic needs. 

 

One of the patients was at the fundraiser and he shared his 

story. He was about 46 years old, riding his bicycle along the 

riverbank and crashed into another bicycle. The collision left 

him paralyzed, as he broke his neck. He shared that he was 

considering travelling to Europe to be euthanized. 

 

Around this time a Saskatoon artist received a grant in order to 

provide art classes for the patients at Sherbrooke. The artist 

worked with this gentleman and taught him to hold a pencil or a 

brush in his mouth so he could paint and draw. The paralyzed 

man would also drive his wheelchair through paint and then on 

to canvas. Through art these patients can share their feelings, 

and the paralyzed gentleman has chosen life. To reflect their life 

these patients call themselves the insiders. Mr. Speaker, what a 

celebration of life. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call oral questions, while we like to 

welcome our visitors to the Assembly, I‟d just ask visitors to be 

mindful of the fact that they‟re not to participate in any form of 

debate on the floor here. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Nuclear Energy Development 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister responsible for Crowns says the Sask Party is heading 

toward a nuclear reactor before the end of their mandate, but it‟s 

clear from yesterday they haven‟t done the work, or they won‟t 

provide answers. The Minister of Energy says he doesn‟t know 

of any possible sites, but the minister responsible for Crowns 

told reporters that there are and I quote “. . . numerous other 

potential sites for a nuclear plant in the province besides those 

mentioned in the report.” 

 

To the government: where are the numerous potential sites, and 

can they name them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 



May 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

Speaker. Member opposite will know that this government is 

very open to the idea of a nuclear plant in Saskatchewan. We‟re 

open to the idea of private sector partners coming into 

Saskatchewan, bringing their expertise, bringing their ideas, 

bringing their dollars, and bringing the jobs here into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Much work has to be done as was explained yesterday, and we 

will be looking at those private sector partners to do some due 

diligence, to look at the appropriate site, and to bring it forward. 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] siting study that was the 

subject of much debate yesterday indicated two sites that were 

put forward to the previous government, to the previous 

administration, and the member opposite will know all about 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you review the Sask 

Party platform, there was no mention of a nuclear reactor in 

their platform and, in fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

commitment to the Crown sector. 

 

The minister in charge of the file either doesn‟t know his file or 

is secretive and doesn‟t want to tell us. The minister responsible 

for Crowns says he‟s aware of numerous other potential sites, 

but Saskatchewan people are on a need-to-know basis. 

According to the minister, they don‟t need to know if a reactor 

might end up in their backyard where they spend their summers, 

or be connected to their water supply. 

 

So to the government: can they name the numerous potential 

sites for a nuclear reactor and why aren‟t they prepared to share 

that with Saskatchewan citizens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I can assure the member opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, that I know my file very, very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Unlike, unlike the member 

opposite who didn‟t know if she saw the study. Yes, she did see 

the study; no, she didn‟t see the study. Then she said that the 

study was rejected. Well if you didn‟t see the study, how can 

you reject the study, Mr. Speaker? That‟s the question that the 

member opposite hasn‟t answered whatsoever. 

 

As far as our commitment to the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, it is very 

clear. We are committed to the Crown Corporations, SaskPower 

included. Members opposite took a very narrow view where 

they thought that every dollar that‟s risked in this province 

should be a taxpayer‟s dollar, and that‟s not the case with this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Since the member doesn‟t want to tell us the 

names of the sites, perhaps I can suggest some locations, and 

the minister can just nod yes or no. I‟ll start off with a 

suggestion from the Enterprise and Innovation minister; is it 

Meadow Lake? How about Kenosee Lake? Is it Candle Lake or 

maybe it‟s Rafferty. Mr. Speaker, this would be a whole lot 

simpler if the members opposite would come clean with the 

people of the province. 

 

To the government: according to the minister we are less than 

four years away from a decision on a nuclear reactor. Where 

will it be located, because Saskatchewan people have the right 

to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this Henny Penny the 

sky is falling argument does nothing — adds nothing — to this 

debate. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite who represents a 

Saskatoon constituency, as I do, probably read the newspaper 

this morning and I‟m going to quote. The editorial says, 

“Anti-nuke gang won‟t carry day in province now.” And I‟m 

quoting, “Saskatchewan has paid dearly for listening to a bunch 

of radicals who are willing to sacrifice everything — including 

the province‟s future — in an . . . [ill-conceived] bid to stymie 

civil nuclear development,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would suggest that‟s more of the same we‟re that hearing 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Cost of Living in the North 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Northern Affairs. Whether it‟s Cumberland 

House, La Ronge, La Loche, or Buffalo Narrows, the extremely 

high cost of power to the North is making it very hard on 

families and poor families. Margaret Naldzil who is a social 

development worker in Fond-du-Lac area, she estimates that the 

average household will be forced to spend nearly $500 a month 

for power. In the coldest winter months, these costs can reach 

nearly $1,000 per month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, combined with the high cost to northerners for 

food, for transportation, for basic supplies, families in the North 

aren‟t seeing all the benefits of the economic boom of our 

province. To the Minister of Northern Affairs: how long will 

the Saskatchewan Party government ignore the people of the 

North while they struggle with unfair costs? 

 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you very much to the member opposite for the question. 

It‟s an important question that we all have to ask ourselves in 

Saskatchewan, the cost of power generation and the needs 

going forward in light of our commitments around greenhouse 

gases. And that‟s why this government is committed to looking 

at all aspects of power generation. We‟re committed to wind 

generation. We‟re committed to gas power generation. We‟re 

committed to hydro development in the North, to clean coal, 

and also to nuclear development. It‟s important to take a 

well-rounded approach free of political philosophy to ensure 

that Saskatchewan people get the power at the lowest possible 

cost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Northern Affairs. Mr. Speaker, power isn‟t the only inflated 

cost that northerners face every day. In Uranium City through 

the winter months, the price of gasoline was steady at $2.39 a 

litre. That‟s double the cost of gas in southern areas of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, people in the North are required to 

travel regularly in order to visit family, to buy food, and to 

access services. Many people access . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member may place his question. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many people 

access medical services by using medical taxis that shuttle 

people to and from hospitals and clinics. The extreme cost of 

gas in the North makes it difficult for families to afford the 

service and get necessary medical treatment. 

 

Once again my question is to the Minister of Northern Affairs. 

Why won‟t the minister commit to doing anything about the 

cost of power for northerners? Will she do anything about the 

extreme cost of gasoline to northerners? Will she do anything 

for the people of the North while sitting on a 1.5 to $2 billion 

nest egg, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and native affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, not only to 

the member across but to the people of the North, I‟m very 

pleased to tell you that not just the Minister of Northern Affairs 

but all of this government is very interested in what‟s happened 

in the North. The North is part of the economic boom that we 

all are looking forward to. After 16 years in government, that 

member didn‟t do anything for the North, and now he stands up 

and saying that we should do. 

 

In fact I‟m really interested to read what was written by his own 

Commonwealth magazine when they said that “Lost . . . [in] the 

„booming economy‟ rhetoric was any mention of the fact that 

not everyone is sharing the benefits.” 

 

We know that northerners weren‟t sharing the benefits, and 

that‟s why at the round table last week we had eight ministers 

talking to the people in the North, saying what we were going to 

do as the new government for northerners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that answer‟s insulting to the 

intelligence of the people of the North because everybody in the 

North knows, Mr. Speaker, that when we were in power, we 

were paying something like $900 million on interest payments 

alone to the debt left by that former government, Mr. Speaker. 

We never sat, we never sat on one and a half to $2 billion in the 

bank, Mr. Speaker. We never had a booming economy, Mr. 

Speaker. We never had record oil. So once again, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m going to ask the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Members will 

come to order. I ask the member from Athabasca to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the high cost of power, the high 

cost of fuel, the high cost of food — Mr. Speaker, northern 

Saskatchewan, whether it‟s in the Cumberland constituency or 

Athabasca, they‟re struggling every day with these costs while 

this government sits on one and a half to $2 billion in the bank, 

Mr. Speaker. Once again, whether it‟s high cost of fuel, high 

cost of food, high cost of power, we look to the Minister of 

Northern Affairs to champion northern issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the question: is she doing that? The answer 

is she‟s not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I was very honoured last 

week to Co-Chair a table on the northern economy with the 

elected leaders in the North. And they came from the North 

with lots of optimism and lots of enthusiasm for this new 

government and the potential we have. In fact the quote from 

the member who used to be representing the North, Joan Beatty, 

said, “Unfortunately as a government we have not done well 

when it comes to dealing with First Nations and Métis peoples.” 

Well this government is working with the First Nations people, 

the Métis people, and the northern people to ensure that 

everyone shares in the benefits of this province. 

 



May 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Grain Transportation 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, we heard last week that this 

government has no intentions of helping agriculture producers 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Athabasca will 

come to order. Member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, we heard last week that this 

government has no intentions of helping agriculture producers 

with rising input costs — costs from fuel and costs from 

fertilizer. But it‟s not just the input costs that are going up. 

Transportation costs are going up as well. The Canadian 

Transportation Agency announced on April 24 that rates will 

increase 8 per cent in 2008-2009. Farmers are now facing the 

highest ever annual increase in rail rates for grain. High 

transportation costs could very well prevent farmers from 

benefiting from the increase in grain prices. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Infrastructure: does his 

government have any plan — any plan at all — to help 

producers who are being hit from all sides, including freight 

costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member knows full well that 

transportation costs have been a problem all through rural 

Saskatchewan for many, many years, and we understand that as 

a government. 

 

Where we‟re coming from, I guess unlike the previous 

government, is we‟re trying to do everything we can to reduce 

costs for our farmers out there and ranchers. One of the things 

we‟ve done is to deal with the education tax rebate on farm land 

and ranchland, Mr. Speaker, something that farmers have been 

asking for for many years, something they didn‟t receive when 

that government was in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly understand transportation costs, fuel 

costs, fertilizer costs are all going up, but at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, grain prices have also improved. So I think, Mr. 

Speaker, sometimes we take it hand in hand but look very 

optimistic to the future on the grain side of the agriculture 

industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, lots has changed since 1992. 

Farm size, rail track mileage, rail service and car supply simply 

come to mind. But one thing that hasn‟t changed since 1992 is 

the cost assumption in the composite index used by the federal 

government to examine rail rates in this country. 

 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture, along with the 

provincial organization such as APAS [Agricultural Producers 

Association of Saskatchewan], is calling for the federal 

government to put farmers first by beginning immediately a 

costing review. To the minister: will he join with the farmers in 

calling for immediate costing review for grain transportation by 

the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know 

and the member knows full well that there‟s a service review 

going on, that they‟re looking into the service provided to 

farmers out there. I think it‟s one of the biggest bones of 

contention right now is that the railways are probably, in the 

farmer‟s mind, not the most popular people in the world 

because grain doesn‟t seem to be a priority of movement. And I 

think that‟s one of the problems we have out there. 

 

When the member talks about a costing review, the Minister of 

Highways and my department, Mr. Speaker, are looking at the 

costing review, at what the costs are for transportation of 

products of all kinds, not just agriculture products, but 

especially agriculture products at this time when all input costs 

are going up. 

 

When talking about a costing review, though, I think we would 

have some cautions looking at that, Mr. Speaker, in saying that 

railways really right now aren‟t looking at making grain a 

priority or farm products a priority right now, so we have to be 

very careful where we go with this, Mr. Speaker, when asking 

the railways to provide a better service for less cost. And I think 

I agree with the member that transportation costs are very high 

and we have to look at it, but we have to go in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time is elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, even the federal Standing 

Committee on Agriculture and Agri-Food understands. They 

unanimously supported a resolution calling for the Minister of 

Transport to ask the commission to include freight rates and 

their impacts on grain shippers in the review. Mr. Speaker, this 

motion was tabled by a Conservative and supported by none 

other than Minister Carol Skelton. And yet this Sask Party 

government doesn‟t think the costing review is necessary. To 

the minister: if Carol Skelton is willing to stand up for 

Saskatchewan farmers, why on earth isn‟t the Saskatchewan 

Party government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we do certainly 

support the level of service review. I think I‟ve talked about that 

on many occasions already, that we believe there has to be an 

improvement to the service provided to agriculture out there, 

and we will be pushing for those changes. 

 

But for the member to insinuate that this problem just happened 

. . . This problem‟s been there for year after year, back to the 

days when that member was farming, Mr. Speaker. This didn‟t 

happen today. And the previous government did absolutely 

nothing for 16 years, and in five months, expects our 

government to have made the changes that he‟s looking for 

today. 

 

So what I would ask the member opposite is to back us when 

we‟re dealing with the federal government and the railways to 

improve service at the most reasonable cost possible, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader from Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Gas Prices and Election Promises 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in August of 2005 the price of gas at the pumps in this 

province spiked to over $1 a litre. On September 7, 2005, the 

member from Swift Current, then the leader of the opposition, 

said and I quote, that “Saskatchewan people deserve a break.” 

He said it was time for the provincial government of the day, 

and again I quote “. . . to climb off their stack of oil and gas 

revenues and give the people of Saskatchewan some of their 

money back.” 

 

Well last night, Mr. Speaker, I observed people here in the 

capital city at the pumps paying not just over $1 a litre, but 

$1.31.9 a litre. So my question is for the Premier. Does he 

believe today what he believed in 2005 that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve a break? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province certainly do deserve a break. They got a big one on 

November 7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we have said in the 

preparation of our budget we certainly, in a priority manner we 

looked at the promises we made to the people of Saskatchewan 

in the campaign. We were able to realize some 40 of those 

promises in our very first budget. The most significant promise 

we made on the tax side was to bring relief for educational 

property tax, and we certainly did that. 

I said in this House yesterday and I‟ve said it in scrums and I‟ve 

said it in interviews, that we will continue to monitor all of the 

issues that are affecting our citizens because we fundamentally 

believe that the people of this province need and should share in 

the prosperity that this province is realizing, and we are 

committed to doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance wants to 

talk about the Premier‟s promises. Well let me remind him 

again, in September of 2005 the Premier promised that a Sask 

Party government would cut the provincial gas tax by 1 cent for 

every dollar that the world price of oil exceeded $60 a barrel. 

That‟s what he promised. 

 

Well yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the price of oil reached almost 

$124 dollars a barrel. So if the Premier would keep his promise, 

that would mean the total elimination, the total elimination of 

the provincial fuel tax. So my question again is for the Premier. 

Will he keep his promise that he made to the people of 

Saskatchewan in 2005? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, certainly 

the Leader of the Opposition understands that we are in very 

uncharted territory in terms of the volatility of the price of oil in 

this country and in the world. Certainly, certainly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. There‟s ample 

time to place questions if members give the minister the 

opportunity to respond. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, certainly in 

the preparation of this year‟s budget, there were estimations of 

what the price of oil may do in the future that ranged very 

significantly. They ranged from as low as $65 a barrel to as 

high as $125 a barrel. And certainly it‟s easy to right now look 

and say, currently it‟s $120-plus a barrel. There is no certainly 

in the industry that this is going to be maintained. And so it‟s a 

very, very volatile issue that we certainly need to keep a very 

clear . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. The 

minister may finalize his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it is certainly . . . The 

price of gas at the pumps is only one of a number of issues that 

we are closely monitoring to make sure that our citizens are 

aptly looked after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 



May 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is 

right. This is uncharted territory. He‟s sitting on a mountain of 

money so tall that he can‟t see the top of it. Mr. Speaker, we are 

talking about $124-a-barrel oil. 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Members will 

come to order and allow the Leader of the Opposition to place 

his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the Premier of the 

province today said that the people of Saskatchewan deserve a 

break. They deserve a break. He‟s sitting on a mountain of 

money, Mr. Speaker, a mountain of money. Now is this another 

example, is this another example . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Leader of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, is this another example of a 

group of people, a party who will say anything in opposition, 

but do nothing in government on behalf of the people they seek 

to represent? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we have said clearly in 

the platform under which we ran for the election that there were 

priorities that this government was going to initiate on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. One of the priorities we said we 

were going to do is provide meaningful tax relief on educational 

property tax. We‟re doing that in the budget. 

 

The other thing that we quickly realized, that we quickly 

realized in reviewing the dismal record of the previous 

government over 16 years, that there had to be significant 

improvement to the infrastructure of this province. And so we 

are using funds that we have available to fix the highways and 

roads in this province so the people can actually drive . . . 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members are not prepared to allow 

individuals to place their answer to their question, we will move 

straight forward to government orders. Minister of Finance may 

complete his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are carefully and methodically going through the 

review of things that need to be done in order to make sure that 

we build a sustainable economy going forward. We have 

promised to do that. We are doing it in a responsible way with 

the best interests of Saskatchewan at heart, and we will continue 

to do just that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, back in 2005 when the . . . 

The Speaker: — Please allow the member to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, back in 2005 and even before 

when the Premier was making promises about giving 

Saskatchewan people a break at the pumps, the now Prime 

Minister, Mr. Stephen Harper, then in opposition, joined with 

the then leader of the opposition here in calling on the federal 

Liberal government to cut the GST [goods and services tax] at 

the pumps. In fact Mr. Harper had a plan which said that a 

Conservative government wouldn‟t charge the GST on any 

price of fuel at the pump over 85 cents a litre. 

 

Well I want to ask the Premier, has he been in touch with his 

good friend, Stephen Harper? Has he called on now the 

Conservative government to cut the GST for motorists in 

Saskatchewan? Has he called on his friend, Stephen Harper, to 

keep Stephen Harper‟s promise to the people of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, clearly this government 

has stated in the past and will continue to state in the future that 

it is our intention to build a respectful, professional relationship 

with whoever occupies the federal government in Ottawa, and 

we‟re going to continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, because this is 

important for the well-being of our citizens. We are at an 

opportunity — now that we have a forward-thinking, 

progressive, determined government to realize the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people in place. This province has a potential 

to prosper like it never has in the past under that government‟s 

tyranny. Mr. Speaker, they are not only unable to fulfill their 

own promises; now they look whimsically at the opportunity to 

criticize us when we are actually keeping our word. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Round Table Conference with First Nations 

and Métis People 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

next week there will be a gathering which will have an 

important impact on the First Nations and Métis people in our 

province and in sustaining our provincial economy. This event 

will take place in Saskatoon, and it‟ll be a historic event. 

 

It‟s a round-table conference on consultation and 

accommodation with First Nations and Métis people. Mr. 

Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada rulings have determined 

that the government has a duty to consult with First Nations and 

Métis people when their decisions have the potential to impact 

Aboriginal or treaty rights. 

 

This new Government of Saskatchewan takes this duty very 

seriously. In fact we believe that it is more than just a duty. It is 

a true opportunity, an opportunity to ensure that First Nations 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

and Métis people can more fully share in the economic 

prosperity of this province. That‟s why we promised in last 

fall‟s election campaign to hold this round table. 

 

We heard the concerns of the First Nations and Métis people 

about the approach of the previous government. We heard them 

loud and clear. We knew how concerned they were that they 

were not consulted when the previous government developed 

and released their consultation guidelines. And we also heard 

industry call for more certainty. We considered all the concerns 

and committed to do something about it. This consultation 

round table is the very first step in that direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations, Métis, industry, and government 

will be at the round table. In fact representatives of these 

organizations have been sitting down together and planning the 

agenda for the two-day event. This new Government of 

Saskatchewan will be listening to what they have to say and 

will use what we have to hear to help craft a new approach, an 

approach that will benefit all of Saskatchewan people. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond to the ministerial 

statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is it 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

the minister for providing me with a copy of her remarks before 

question period so that I might provide a more informed 

response. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we‟ve had a history of 

working in partnership with First Nations and Métis people. We 

freely embrace the responsibilities and benefits that arise from 

being treaty people. 

 

The treaties are living documents, Mr. Speaker. They are signed 

for as long as the sun shines, the grass grows and the water 

flows. And certainly the treaties rest on human shoulders and 

their implementation rests with all levels of government and 

certainly with the signatories to those treaties, the First Nations 

of Canada. And they brought together the Crown, the First 

Nations, and they were signed under the Creator. 

 

And there is a responsibility and a benefit that is to accrue to all 

parties in terms of signing of those covenants, those sacred 

documents. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the implementation of those 

treaties, there was mutual benefit that was intended. That 

mutual benefit continues to be subject to evolution, to 

implementation over the years, and certainly sometimes that 

takes place in partnership through government-to-government 

relationships. Sometimes it takes place in the courts. The duty 

to consult era of treaty implementation certainly arises from 

Supreme Court decisions, and we recognize on this side the 

responsibilities that arise from that to work through the duty to 

consult, what that means, and the certainty that it provides for 

all parties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we look forward to what happens at the conference. We look 

forward with great interest to what happens at the conference. 

We note also with interest that the first part of it is open to the 

public and certainly we‟ll be there watching it very closely. The 

second day of the conference is closed to the public when the 

substantive discussions will be taking place. We note that with 

interest, Mr. Speaker, but I guess the main thing is that there‟s a 

benefit, a mutual benefit, that was intended by the treaties and it 

is our hope and our belief that this should be a historic 

opportunity to realize that benefit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 6, The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007, and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007, be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



May 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

The Speaker: — Question. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Actually I would ask all those in favour say 

aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. The motion is . . . 

Standing vote, call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 10:54 until 11:20.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 

brought forward by the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour, that Bill No. 6, The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now read the third time. Those 

in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 35] 

 

Stewart Elhard Bjornerud 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris D‟Autremont 

Hickie Cheveldayoff Heppner 

Gantefoer Harpauer Norris 

Morgan Hutchinson Huyghebaert 

Brkich Hart Kirsch 

Schriemer Allchurch Weekes 

Chisholm Wilson Duncan 

Michelson LeClerc Ottenbreit 

Ross Reiter Bradshaw 

Harrison McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

Order. Please allow the vote to proceed without interference. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Yates Higgins Belanger 

Furber Iwanchuk Forbes 

Morin Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 

favour of the motion, 35; those opposed, 18. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the House Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

fourth report. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the House 

Services Committee: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

House Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The House will move back to orders of the 

day and deal with the written questions. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table the answers to questions 628 

to 649. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 628 to 649 tabled. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Now we try to adjourn, Mr. Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2008 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly adjourns until 

Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:25.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1257 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1258 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1258 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1258 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1258 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mother’s Day  

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1258 

 World Lupus Day 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1259 

 Art Auction for Regina & District Food Bank 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1259 

 Wings Over Wascana Nature Festival 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1259 

 Long-time Family Owners Sell Regina Beach Café 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1259 

 Keepers of the Land 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1260 

 Sherbrooke Nursing Home Experience 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1260 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Nuclear Energy Development 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1260 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1260 

 Cost of Living in the North 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1262 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

 Grain Transportation 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1263 

 Gas Prices and Election Promises 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1264 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1264 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Round Table Conference with First Nations and Métis People 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1265 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


