




















































Hansard: April 14, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 25B  MONDAY, APRIL 14, 2008, 6 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 877 

 April 14, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 18:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 6 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Being 6 p.m., debate will continue. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

continue on on Bill No. 6, the amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. This government is attempting to justify their action in 

tabling these amendments in a manner that appears to be as 

innocuous as modernization or housekeeping. But it seems plain 

to me that the real motivation is to install their friends and 

enshrine a piece of legislation designed to limit the freedom of 

association that as entrenched in the Canadian Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms. They also herald this dawning of a new age in a 

forceful and brash manner so that civil servants can be warned 

to heed the call. 

 

The real motivation behind Bill 6, Mr. Speaker, is to provide an 

economic climate with a steady decline in union density and a 

labour climate that will all but eliminate the applications for 

certification by employees who wish to join a trade union or 

employee association. 

 

There are other amendments to The Trade Union Act as 

proposed by Bill No. 6, and I will turn to these now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the proposed new section 6 of The Trade Union Act, the 

government will require that acceptable evidence of union 

support will be determined based on regulations made by 

cabinet, not the Labour Relations Board as is in the case for all 

other regulations, forms, etc., relating to The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would cabinet be doing this? Again is there a 

lack of confidence in the new hand-picked, newly appointed 

Chair of the board? Maybe with the firing of all the experienced 

adjudicative employees of the board, there are legitimate 

concerns about the depth of understanding that is required to 

draft appropriate regulations and the like. 

 

What we see, Mr. Speaker, is once again the heavy hand of the 

new regime intervening where a competent quasi-judicial 

tribunal, the Labour Relations Board, had the authority to draft 

regulations in consultation with stakeholders. I can understand 

if the government is hesitant to let the experienced take on the 

task, but surely the answer was not to fire all of the adjudicative 

employees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Seibel‟s appointment was expiring early this fall, so one 

would think that an orderly transition could have been planned. 

The plan could have preserved the operation of the board, 

retained some of the organizational experience and knowledge, 

allowed for a new chairperson to access the two remaining 

Vice-Chairs and provided continuity to the board. 

 

Most importantly it would not have left significant applicants 

wondering what will happen to their cases, wondering if they‟ll 

have to undergo the significant costs of having the case heard 

over again, and wondering if a disruption to the operation of the 

board will mean even further delays in justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is another example of a top-down order of government the 

Premier seems intent on establishing with little or no regard to 

the wake his path of destruction leaves behind. Mr. Speaker, 

this province‟s economy is humming, and we have many 

challenges to contend with in order to make sure that it all 

works well for the people of Saskatchewan. The most 

pronounced issue is the critical labour shortage facing 

employers and not the interference with workers‟ rights or the 

operation of the board established to resolve disputes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this government so afraid of unions that it will 

insist on controlling from the centre of government everything 

that has to do with workers‟ freedom to join and support a 

union? I say this, Mr. Speaker, because this proposed legislation 

and the mystery regulations to be developed by cabinet or at 

least adopted by cabinet exude an ominous tone that is so 

heavy-handed in favour of the state and employers that it is 

impossible to suss out the real reasoning behind the blasé 

explanations given by the Minister of Advanced Education and 

Labour and/or when the minister stumbles, the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister Responsible for Labour or the 

Premier who was involved in drafting this legislation, whose 

axe is being ground? What favour is being paid? 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning to the proposed new section 1.2 of this 

government‟s anti-trade union Act, the following is said: 

 

The board must require as evidence of each employee‟s 

support mentioned in subsection (1.1) written support of 

the application, as prescribed in the regulations made by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, made within 90 days 

of the filing of the application”. 

 

Again the Sask Party government has drawn from the British 

Columbia model, and my guess is that the government is 

intending to insert some language that makes it clear that the 

card the employee is signing identifies that it is intended for the 

purpose of certification. 

 

For the members opposite, I do want to point out that there is a 

section in the current Act that provides that the board may 

rescind an order or reject support evidence obtained by 

fraudulent means. If the members opposite are unsure of that 

provision or unable to locate it, let that stand as further evidence 

that they are ill-prepared and inexperienced. 

 

Being caught short can happen when your strings are being 

pulled by unforeseen forces, Mr. Speaker. If a trade union was 

to somehow misrepresent the signing of a membership card or 

cards as support evidence, the remedies in the current trade 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

union Act rectifies the transgression and provides a strong 

deterrent against fraudulent behaviour in any form. However 

the current government is proposing by regulation adopted by 

cabinet to begin controlling and dictating how trade unions will 

sign up new members. 

 

This is a gross intrusion, Mr. Speaker. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, this 

would wash well with the junta in Myanmar, formerly known as 

Burma, but in Canada this kind of state interference with any 

legitimate organization, let alone the business of a trade union is 

an unwarranted affront by a central government to the freely 

conducted business of democratically accepted organizations. 

Furthermore it is unnecessary by virtue of the protections 

already in place in The Trade Union Act. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m going to focus at this time on two other amendments to 

section 6 of the current trade union Act: 

 

(2) Clause 6 (2)(b) is amended: 

 

(a) by striking out “25%” and substituting “45%”; 

and 

 

(b) by striking out “6 months” and substituting “90 

days”. 

 

The comments I have made in relation to the amendments on 

6(1) and (2) apply to these amendments as well, but I do want 

to spend a moment on the change of stale-dating support 

evidence from six months to 90 days. Once again this shorter 

time frame appears to be drawn from British Columbia‟s 

legislation. Why, Mr. Speaker? The jurisdictions in Canada are 

all over the map on this. And if there is a commonality, it is in 

the form of a nominal initiation fee ranging for $1 to $5. At 

most, four jurisdictions have a 90-day or three-month expiry of 

support evidence requirement. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, what decisions of the Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board, with an attentive eye on those decisions that 

had been judicially reviewed, have pointed to some bias or error 

in law that needs to be remedied in relation to expiry of support 

evidence. Is the 90-day drop-dead requirement just another 

attack on trade unions, which I think it is, or does the 

government of the day not know about the card revocation rules 

already in place or doesn‟t the government trust workers to 

understand what they mean when they sign a union application 

for membership card? Is this more Burma from the Premier? 

 

(3) Clause 6(2)(c) is repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment is a recipe for mischief. For the 

enlightenment of the members opposite, this section of The 

Trade Union Act is commonly referred to as the raid provision. 

In a union raid of another union, the duly certified union has the 

right to rely on the principle of accretion. This principle has 

long been upheld in jurisdictions throughout Canada and has 

been articulated by the Supreme Court of Canada. The proposed 

amendment in Bill 6 takes the jurisprudence and the rules 

governing raids and tosses them out the window. 

 

I see from the members opposite that the term accretion is not 

something that they are familiar with, Mr. Speaker. Accretion is 

the recognition that a union that has been duly certified by a 

labour relations board takes its evidence of support for the 

incumbent or certified union a number equal to 50 per cent plus 

one of the employees in the bargaining unit. This is accepted as 

evidence of majority support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This amendment allows for a union that wishes to raid another 

union to apply to the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board to 

be the bargaining representative with 45 per cent support of the 

employees in question and to require the Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board to conduct a vote. By virtue of Bill 6, a raiding 

application for a change in union representation based on 

evidence of 45 per cent by the raiding union will be mandatory 

in spite of the fact that the existing union continues to have the 

support of the majority of the workers in question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand where the government is going 

with this — an ideological desire to thumb their noses at 

employees‟ express wishes. But why create such mischief? 

Why create this unnecessary disruption in the workplace? Why 

burden the employers with this intrusion? Why burden the 

taxpayers with this senseless and unnecessary cost, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

At present the Labour Relations Board has the ability to reject a 

raid under the circumstances described. However Bill No. 6 will 

change the rules. Who asked for this amendment, Mr. Speaker? 

What purpose does it serve? Where is the cry to fix some 

mysterious miscarriage of justice, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This amendment is another example of the government‟s chaos 

theory in relation to industrial relations in this province. In Bill 

6 the government proposes to amend sections 10 of the current 

Trade Union Act as follows: 

 

Section 10.1 amended 

4(1) Clause 10.1(b) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(b) there is insufficient evidence before the board that 

shows that 45% or more of the employees in the 

appropriate unit support the application”. 

 

(2) Clause 10.1(c) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(c) the board finds that sufficient evidence of support 

mentioned in clause (b) would have been obtained but 

for the unfair labour practice or violation of this Act”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this entire amendment is confusing. And to assist 

the House in recognizing where this confusion lies, the rest of 

the section must be reviewed. It is the section of the Act that 

deals with certification after unfair labour practices and reads as 

follows: 

 

10.1 On an application pursuant to clause 5(a), (b) or (c), 

the board shall make an order directing a vote to be taken 

by secret ballot of all employees eligible to vote, and may 

make an order pursuant to clause 5(g), where: 

 

(a) the board finds that the employer or the employer‟s 

agent has committed an unfair labour practice or has 

otherwise violated this Act . . . 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

Now when you drop in the amendments, Mr. Speaker, the 

reading of the section gets murky. 

 

Section 10.1 amended 

4(1) Clause 10.1(b) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(b) there is insufficient evidence before the board 

that shows that 45% or more of the employees in the 

appropriate unit support the application”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the parts that amend the change to a 45 per cent 

threshold is relatively clear. However the provision in its 

entirety in layperson‟s language seems to read that the board 

shall direct a vote when the threshold has not been met and 

there is a finding of an unfair labour practice. You must read it 

in conjunction with the preamble in section (a). This has in fact 

lowered the support evidence required for a vote under the 

current Act. We on this side of the House support an initiative 

like that of course. 

 

(2) Clause 10.1(c) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(c) the board finds that sufficient evidence of support 

mentioned in clause (b) would have been obtained but 

for the unfair labour practice or violation of this Act”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this next amendment which appears to be stand 

alone as the amended (b) no longer contains the conjunctive 

and, of the current legislation, appears to direct a vote in 

instances where the support is less than the insufficient 

evidence defined in (b), but there is a finding that this 

insufficient support could have been obtained but for employer 

interference. 

 

[18:15] 

 

Again if the intent is to make it easier for unions to apply for 

and receive a vote when due to illegal employer actions the 

likelihood of achieving a majority or just the threshold as 

envisioned by the government has been put at risk, then we will 

support this amendment, as we support the freedom of 

association of employees and recognize that freedom means 

without intimidation, coercion, or threats from employers. It is 

my hope that the government‟s intention is to open up the 

remedial certification ability of the board, as that ability is the 

most effective deterrent against unlawful employer actions 

during organizing drives. 

 

Section 10.2 amended 

5(1) Clause 10.2(b) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

“(b) there is insufficient evidence before the board that 

shows that 45% or more of the employees in the 

appropriate unit support the application”. 

 

(2) Clause 10.2(c) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

“(c) the board finds that sufficient evidence of support 

mentioned in clause (b) would have been obtained but for 

the unfair labour practice or violation of this Act”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments are the replication of the 

amendments to 10.1(b) and (c) and deal with applications for 

rescission or decertification and as such I have made my 

comments. 

 

Section 11 amended 

6 Clause 11 (1)(a) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

“(a) to interfere with, restrain, intimidate, threaten, or 

coerce an employee in the exercise of any right conferred 

by this Act, but nothing in this Act precludes an employer 

from communicating facts and its opinions to its 

employees”. 

 

I want to start my comments on the basis of the mandate letter 

sent to the newly appointed Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. In that letter dated November 19, 

2007, the Premier directs the minister as follows, quote: 

 

In your capacity as Minister of Labour, establish a fair and 

balanced labour environment in Saskatchewan that 

respects the right of workers and employers by: 

Ensuring democratic workplaces by: 

[Section 2] Requiring secret ballots on any vote to 

certify a union in a workplace and a 50% plus one 

result for successful certification; and 

 

[3] Ensuring freedom of information in the workplace 

during any unionization drive, by allowing unions and 

management the opportunity to fairly communicate 

with employees. 

 

The Premier‟s mandate letter seems pretty clear and addresses 

employers‟ ability to communicate during an organizing drive 

quite specifically. The mandate letter does not address the 

employers‟ ability to communicate beyond the narrow time 

period that occurs during an organizing drive. 

 

However Bill 6 clearly opens a door by enabling employer 

interference in employees‟ unions on a continuing basis and 

unrestricted. I dare say that freedom of speech has never been 

so unfettered especially in terms of labour law. The Throne 

Speech provides some additional guidance as to the intent of the 

Premier and the Sask Party government under the maligned 

heading “Democratic Labour Laws.” Under that deceptive 

misnomer, the following is found, and I quote: 

 

The rights of workers to bargain collectively and the rights 

of employers must be respected. However, the labour 

legislative environment must also be competitive with 

other Canadian jurisdictions . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 6 proposes to amend section 11 of the current 

Act wherein unfair labour practises are defined and prohibited. 

The particular amendment focuses exclusively on clause 

11(1)(a) of the Act which references employer actions, 

including by communication, and prohibits any attempt “. . . to 

interfere with, restrain, intimidate . . . or coerce an employee [or 

employees] in the exercise of any right conferred by the Act 

. . .” This provision is commonly referred to as the employer‟s 

free speech. 

 

Given what the Premier and the Minister Responsible for 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Labour have said, Mr. Speaker, one could reasonably conclude 

that this government was considering changes that would 

clarify an employer‟s right to communicate during an 

organizing drive, a right that every employer enjoys under the 

current trade union Act at the present time, providing they don‟t 

cross the line into coercion, intimidation, and so forth. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, with this amendment, this government appears 

to be undertaking an unprecedented expansion of employer‟s 

ability to intrude in its employees‟ expressed wishes, not only 

during an organizing drive but for evermore and in all ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given that it was the express wishes of the Premier 

to be competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions — and I 

take that to mean in keeping with the common practices of other 

jurisdictions — let‟s review what this government proposes in 

comparison to the rest of Canada. What we find is that nowhere 

is the employer‟s free speech given such broad and sweeping, 

unrestricted application. 

 

What else we find, Mr. Speaker, is that when other jurisdictions 

border . . . and they only just border which is not to be confused 

with an exact match. What we find is a balance that is provided 

by way of power to order remedial certifications. But alas, Mr. 

Speaker, this government‟s actions might be akin to the adage 

that absolute power corrupts absolutely because I see no 

evidence of balance, just evidence of a long held hatred of trade 

unions. 

 

And once again the government is on public record as saying 

one thing and doing another. I want to draw your attention to 

the video message from the part-time Minister of Labour. On 

the question of employer communications, I do appreciate the 

creativity used to develop this video message, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but then I appreciated it more when it was first done 

by the government in Nova Scotia. 

 

At least they had the benefit of 16 months of consultations to 

draw from, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan we, by the minister‟s 

own admission, don‟t know who was consulted or who drafted 

the Bill or in fact who drafted the script. But nevertheless here 

is the quote directly from the material on the minister‟s website, 

question no. 2: “What is the intent of the proposed amendment 

regarding employer communications?” 

 

The minister is quoted as saying: 

 

During labour disputes, employees have the right to be 

informed in an appropriate way. 

 

Current provisions severely restrict employers‟ ability to 

speak with employees. It will, however, remain an unfair 

labour practice for an employer to interfere or intimidate 

employees by communication or any other means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want the Minister 

Responsible for Labour to explain to this House why the 

employers‟ right to communicate is being expanded by stealth 

to now include labour disputes without mentioning an 

organizing drive. Why the change, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Does the minister know that there is a difference between a 

labour dispute and an organizing drive? Or is this some sort of 

Freudian slip in that the minister or his government has had a 

long held and firm belief that an organizing drive is a labour 

dispute? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the true intent of this aspect of the 

legislation? Can employers communicate on all issues involving 

a trade union as the government would have it? Does the 

government intend to permit employers to communicate their 

opinions in relation to internal union business such as to who 

should be elected to shop stewards or delegates to trade union 

conventions or as members of the occupational health and 

safety committees? 

 

Does the employer, by virtue of this proposed amendment, now 

get to have input into union bargaining proposals that union 

members are considering? Is there now going to be a legal 

platform allowing employers to express their opinions about a 

ratification meeting, perhaps? 

 

What are the limits, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Or is the government 

entrusting that determination to be made by its new legacy 

appointees to the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board, 

subject to the regulations delivered by cabinet? 

 

This is nothing short of an amendment to legitimize employer 

domination of unions, and it constitutes an unprecedented 

intrusion into union democracy as well as an abject denial of the 

freedom of association, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister and Mr. Emsley should have a look at definition 

2(e) of the current trade union Act. Or maybe they have, and 

that is why this government, Mr. Speaker, is unwilling to test its 

assumptions in the courts or submit its proposed legislation to 

an independent committee of review. I want to remind the 

members opposite, as they are new at governing, that any 

amendment to the Act still has to fall within the four corners of 

the Act and cannot be contrary to the purpose and intent of the 

overall legislation. 

 

It certainly does appear that the Sask Party government‟s 

intention is to grant immunity for the employer in 

communicating whatever they want, whether it‟s related to the 

business or just an issue they want to sound off on. The motives 

for this amendment are clouded and steeped in bias and lack of 

understanding of labour relations law. Interestingly, in the name 

of so-called balance, there are no companion amendments that 

would expand unions‟ access or ability to communicate with 

employees, nor is there the inherent ability to order a remedial 

certification when the employer is found to have acted 

egregiously or in contravention of the law. 

 

I raise the issue of immunity and the employer beneficial 

captive audience codicil in the proposed amendment to section 

11(1) of the current trade union Act as a real concern. It would 

appear that the words “. . . but nothing in this Act precludes an 

employer from communicating facts and its opinion to its 

employees” seems designed to leave it open for an employer to 

communicate its opinions on anything at all and with absolute 

impunity. Maybe employers will be able to tell employees how 

to vote in elections for public office. 

 

Let me quote from a passage written in 1941. The author is Mr. 

Justice Learned Hand, and it comes from a decision of the 

National Labor Relations Board in the United States. And it‟s 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

funny, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . You know, the members 

opposite are laughing, but unfortunately this is the reality of this 

legislation. It is so sweeping and so broad that it can literally 

take in any of these interpretations that I‟m presenting this 

evening. So as I said, Mr. Justice Learned Hand is the author of 

a decision from the National Labor Relations Board in the 

United States. It‟s a passage that is often quoted by labour 

relations boards in this country, and it is on the topic of 

employer communication: 

 

No doubt an employer is as free as anyone else in general 

to broadcast any arguments he chooses against trade 

unions but it does not follow that he may do so to all 

audiences. The privilege of “free speech,” like other 

privileges, is not absolute; it has its seasons; a democratic 

society has an acute interest in its protection and cannot 

indeed live without it; but it is an interest measured by its 

purpose. That purpose is to enable others to make an 

informed judgment as to what concerns them, and ends so 

far as the utterances do not contribute to the result. 

Language may serve to enlighten a hearer, though it also 

betray the speaker‟s feelings and desires; but the light it 

sheds will be in some degree clouded, if the hearer is in his 

power. Arguments by an employer directed to his 

employees have such an ambivalent character; they are 

legitimate enough as such, and pro tanto the privilege of 

“free speech” protects them; but, so far as they also 

disclose his wishes, as they generally do, they have a force 

independent of persuasion. The Board is vested with 

power to measure these two factors against each other, a 

power whose exercise does not trench upon the First 

Amendment. Words are not pebbles in alien juxtaposition; 

they have only a communal existence; and not only does 

the meaning of each interpenetrate the other, but all in 

their aggregate take their purpose from the setting in 

which they are used, of which the relation[ship] between 

the speaker and the hearer is perhaps the most important 

. . . What to an outsider will be no more than the vigorous 

presentation of a conviction, to an employee may be the 

manifestation of a determination which it is not safe to 

thwart. The Board must decide how far the second aspect 

obliterates the first. 

 

Now to put this in the Canadian context, the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms in relation to a freedom of association and 

freedom of expression are the two factors that must be balanced 

against one another, that is in this context the employer‟s 

freedom of expression and the employee‟s freedom of 

association. 

 

The balancing — and I recognize that the government uses that 

catchphrase ad nauseam — but the balancing of those two 

factors has been examined by the Supreme Court of Canada on 

many occasions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. By way of example, 

former Chief Justice Dixon of our own Supreme Court, from 

the Supreme Court, who was from Yorkton, Saskatchewan, and 

a war veteran as well, wrote, quote: 

 

Freedom of association is the cornerstone of modern 

labour relations. Historically, workers have combined to 

overcome the inherent inequalities of bargaining power in 

the employment relationship and to protect themselves 

from unfair, unsafe or exploitive working conditions. As 

the United States Supreme Court stated in N.L.R.E. 

[National Labour Relations Board] v. Jones and 

Laughlinan Steel Corp. 

 

Long ago we stated the reason for labor organizations. We 

said that they were organized out of the necessities of the 

situation; that a single employee was helpless in dealing 

with an employer; that he was dependent ordinarily on his 

daily wage for the maintenance of himself and family; 

that, if the employer refused to pay him the wages that he 

thought fair, he was nevertheless unable to leave the 

employ and resist arbitrary and unfair treatment . . . 

 

[18:30] 

 

The “necessities of the situation” go beyond, of course, the 

fairness of wages and remunerative concerns, and extend 

to matters such as health and safety in the work place, 

hours of work, sexual equality, and other aspects of work 

fundamental to the dignity and personal liberty of 

employees. 

 

As is often the case with Supreme Court rulings, Chief Justice 

Dickson was not alone in his view. Mr. Justice McIntyre wrote 

the following: 

 

It may be observed as well that freedom of association was 

recognized and applied in relation to trade unions. The law 

of Canada and of each province has long recognized that 

trade unions could, and did, exist as lawful associations 

with rights and obligations fixed by law and that 

individuals had the right to belong to, and participate in, 

the activities of trade unions . . . 

 

Mr. Justice Le Dain‟s judgment contains the following 

comments that really drive home the cautionary note that I want 

the members opposite to consider. Quote: 

 

Freedom of association is particularly important for the 

exercise of other fundamental freedoms, such as freedom 

of expression and freedom of conscience and religion. 

These afford a wide scope for protected activity in 

association. Moreover the freedom to work for the 

establishment of an association, to belong to an 

association, to maintain it, and to participate in its lawful 

activity without penalty or reprisal is not to be taken for 

granted. That is indicated by its express recognition and 

protection in labour relations legislation. It is a freedom 

that has been suppressed in varying degrees from time to 

time by totalitarian regimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these quotes were from a time before the 

landmark Supreme Court of Canada decision in Health Services 

and Support — Facilities Subsector Bargaining Association v. 

British Columbia that I‟ve referenced earlier in my comments. 

That decision was a stunning reversal of 20 years of the court‟s 

own jurisprudence and guarantees employees freedom of 

association and the recognition that those rights affirm the 

values of dignity, personal autonomy, equality, and democracy 

that are inherent in the Charter. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments to 11(1)(a) seek to 

undermine, if not obliterate, the protection of employees in 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

choosing to belong to and participate in a trade union and run 

affront of that recent Supreme Court decision. The amendment 

seeks to undo years of labour relations law, law that is 

consistent in all Canadian jurisdictions that protects employees 

during that vulnerable period of unionization. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like this House to consider the 

quotes that I‟ve provided from some of the most learned minds 

to ever have cause to look at the issue and to set those 

comments against the backdrop of an election campaign 

because an organizing drive is often and erroneously compared 

to an election campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Let me begin by stating the inherent differences. The union 

does not have equal access to the workplace, does not have an 

equal opportunity for an exchange of ideas or open debate, and 

does not have the benefit of a neutral commentator to assess the 

issues. And all of these factors make it significantly different to 

a public election. 

 

In addition there is no government or state to which either 

management of a union is elected to and which has legislative 

powers to govern the employer‟s operations. The ownership of 

a company remains unchanged by the fact of unionization, as 

does the management. Quite simply put, after an election, the 

supervisor is still the supervisor. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 

short-sighted to draw an analogy between election campaigns 

and organizing drives. If there is a comparison that is closer to 

the situation found in organizing drives, it may be a referendum 

as in a referendum on a single issue being decided and not a 

change in government. 

 

There is, however, one factor which underscores the lack of 

analogy to an election campaign, and this is the fact that the 

membership evidence or support evidence is kept confidential. 

That is true in every jurisdiction. This is not an issue of privacy, 

but rather a protection of employees against improper 

interference by employers. It is a statutory protection that has in 

place to ensure employees‟ freedom of association. 

 

This public policy is a recognition of the economic dependence 

and vulnerability of employees to an employer. An employer 

has the ability to deprive an employee of their job. This is a 

very powerful weapon which the employer can use against their 

employees. Canadian labour legislation prohibits any employer 

interference to ensure that freedom of association is not 

thwarted by the employer‟s resistance to trade union organizing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to again turn to Dr. Muthu‟s 

critique of Bill 6 amendments with the following quote: 

 

The use of a political analogy by employers to describe 

the union representation election, their emphasis on 

certification only by mandatory voting, their preference 

for a lengthy, American-style election campaign based on 

the employer‟s freedom of speech, their civil libertarian 

rhetoric in defence of the rights of individual employees 

against the imminent union dictatorship after certification, 

and their conviction that the vigorous employer campaign 

against unionization has almost no bearing on the election 

results [no bearing on the election results] are based on 

faulty assumptions and are empirically unsound.  

 

Dr. Muthu goes on to say that, quote: 

 

There are also other differences between a political 

election and union election identified by Professor Gordon 

Lafer in his report entitled Neither Free nor Fair, quote: 

 

In a regular political election, the boundaries of 

electoral districts and list of eligible voters are 

established long before the campaign begins, in a 

process that is independent of either candidate. By 

contrast, the scope of workers who are eligible to vote 

in any NLRB election is subject to debate during the 

campaign process itself.” 

 

In “bargaining unit” determination, the employer does 

have a greater scope for manipulation, the electorate in its 

favour and against union organizers. 

 

Moreover management has disproportionate control 

over power to gerrymander elections. The NLRB‟s 

determination of whether a certain group of employees 

share sufficient “community of interest” to be lumped 

together as one electorate . . . are under the direct 

control of the employer. . . managers [may]. . . inflate 

the size of the bargaining unit to a level that is too 

large or too geographically disperse to be organized. 

 

The near-universal mantra for management gurus on 

preventative labour relations is quote, “You can‟t lose an 

election that never takes place.” Or how about this one: “How 

to have the election held in a voting unit you want and not the 

unit the union wants.” Or: “Organization delayed can be 

organization denied.” 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, there are a good many righteous 

reasons for not accepting an analogy that organizing campaigns 

are like election campaigns, that there are just as many good 

and righteous reasons for protecting employees during this 

vulnerable period. Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce a passage 

from the subcommittee of special advisors that is found in the 

report given to the minister of Labour in 1992, entitled 

“Recommendations for Labour Law Reform.” 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are not in receipt of 

the valuable information that results in broad-based 

consultations, since the Sask Party government is adverse to 

that kind of collaborative, public policy development. The 

passage — and it has been held in such high regard as to be 

quoted in decisions of the BC Labour Relations Board — the 

passage is as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quote: 

 

As mentioned, in the introduction of our report, one of the 

major impediments to union organizing is employer 

opposition. That opposition can easily manifest itself 

during an organizing campaign, when employer 

representatives express inappropriate opinions on the 

question of unionization. 

 

We accept the view that employers have a legitimate 

interest in whether their employees organize for the 

purpose of collective bargaining. On the other hand, we 

believe that employers must maintain a circumspect 

position during an organizing campaign to ensure that 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

employees are able to freely choose whether or not they 

wish to belong to a trade union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment to section 11(1)(a) of 

The Trade Union Act goes well beyond what the minister and 

the Premier have said it does. The amendment seeks to provide 

unfettered immunity to the employer to use his captive audience 

advantage to expound any opinions or views on any subject he 

may have. There is no other reason for the words “but nothing 

in this Act,” the equivalent of a notwithstanding provision to 

have been included in these amendments, save and except to gut 

the unfair labour practice provisions and undermine the 

authority of the Act. 

 

To borrow from former Chief Justice Dickson once more, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

This government is trying to suck and blow at the same 

time. They want to suck up all of their right-wing backers 

[They want to suck up to all of their right-wing backers] 

and they want to blow off the rights of working people. I 

would suggest that this is rather unique in labour relations 

in Canada, except that British Columbia introduced 

similar legislation over a decade ago, and it was found to 

be flawed and has subsequently been amended to address 

that flaw. 

 

I do want to point out that the British Columbia legislation was 

somewhat more limiting than what is proposed in 

Saskatchewan, in that the facts and opinions were tied to with 

respect to the employer‟s business. This limited the blue sky 

that has been created by the government amendment. Once 

again for the benefit of this House, I want to point out that the 

Sask Party government looked to BC, British Columbia, the 

apparent brains of the new West, for ideas. If they had 

consulted — and it is clear that they don‟t have much appetite 

for that type of dialogue — they would have realized that they 

had been handed an old hat. And now they are trying to stack 

the deck by sacking the chairperson and vice-chairpersons of 

the Labour Relations Board and replacing them with people 

closer to their mindset — by the government‟s own description, 

I might add. Lady Macbeth would be proud, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I‟m certain that they look to the new crew to somehow find a 

new way around the problems that the legislation in British 

Columbia encountered. The Premier said in a media scrum on 

March 10, 2008, that, quote, “the appointment was a value-add 

as we interpret a brand new trade union Act.” 

 

I don‟t know what value was added except that the position now 

pays $180,000 a year, a full $60,000 per year more than the 

previous chairperson. And for that kind of money, I suspect the 

Premier will be looking for the right results. 

 

The Premier also said on March 10, 2008, that, quote, “You 

need to have a sort of quasi-judicial body,” and that was the 

reason for the increase to the wage. Well, Mr. Premier, one 

doesn‟t need a quasi-judicial body as you indicated, but instead 

one needs a mind that understands labour and administrative 

law, and furthermore one needs to accept the philosophy 

underlining a quasi-judicial administrative tribunal because that 

is what the Labour Relations Board is, and that is the function 

of the board chairperson. 

 

But I think that one other comment in that fateful scrum tells 

the tale of this government‟s true intent and the marching orders 

of the new chairperson, and that is, quote, “We seek to change 

the letter of the law.” 

 

We certainly take the Premier at his word, Mr. Speaker, but I 

guess he should have also said that he wants to change the spirit 

of the law and make sure that his legacy is a non-union one. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, leave to introduce 

a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to introduce to all of the Saskatchewan MLAs 

[Members of the Legislative Assembly] a very, very special 

young lady who has travelled eight hours to be here. And I want 

to keep this recording, so when she graduates I want to show 

her this recording, that I introduced her to all of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to say at the outset, I thank all my colleagues for the 

leave to introduce her. I promised the young lady that she‟s 

with I wouldn‟t introduce her because she‟s been introduced in 

the House a number of times, and that‟s my daughter, Kellie. 

But it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to all the MLAs in the Assembly, a young three-year-old 

named Meika Rose Belanger, and Meika is my granddaughter. 

 

[18:45] 

 

And I must say that the future for the New Democrats in 

northern Saskatchewan is indeed very bright because as we 

bring more New Democrats up through the ranks they get better 

looking, they get smarter, and they get more aggressive. And I 

rest my case, Mr. Speaker, to my granddaughter, Meika Rose 

Lena Belanger. And she‟s named after her two grandmothers 

who have since passed away. 

 

And it gives me a great pleasure to introduce my future, and her 

name is Meika Rose Lena Belanger. Welcome, Meika. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With all due 

respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the letter of the law means 

nothing coming from a gang who apparently can‟t read the law 

or understand how it actually operates. Oh yes, they have 

opinions, but those are like a part of the anatomy that everyone 

has, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn‟t understand 

that labour law does not exist in a vacuum. It is the result of 

decades, if not centuries, of jurisprudence supporting and 

enhancing the right of employees while balancing the interests 

and freedom of expression of employers. 

 

No jurisdiction in Canada gives unfettered rights to employers 

to do and say anything they want on any topic they want, with 

impunity and immunity from the application of unfair labour 

practice laws. In all of the legislations in all of the jurisdictions, 

the employers‟ free speech provision — if there even is one — 

is one way or another expressly made subject to the unfair 

labour practice provisions in the rest of the statute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government does not, quote, “seek to change 

the letter of the law.” The government seeks to render the law 

meaningless and by the stroke of a pen to render null and void 

the right of employees and the trade unions they independently 

and freely choose as their representatives. 

 

This Assembly does not have the benefit of knowing who 

drafted these amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That question 

is on the record and I‟m expecting and anticipating an answer. 

But I am reminded of the comments of Mr. Justice Le Dain and 

I believe that author of those draconian amendments has a 

desire to create a totalitarian state in Saskatchewan while 

creating a climate of unprecedented labour unrest. I am hard 

pressed to believe that what this government is proposing is a 

blueprint for growth and security. Let us review: 

 

New section 12.1 

7 The following section is added after section 12: 

 

“Deadline to report unfair labour practice 

12.1(1) Subject to subsection (2), the board may 

refuse to hear any allegation of an unfair labour 

practice that is made more than 90 days after the 

complainant knew, or in the opinion of the board 

ought to have known, of the action or circumstances 

giving rise to the allegation, unless the respondent 

has consented in writing to waive or extend the 

deadline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on first blush this appears a well-founded 

amendment but the proof will be in the administration of this 

provision. Now because I know I‟m dealing with a great deal of 

inexperience across the floor, I will not give any examples of 

unfair labour practices because essentially any violation of any 

section of The Trade Union Act can be an unfair labour 

practice. 

 

There are however some circumstances that the 90 days 

prescribed in this amendment may be a miscarriage of justice, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe limiting the length of time that 

the parties can use to attempt to find a voluntary agreement to 

an issue in dispute is counterproductive to sound labour 

relations practices. I do want to caution that leaving issues to 

fester could also be seen as a miscarriage of justice and the 

approach of lying in the weeds is not acceptable either. I think 

that the best solution would be for a far more reasonable 

timeline and I suggest that timeline be six months. 

 

In making this suggestion, I recognize that there are 

jurisdictions that limit the time in which to file an application 

but the most common application of that limitation appears to 

be in relation to duty to accommodate applications. While this 

type of application would certainly be covered by this 

amendment, I am certain it is not the only type of application 

intended to be restricted in such a manner. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest a more reasonable approach and 

ask the government to amend the 90-day limit and replace it 

with a six-month limit in an effort to recognize that bargaining 

collectively as defined in the Act in section 2(b) means more 

than negotiating a collective agreement. It also means 

negotiating the settlement of disputes and grievances, which 

includes the settlements of disputes, an unfair labour practice 

application as provided under section 11, 25.1, 36(2), 36.1, or 

any other section of the Act are issues in dispute. 

 

While it may be sound public policy to have a deterrent in terms 

of a time limit, it does not serve the public good if that time 

limit is so limiting as to restrict the ability of the parties to 

resolve their dispute through negotiations. I believe that that is 

relatively well known in the House, and there are times when 

negotiations can take longer than 90 days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to remind the members opposite that 

they rose up in opposition to the amendment to section 26.5(4), 

when our government introduced the ability for parties to file an 

application for first collective bargaining agreement when 90 

days or more had passed since the date of certification. 

 

The members opposite cried foul and said that 90 days was 

much too short a time limit, and urged our government to leave 

the legislation as it was, or at the very least provide a much 

longer time limit. 

 

Now to say that the members opposite do say one thing and do 

the opposite would be repetitive of me. So I‟ll refrain from 

suggesting that they heed their own concerns about limiting the 

ability of the parties to reach a negotiated agreement without 

interference from the government. 

 

(2) The board must hear any allegation of an unfair labour 

practice that is made after the deadline mentioned in 

subsection (1) if the respondent has consented in writing 

to waive or extend the deadline”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment is odd and almost akin to a writ 

on water. While there are instances when employers file unfair 

labour practices, it is well known that the majority of unfair 

labour . . . of applications are from unions and employee 

associations. I suggest the likelihood of an employer consenting 

to an application being filed after the 90-day period would only 

be matched in odds to my winning the lottery, Mr, Deputy 

Speaker. And I as a rule do not purchase tickets. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

I do note that there‟s an ability to consent to an extension, but 

that same ability to consent to a certification application is not 

found. I must take this opportunity to again reinforce that there 

are employers that will and do not object to certification 

applications, and the amendments to section 6 create a hardship 

that could be easily avoided with a provision that allowed for 

consent, similar to what has been proposed here. 

 

Section 17 amended 

8 Subsection 17 (2) is amended by adding the 

following clause after clause (b): 

 

“(c) for the purposes of subsection 6(1.2)”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment is designed to facilitate the 

intrusion of the government into the affairs of a union. It is 

illustrative of the Sask Party belief that people do not know 

they‟re signing a card to get their workplace certified when they 

sign a union membership card. Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure that I 

have seen a union card that doesn‟t make it clear that the 

signatory is assigning bargaining rights to the union. I believe 

that this is just more of the paranoid disbelief that employees do 

and will freely choose to belong to a trade union. 

 

I‟ve already spoken of the checks and balances inherent in the 

Act as it stands today but remind the members opposite that 

certification gained by fraud will be rescinded. 

 

Section 18 amended 

9 Section 18 is amended: 

 

(a) in clause (f) by adding “subject to the 

regulations made by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council,” before “to determine”; and 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the sole purpose of this amendment is to 

create a standard form that can be given to employees who wish 

to decertify their workplace. I suggest that the next thing that 

will be required is that this form will be available on the Labour 

Relations Board website or copies ready and available to be 

mailed out to interested employees from the board. Should this 

come about I would further suggest that in the interest of 

fairness that the union support cards would also be afforded the 

same opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The fullness of time 

will reveal the true intent behind this particular amendment. 

 

(b) in clause (g) by adding “subject to the 

regulations made by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council,” before “to determine”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current legislation reads as follows: 

 

(g) to determine the form in which and the time 

within which any party to a proceeding before the 

board must file or present any thing, document or 

information and to refuse to accept any thing, 

document or information that is not filed or presented 

in that form or by that time; 

 

This amendment does not change the substance of the provision 

but it profoundly changes who determines those various forms, 

time periods, and so on. This amendment goes directly to the 

lack of confidence that the government has in its new chairman 

of the Labour Relations Board and takes away the authority 

from the board to determine these matters. It also takes away 

the involvement of stakeholders and does not even — and does 

— and does contemplate seeking advice or information from 

the employer and employee representatives to the board. 

 

As I understand changes that have been implemented at the 

board involving time periods, forms and the like have gone 

through a vetting process and involving first the members of the 

board and then the stakeholder groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a practical consideration to involve those people who actually 

make up the adjudicative panel in these matters. This 

amendment is another example of heavy-handed, paternalistic 

government and furthermore takes the discussion out of the 

public sphere and moves it to the backrooms of cabinet or at 

least to the backrooms so that whoever is putting forward this 

misguided agenda can — without the interference of public 

scrutiny, transparency, or accountability — create what they 

have deemed to be the forms and time periods for a whole, 

unconnected, quasi-judicial, administrative tribunal to 

administer the Act. The depth of this government‟s abhorrence 

to consultation is almost boundless, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

New sections 21.1 and 21.2 

10 The following sections are added after section 21: 

 

Deadline for board decision 

21.1(1) Any decision of the board shall be provided 

to the parties within six months of the last day of the 

hearing unless the board is reasonably justified in 

requiring more time. 

 

(2) Notwithstanding section 21 and subsection 40(1), 

any party to a proceeding before the board may apply 

to the Court of Queen‟s Bench for an order directing 

the board to provide its decision if the deadline in 

subsection (1) has not been met. 

 

(3) Any failure to comply with subsection (1) does 

not affect the validity of a decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we can all agree that timely decision 

making is a reasonable goal. I do, however, find it unlikely that 

parties to the board are going to undertake the additional 

expense of applying to the Court of Queen‟s Bench to receive 

an order directing the board to provide its decision. 

 

On a practical note, I‟m not certain how the reduction of one 

Vice-Chair position will aid in the timely hearing and 

determinations that the board is charged with undertaking. In 

fact, I understand that a backlog has already been created, given 

the number of decisions that were outstanding from the unjustly 

terminated Chair and two Vice-Chairs of the board. 

 

There are also hearings that were under way which are not yet 

completed and there is also the hearings that have had to be 

cancelled and further delays as a result of the terminations and 

the newly appointed chairman being physically unable to hear 

cases scheduled in both Saskatoon and Regina for the same 

days. As I say, Mr. Speaker, the goal is laudable but the actions 

of the government have already eroded the alleged intent of the 

amendment. 

 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Annual report 

21.2(1) In each fiscal year, the board shall, in 

accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991, 

submit to the minister an annual report on the activities 

of the board for the preceding fiscal year. 

 

(2) The minister shall, in accordance with The Tabling 

of Documents Act, 1991, lay before the Legislative 

Assembly each report received by the minister pursuant 

to this section. 

 

(3) Notwithstanding subsection 40(1), the annual report 

shall include the following information: 

 

(a) a list of all matters filed with the board; 

 

(b) a list of all decisions rendered by the board; 

 

(c) with respect to each decision listed: 

 

(i) the date the matter was initially filed; 

(ii) the date the matter was heard by the board; 

(iii) the members of the board that heard the matter; 

and 

(iv) the length of time between the last day of the 

hearing and the rendering of the decision; and 

 

(d) a summary, by member, of: 

 

(i) the number of decisions rendered; 

(ii) the type of decision whether interim or final 

disposition; and 

(iii) the average period between the last day of a 

hearing and the rendering of the decision for each 

type of decision”. 

 

[19:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the amendment 21(3)(d), is the 

amendment intended for a summary for each member as 

provided in section 4(1.1)(a)(i) of the Act or section 

4(1.1)(a)(ii) of the Act or both? To make the question easier for 

the minister to understand, as he doesn‟t really have an 

understanding of The Trade Union Act to this point, is the 

intention to provide an individual summary of all 18 board 

members, as well as a chairperson and vice-chairpersons, or as 

we have now one vice-chairperson? 

 

Because as I understand it . . . Now I will use a well-known 

former board sideperson as an example, so I‟m going to use 

current member Clare Gitzel, an employer-representative 

sideperson as the example. As I read the amendment, when Mr. 

Gitzel sits as a sideperson on a panel, the board will have to 

record the number of decisions that are rendered for cases that 

he has sat on as a sideperson, the type of decision that was 

rendered, be it interim or final, and the average time between 

the last day of the hearing and the rendering of the decision for 

each type of decision, interim or final. 

 

So over the course of a fiscal year, Mr. Gitzel may sit on a 

panel on eight different cases for a total of 15 days. There 

would of course be additional time that he may spend in 

deliberation of the cases and in reading the draft decision or 

drafts, whatever the situation requires. As a result of this 

amendment, the board will have to keep track of the number of 

the number of panels that Mr. Gitzel sat on, the type of panel 

that it was, and the average number of days between the last 

hearing date and the date of the final decision — noting 

separately the average for each type of decision. 

 

My question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, why? For what purpose? 

What is the value-add here? And how does this improve the 

timeliness of decision making? How does this fit with the 

increased productivity that the minister spoke of in justifying 

the massive increase to the salary of the other chairperson? 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the tracking of these details about Mr. 

Gitzel and the 17 other sidepeople of the board and the 

presentation of those results in the annual report improve the 

efficiencies of the board? How does this assist anyone in getting 

timely decisions? What is the purpose of this busy work? How 

will the government ensure that the board is properly resourced 

to undertake all these additional duties, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

I‟m also wondering what the purpose is of tracking the time 

between the filing of an application and a date the matter was 

heard before the board. 

 

It is my understanding that the parties generally are canvassed 

to gauge availability for a hearing and the number of days each 

party — or the parties for that matter as many cases involve 

more than two parties — but the parties indicate the number of 

days that they believe they will be able to present their case. In 

addition parties will often agree to adjourn a hearing date for a 

variety of reasons. In my own past experience with the board, 

that was certainly the case. There are occasions that I imagine 

the board may have to cancel or adjourn hearing. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have heard recently of at least two 

hearings, and there may be others, that were cancelled by the 

board. In fact they were scheduled for this . . . well a number of 

weeks ago, the week of March 17 but were cancelled by the 

board. Perhaps this is the value-add the Premier spoke of or the 

increased productivity that was foretold of by the minister in 

justifying the firing of the adjudicative employees of the board. 

 

I‟m not sure that the parties affected feel as though they‟ve 

received any value-add, and there was nothing by the way of 

increased productivity either. That was not how they expressed 

themselves to me anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the House that the Premier‟s 

hand-picked friend of the Sask Party, the new chairman of the 

Labour Relations Board has clearly been able to get the intent 

of the Sask Party government‟s communication on the subject 

of labour laws and how he should conduct himself. 

 

The Premier has been very effective as the employer in 

conveying his wishes to his employees. One might even suggest 

that there has been undue influence in the free decision making 

that the new chairman is required to have as an executive 

officer at arm‟s length, independent, quasi-judicial 

administrative tribunal. 

 

I don‟t think we have to wait to see how he performs, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that it is already clear since the new chairman 

also did not consult with the parties. He has heard how he has to 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

conduct himself and knows full well that this government 

doesn‟t believe in consultation unless it is behind closed doors, 

potentially. 

 

Unless it is away from the prying eyes and ears of the public 

and unless it is with a people this government feels beholden to, 

someone like the president of the University of Saskatchewan, 

who was in the middle of a labour dispute, Mr. Speaker. Maybe 

it came about as the minister wanted to help out his former 

employer. Maybe it occurred when they were discussing which 

government appointment would be best suited for the 

president‟s wife. All I really know is that there is an email that 

clearly indicates that he was consulted, whether he saw the 

actual draft Bill or not, and it was before the legislation was 

introduced and the threat of legislating the CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees] members back to work, declaring 

them essential, defeated the strike. But then that was the intent. 

Labour peace for the Sask Party government can be equated to 

no rights for working people in this province should these 

pieces of legislation pass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier not only wants to, and I quote, 

“change the letter of the law,” but he wants to walk over every 

practice, every policy, and every principle that governs modern 

industrial relations. This is not a stamp the Sask Party 

government is putting on labour relations. It is the stamping out 

of rights of employees and their trade unions. 

 

Section 33 amended 

11 Subsection 33(3) is repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying that this provision has 

been in the Act for decades and never really presented a 

problem, with very few exceptions. For the information of this 

House, the majority of collective agreements in this country 

have a term or duration of three years. While it is true that most 

jurisdictions do not have legislative provisions for the setting of 

the term of a collective agreement, the practical approach has 

been for a term of three years. It is somewhat of a standard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, this provision has been around for 

decades, and with very few exceptions served the stakeholders 

effectively. Occasionally there have been times when parties 

will agree to a longer term, and even more rarely do those 

parties seek a private members‟ Bill to receive legislative 

sanction for a collective agreement with a longer term. The last 

agreement with IPSCO and the steelworkers is the one example 

that comes to mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But practically speaking, the parties are able to come to an 

agreement if they are seeking something other than a three-year 

term. They may agree to sign off on the time that has already 

passed since the old agreement expired and the new agreement 

that is in a go-forward position. They may sign back-to-back 

agreements, or there are many creative and legal methods for 

dealing with that question when the parties agree. What neither 

party may do is bargain the issue to an impasse. What the union 

cannot do is take strike action to achieve a longer term. What 

the employer cannot do is lock out employees in an effort to 

force the employees to accept a longer term. 

 

It is easy to see that this amendment is opening up yet another 

issue that can lead to a labour dispute. I would have thought that 

this government has given enough cause to pit workers against 

their employer with the other draconian amendments they have 

introduced to The Trade Union Act, but there seems to be a 

concerted desire to create a labour climate in this province that 

is acrimonious, confrontational, antiquated, and bent on 

creating a war with working people. 

 

The instability that they are wreaking in this province is posed 

to wreak havoc with the prosperity and growth that we so 

carefully put into place. This government is taking its time of 

labour peace, growth and unprecedented economic prosperity 

and wilfully and wantonly destroying it. So much for security. 

 

Employers be warned. Investors be careful. This government is 

creating a climate of despair for workers that is not a recipe for 

success. Employees be warned. You will not enjoy the same 

rights as you may have become accustomed to in other 

provinces because in Saskatchewan we do turn back the hands 

of time but not by one hour. In Saskatchewan we want to take 

you back to 1947, the time of the Taft-Hartley amendments to 

the Wagner Act. While the sum total of these amendments do 

not repeal the entirety of The Trade Union Act, they accomplish 

the same thing, Mr. Speaker. The Act will be a writ on water. 

 

Coming into force 

12 This Act comes into force on assent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my humble opinion, this Act should never reach 

assent. 

 

As I said earlier in my speech, this Bill is a death threat to 

unions and a letter bomb for working people in the province. 

Mr. Speaker. I‟m going to close by relaying a little tale from 

south of the border. It is, at least I think it is, instructive . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you . And only reinforces just 

how backwards and out of step the Sask Party amendments are. 

 

In 2007 the Employee Free Choice Act was introduced by two 

Democratic and one Republican senator. This Act looks to undo 

the damage that has been created by the Taft-Hartley 

amendments to the Wagner Act and moves the National Labour 

Relations law to a balanced position. 

 

The Act is as follows. Section 1, this Act provides for 

certification of the union by the National Labour Relations 

Board on the basis of card check. No more mandatory elections 

are required. Section 2, this Act provides for first contract 

mediation, failing that, binding arbitration, which is valid for 

two years. Section 3, this Act provides for stronger penalties for 

violations while employees are attempting to form a union or 

attain a first contract. 

 

Subsection (a) provides for civil penalties, fines of up to 

$20,000 per violation against employers found to have wilfully 

or repeatedly violated employees‟ rights during an organizing 

campaign or first contract drive. Subsection (b) provides for 

triple back pay to be paid by an employer when an employee is 

discharged or discriminated against during an organizing 

campaign or first contract drive. 

 

Subsection (c) provides for mandatory application for 

injunction whenever either party violates the Act and when 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

there is reasonable cause to believe the employer has discharged 

or discriminated against employees or threaten to do so which 

significantly interferes with employee rights during organizing 

or first contract drive. It also authorizes the courts to grant 

appropriate injunctive relief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of bipartisan legislation has been passed 

in the Senate by a vote of 51 to 48 and by the House of 

Representatives by a vote of 241 to 185. This, Mr. Speaker, is 

the future of labour relations law in North America. 

 

Bill 6 is the way of the past, Mr. Speaker. Bill 6 is not 

legislation that is reflective of the current labour relations 

climate in Canada. It does not reflect a modern view of 

industrial relations and brings no value-add for productivity or 

competitiveness. 

 

This legislation does not provide any solutions for real 

problems facing employers today, that being a severe labour 

shortage, and it does nothing to assist Saskatchewan in growing 

to be a leader in the new West or anywhere. This legislation is 

old school, Mr. Speaker, full of unfulfilled, ideologically driven 

desires to eliminate trade unionism and is much much worse, 

much more worse, is much more reminiscent of the Wild West 

than it is of any sound public policy that looks to protect the 

interests of working people in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill should be taken off the legislative agenda 

and the issues placed before a legitimate and representative 

committee to meet with the stakeholders and public. Anything 

short of that and this government shows it has no desire to work 

with labour in this province and instead declares war. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after a lengthy critique of Bill 6 and the 

proposed amendments by the Sask Party, I‟m hoping that the 

members of the government pay close attention. I hope they 

learned something from that. This was definitely a speech that 

required a lot of research and a lot of consultation with various 

people and various organizations — something that the Sask 

Party government might want to take an example of. And 

otherwise they are more than welcome to read it in Hansard and 

to review the research that I have done on their behalf. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise this evening to add a few 

comments to the legislation that‟s before us. Bill 6 and Bill 5 

have caused a fair bit of lively debate not only in this House but 

across the province. And sadly it‟s been a very divided debate 

when we talk to stakeholders and we talk to people outside of 

this House. And I think that‟s for a number of reasons. This 

Sask Party government has moved ahead arbitrarily with 

legislation that was obviously drafted by outside sources, but 

they have moved ahead without any public consultations or any 

substantive consultations. 

 

And really, when you look at the issues that are before us and 

why it has caused a fair bit of debate, you truly have to look at 

the intent of The Trade Union Act and why it is there in the first 

place. And what you have to take into consideration is that The 

Trade Union Act was put in place to empower workers and 

unions. And we may get a few cries and complaints about that. 

 

There‟s a quote that I‟d like to put into Hansard, Mr. Speaker, 

and it‟s from Our Times magazine. And it‟s an article that was 

published by Dr. Elaine Bernard, and she‟s the executive 

director of the Harvard trade union program at Harvard Law 

School. The article is entitled “Collective Bargaining as a 

Constitutional Right.” And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . “the right to bargain collectively with an employer 

enhances the human dignity, liberty and autonomy of 

workers by giving them the opportunity to influence the 

establishment of workplace rules and thereby gain some 

control over a major aspect of their lives, namely their 

work.” 

 

And that was from the Supreme Court of Canada. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when you look at that and you think of The Trade 

Union Act as being put in place to empower workers and 

unions, you start to realize the passion and emotion that comes 

forward when we see changes being proposed for the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also made the comment that this obviously was 

legislation that was structured and written outside of the 

departments of Justice and Labour, and brought to them after 

the fact to be tabled in this House. 

 

And there‟s a number of reasons why this is evident, but one 

that I want to touch on is when you‟re looking at any changes to 

the Act, it‟s important to remember that the implication of a 

change to even one word must be read in the context of the 

whole Act, all regulations, and the case law history. And I know 

from past practice and from experience that I‟ve had that when 

Justice and Labour work on a piece of legislation, it is looked at 

in the context of the whole Act and other pieces of legislation 

that it may affect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know this hasn‟t been the fact. We know 

that there has been amendments talked about. We haven‟t seen 

them, but we‟ve heard them talked about. But I do know that 

the minister tabled The Trade Union Act amendment (2), now 

known as Bill 22, which also makes some changes to The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

And this was an afterthought when it was brought to his 

attention, but what he was actually proposing to do with the 

Labour Relations Board he couldn‟t do by the legislation. So 

this tells me that the people that wrote the legislation were 

single-mindedly looking at it for specific issues, and not 

looking at it as the Department of Labour or the Department of 

Justice would have looked at it, as an overview and in context 

of the whole Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of things that have been 

pretty contentious, and I know my colleagues have gone over in 

fair detail a number of them. But what this legislation has also 

done, it‟s really provoked a couple of analyses of the 

legislation. And one of them that has been quite useful when 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

you look at Bill 6 was put out by Jim Warren. And he‟s a 

Regina-based researcher and labour historian. And he says in 

his study: 

 

“As it stands the proposed legislation constitutes an effort 

to enhance employer power and reduce the capacity of 

employees to achieve union recognition and the ability to 

bargain collectively with their employers.” 

 

Warren‟s study discusses the evolution of the Saskatchewan 

trade union Act from 1944 and to the present day, and argues 

that the current government‟s Bill 6 amendments are unduly 

punitive. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here we go back to why The Trade Union 

Act is there. And this Act is supposed to empower workers and 

unions. And the changes are looked at from the perspective of 

whether the changes weaken or strengthen workers and their 

unions. And in other words, quite simply looking at who 

benefits from the change in law is a great guide to 

understanding its meaning. So when we look at the comments 

of Mr. Warren, and it goes into quite a bit of detail, but I mean 

you couldn‟t be more clear than this. The title of his paper, “An 

Assessment of Bill 6, Amendments to the Trade Union Act, 

2008,” is titled “Joining the Race to the Bottom.” And that 

really says it all, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn‟t speak well to what 

the future holds for working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this brings up a number of other issues in this labour 

market. And when times are so good why is it a time that we 

wish to be making these changes? And I‟m sure there will be 

more said to this over the next couple of days. 

 

But one of the other analyses that has been put out is the 

“Proposed Amendments to the Trade Union Act: A Critique.” 

And this is Dr. S. Muthu, Professor Emeritus, facility of 

business administration, University of Regina. And his field of 

specialization is industrial relations, business ethics, and 

administrative law. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are a couple of pieces that I would truly 

like to make a number of points on, and really there‟s a number 

of issues that arise when you look at Bill 6. It looks quite simple 

on face value, but it truly isn‟t. And it has and will have some 

lasting implications for working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think there‟s a couple of other points that need to be 

made where the minister, when he first tabled this legislation — 

even though he said it had been worked on for a year by the 

Saskatchewan Party but he hadn‟t seen it until it was tabled — 

he talked about meeting national norms and that this legislation 

was nothing more, nothing less than what other provinces 

already had. Now I think my colleagues have made the point 

over and over again in the last number of hours that this is 

definitely, the proposed legislation for Saskatchewan is 

definitely over and beyond what national norms are. It‟s 

broader and it has more drastic implications for working people 

in this province. And we really need to have more discussion on 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a couple of points I want to make out of 

the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives paper by Mr. Jim 

Warren. There‟s also the critique about the proposed 

amendments to The Trade Union Act that I would like to make 

more detailed comments on some specific sections, but Mr. 

Speaker, the poor analysis that‟s been done by this government 

on this legislation before it was tabled, the poor preparation for 

rolling this out to the public, and, Mr. Speaker, even worse 

claiming that it meets national norms and brings Saskatchewan 

in line with other provinces couldn‟t be much farther from 

being accurate than what it is right now. But the lack of public 

consultations which has caused a huge rift across this province, 

public discussion, and the basic misunderstanding or the basic 

misrepresentation of the intent of this legislation means that my 

colleagues and I, we, will have to do some more consultations. 

 

There is many stakeholders who have not been able to make 

public presentation because of this government‟s lack of 

accessibility and lack of transparency and accountability. So my 

colleagues and I need to get in touch with these stakeholders. 

We need to make sure that we have some good lines of 

communication and good discussions on this piece of 

legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to . . . I recognize the member 

from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D‟Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve spent a number of hours in here now 

listening to the members opposite talk about Bill No. 6 and 

what kind of an imposition this is going to be on the workers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But in all the comments that I‟ve . . . 

 

The Speaker: — My apologies. I missed the comments from 

the member and I believe I did call for a member to have moved 

to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 2 — The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to be 

able to join the debate once again on the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan piece. And I‟m glad despite the minor confusion 

there that I am able to stand and carry on the discussion on this 

piece, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act is a piece of legislation that 

has received considerable attention from people in the 

community, people in this legislature as well, and people 

outside of the province also. So, Mr. Speaker, as we look to The 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act and examine the merits and 

perhaps some of the pitfalls with the Act, it‟s important to first 

look at the context of where Saskatchewan currently is at in 

terms of its economic well-being and social well-being and 

where things have been occurring for some time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned the last time I spoke, there are a number of 

indicators right now in the province which would suggest that 

things are going well in the province and have been going well 

for a period of time largely due to the work that has occurred 

over the past number of years in positioning our province in a 

place where now, with commodity prices where they are, that 

we‟re able to truly capitalize and carry on with the work that 

has been done. 

 

I was pleased on Saturday to look in The Globe and Mail, Mr. 

Speaker, and there was a fairly lengthy piece about 

Saskatchewan on the business section on pages 4 and 5. 

Actually the front page of The Globe had a nice photo of the 

province and talked about it as the it province and a number of 

very positive things were highlighted about where 

Saskatchewan has been and where it currently is and where it 

may be going in the years to come. 

 

I‟d like to share a few parts of the article, Mr. Speaker, because 

I think it provides an important context that we need to be 

aware of when we‟re looking at the idea of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, what it wants to do and how it wants to do it. 

The first section — so this is in the report on business weekend 

on B4 — the article starts off with Dr. Grant Isaac, who is at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And actually I had the pleasure of 

taking an undergrad course from Dr. Isaac when he, in the early 

days when he first moved back to the province. I believe it was 

the international political economy of biotechnology or 

something along those lines, but back in 2000. I quote from the 

article: 

 

Grant Isaac, when he left, never thought he‟d be back. 

 

Hailing from a family of sports broadcasters out of 

Regina, Mr. Isaac studied economics at the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. After finishing his masters, 

he and his wife moved to England, where Mr. Isaac did 

his PhD at the London School of Economics. A world of 

opportunity was at hand. 

 

But they chose, in 2000, to return. Sensing change, 

sensing possibility, sensing something percolating, the 

spirits of their forebears, pioneers who [had] made a life 

out of a hard land, in the middle of nowhere. 

 

“Everything just seemed to be pointing in the direction of 

change,” Mr. Isaac remembered of the emerging 

ambitions of his home province this week over a coffee in 

Saskatoon. 

 

So that‟s very good optimism and I‟m pleased that Dr. Isaac 

was of that opinion when he decided to come back. An 

important point that I note is the date when he had that feeling 

and that sentiment about the province was back in 2000, Mr. 

Speaker. So that was some time ago recognizing — it would 

appear recognizing — that good things have been happening in 

this province for some time, Mr. Speaker. 

[19:30] 

 

The article goes on to talk about a number of areas, Mr. 

Speaker, where Enterprise Saskatchewan will be very active, 

where Enterprise Saskatchewan will have a significant role. The 

article, as you would know, Mr. Speaker, from following the 

news, currently there are a number of pressures on the world 

supply of food, so this is one aspect that can contribute to the 

boom and the good times in the province. The combination of 

the need for food production, which Saskatchewan is quite good 

at — a number of our resources that play a role in that — and 

also the resources that have here in this province that are also in 

demand by the world. Going on to quote: 

 

The province may still be seen mostly as rural agriculture 

place but its economy is far behind that antiquated image. 

Mining, oil and natural gas, and manufacturing make up 

about 20 per cent of the economy, and are triple the size 

of the farming business, according to the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Public Policy at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s very good to see SIPP [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Public Policy] receiving such good press on the national 

stage. 

 

Oil is particularly hot. The province produces more than 

400,000 barrels a day, almost as much as Alberta, 

excluding the oil sands. And the Bakken play in the 

southeastern area of the province, unlocked in the past 

couple years by advances in drilling technology, is on fire, 

promoted as the second-largest oil field ever found in 

Canada. 

 

So it‟s no secret, Mr. Speaker, that resources will have a very 

important part. So as we look at a discussion about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, which will have an important influence on what 

we do with resources, it‟s important to remember where 

Saskatchewan, where we are poised, and what is happening at 

this current time. 

 

The last quote I want to identify from this article which I 

enjoyed reading, Mr. Speaker, was towards the end of the 

article. And it goes to speak of perhaps some of the sentiment 

that was expressed at the beginning of the article when Dr. Isaac 

was interviewed, and that‟s the recognition that changes that 

have been occurring in this province did not occur magically on 

the night of November 7. But rather they‟ve been part of a 

determined and part of a strategic plan that this party when it 

was in government was engaged on. And the quote reads this, 

and this is on B5, Mr. Speaker: 

 

But the NDP started to make business-savvy moves this 

decade, cutting taxes, easing red tape and moving 

incentives to businesses to take risks. 

 

And while the Sask Party looks like a move to the right 

from the left, it has ended up being more of a continuation 

of things the NDP had started. 

 

So it‟s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that one of the national 

papers in this country would make that observation, that the 

changes that have been occurring here have indeed been 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

happening for some time, Mr. Speaker, and that a good amount 

of the benefits that we are experiencing today from those 

changes have been taking place for some time. I think also, Mr. 

Speaker, that that‟s a point that many people in the province 

also recognize. 

 

I know in a lot of the talk around the budget that we heard 

following the recent budget, I know on this side of the House 

we used the expression NDP lite or an almost NDP budget. And 

it is true that a good number of the editorials that were printed 

and spoken after the budget, people recognized this, that for the 

most part the structures and a lot of the changes that had been 

put in place, that had occurred, were in fact a continuation and 

were going on in the existing budget. So while we would 

recognize on this side that there are some holes and some 

problems with that budget, we would also recognize that a lot of 

what is there, a lot of what was begun there is in fact carrying 

on. 

 

So I spent some time, Mr. Speaker, in a sense setting the stage, 

giving us an understanding of where Saskatchewan is and 

where we have been and where we are headed. And it‟s 

important to keep in mind as we think about what the role of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will be and what it is supposed to be. 

 

It‟s curious at a time when things are going well, when so many 

positive changes have occurred, that we as a province would 

want to hand that over to an entity that really does have a lot of 

question marks around it, an entity which some of the media 

have described as highly nebulous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s true that in looking at the Enterprise Saskatchewan model 

there are a number of questions that are raised, and these are 

questions that I know, that as I‟ve been out in the community 

meeting with people, whether it‟s doing errands on a Saturday 

or people coming into my constituency office, Mr. Speaker, 

these are questions that they have about how will this 

organization work. What exactly is its purpose? And how will it 

be held accountable to the people and the public? 

 

So when I discuss this with my constituents, one area that I talk 

about and which really they bring up but we have a discussion 

about, and that involves the murky and the questionable 

rationale behind Enterprise Saskatchewan. I think people do 

have a lot of questions about it. As I said, in The StarPhoenix it 

was referred to as a highly nebulous entity. 

 

I guess part of the problem people are having with, some of the 

questions people are having comes down to some of the rhetoric 

we heard pre-election and post-election concerning Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and how some of the things that were talked 

about really aren‟t jibing with what people are seeing today and 

what they‟re reading about and hearing in the news. 

 

Sort of the one main point that we need to remember is that 

when Enterprise Saskatchewan was talked about in its 

formative years, over the last couple of years and earlier than 

that when it was introduced, it was about the Sask Party‟s hope 

and intent and their stated belief that they are able to remove the 

politics from the decision-making process. 

 

And that was part of the rationale, as I understood it when it 

was explained, that they hope that, well what we would have is 

a group of people that were made up from industry, that were 

respected, were accomplished, active in their respective fields, 

and that these people would provide us with the expertise and 

the knowledge to make sound decisions. And they said that this 

would be done separate from the elected individuals and that 

these decisions that would come out of this process would be 

listened to and would be indeed implemented from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of the problem that we saw though, soon after election, is 

that very quickly the separation between the people that were 

said to be experts and the people that are elected, that separation 

very quickly eroded. It just disappeared. And this was a 

significant flip-flop that was stated by the government, a 

flip-flop that I think was recognized by people in the media and 

people in the public. 

 

I suppose if the Sask Party government was intent on 

maintaining that separation, I don‟t see why, Mr. Speaker, two 

members of its cabinet would be placed on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan — one being the Chair and one serving on 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. If the goal was to keep it separate, if 

the goal was to have it separate from the politicians, to me it 

seems like an odd way to ensure that by actually placing the 

politicians in Enterprise Saskatchewan, if that was indeed their 

intent. 

 

And now we‟re not, having seen that, we‟re not sure that that 

was in fact their true motive behind Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

and that there are many questions around the purpose of the 

organization. 

 

One could come to the conclusion that if members of cabinet 

are placed on Enterprise Saskatchewan, that surely that is for a 

reason. A reason beyond the flow of communication because, 

Mr. Speaker, for communication we have minutes, we have 

records of meetings, we have video cameras, and we have the 

written form, staff people that can take part and relay 

information. So I don‟t think the intent of having elected 

officials in Enterprise Saskatchewan was strictly for 

communication. 

 

My hunch is that, Mr. Speaker, it had more to do with the Sask 

Party realizing that they needed to have people involved in 

Enterprise Saskatchewan if in fact they could live with the 

outcomes of Enterprise Saskatchewan. It was more of a means, 

Mr. Speaker, as I see it, to ensure that the outcomes of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, the decisions that are made, that they 

would be consistent with what the Sask Party wants and what 

cabinet wants. 

 

To me it is somewhat disingenuous to suggest that the whole 

purpose of Enterprise Saskatchewan was to remove the politics 

from the process when in fact very soon after the election we 

see two members of cabinet being put in Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. At the end of the day what we may see with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is that it is more or less the puppet of 

cabinet, a means simply to have a facade of approval from the 

wider community, but at the end of the day it comes down to 

what cabinet wants. 

 

I also think that a good amount of the Enterprise discussion — 

in relation to how it will integrate into the rest of government 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

and how it will interact and add benefits to the different 

ministries — I think a big amount of that is also in question and 

is also up in the air. There is the idea of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. We have the initial legislation, but we don‟t 

have a great idea yet as to how the nuts and bolts will operate, 

Mr. Speaker, how the information from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will be indeed be integrated into the ministries. 

 

One example in looking at this question of how Enterprise 

Saskatchewan at the end of the day is going to work with 

ministries or line departments has come out just recently, Mr. 

Speaker. I know committees were meeting at the end of last 

week before we went home to our constituencies for the 

weekend and had a chance to talk to people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you would know, I‟m a member of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services and we had a good 

time in estimates on Thursday. Some good discussion was had 

and some good information was gained. As every critic is 

responsible to do, I was asking questions about different aspects 

for Advanced Education and Employment, the critic 

responsibilities that I have. And I‟m providing this information, 

Mr. Speaker, because it ties into how Enterprise Saskatchewan 

will have a positive role and how it will be, will be used — or 

so they hope and suggest and claim. 

 

And the issue that we were discussing, Mr. Speaker, was the 

Sask Party‟s plan for a tuition rebate scheme. As you would 

know, in the previous administration we had a grad tax 

exemption program that was, that was in place for all people in 

the province. One characteristic of that program, Mr. Speaker, 

was that it was open to individuals that studied out of province. 

So individuals that just, having been born in a different area and 

studied in a different area decided to go to University of 

Moncton and for whatever reason they wanted to afterwards 

come to Saskatchewan, in our plan those individuals were able 

to benefit from that. And individuals, Mr. Speaker, that are 

from Saskatchewan but through life circumstance or no fault of 

their own because a program is offered somewhere else, those 

individuals have to study out of province at a different 

institution. 

 

So the original Sask Party plan on that document or on the 

tuition rebate scheme, Mr. Speaker, was exclusively for 

Saskatchewan people — Saskatchewan-trained individuals — 

and it had no application outside of the borders of this province. 

So when the budget was delivered, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

note that I found on the bottom of page 41 of the budget 

summary document. And it said: 

 

Eligibility will also be extended to selected programs at 

post-secondary institutions outside Saskatchewan. These 

programs will be determined by the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as any good critic would do during the 

estimates time which is set aside for such questions, I had the 

opportunity to ask the minister what was the impetus for this 

change and some questions about application and how this 

would occur because this was a marked departure from what the 

Sask Party had been saying for some time. And so the minister 

provided some answers. He said, well it was brought up in 

question period so that was one, one area where he became 

aware of this situation with people outside the province also 

needing or being appropriate to benefit from this program. 

 

So I had some questions though about, Mr. Speaker, how it‟s 

determined who is in and who is out because any time you have 

a program where a few people are eligible, inevitably you have 

a good number of people, usually more, that are not eligible for 

the program. So I had some questions about how this would be 

determined. And the quote that or the statement that the 

minister replied to my question was, and I quote: 

 

Certainly as we move forward with some legislative 

alignment that needs to take place in order to put this in 

motion, we‟ll be finalizing those specific sectors. I 

anticipate that over the next 30 to 60 days we‟ll have that 

finalized. That‟s an ongoing process that will be done in 

consultation with stakeholders across the province. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So we have a policy change which I think is a good policy 

change. I don‟t agree with the overall structure of the program, 

but offering it to more people is better than fewer. So I went on 

to ask the minister, and I said, quote, “Thirty to sixty. Okay. 

And does the final decision rest with the ministry?” And the 

minister replied, “Yes, it would.” 

 

I went on to ask another question about . . . And my question 

read: 

 

You mentioned you would be consulting stakeholders to 

determine what are the high-need, high-priority areas. 

What is the format for engaging those stakeholders? Is 

there a committee established? Will one be established? Is 

it ad hoc? How does that work? 

 

So that was my series of questions in a question. And the 

minister‟s reply was, “No. Our initial focus is likely to be by 

drawing on the expertise of the stakeholders in Enterprise 

Saskatchewan.” I went on to ask if they make the decisions or 

this is simply a recommendation. And the minister replied, “No, 

they wouldn‟t make decisions. They would be offering 

recommendations. Just for clarification.” 

 

So the minister made this remark. I thought well we‟re starting 

to see how Enterprise Saskatchewan might have a role in some 

of the programs in 30 to 60 days as was identified. And that was 

getting towards what I thought was the end of the line of my 

questioning, but then the minister indicated something which I 

found surprising. He started to name a variety of other 

organizations that they would be consulting in addition to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. He said, I quote: 

 

Yes, among other stakeholders. Obviously we‟re going to 

include some of the . . . [learning] post-secondary 

institutions. We‟re going to be speaking with the 

apprenticeship council and some others. Now the actual 

process, we‟ll roll that out, as I say, in the coming weeks. 

 

And as we carried on with our discussion, as we looked at how 

this list would be determined by those who are eligible for 

seats, it became clear that the list of people consulting was 

growing and growing. And I asked myself the question, if 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is the location where the expertise 

lies, if that‟s the solution, then why the need to go to so many 

other individuals? 

 

The minister identified individuals that would be eligible for 

this program. There are the health care seats which are 

purchased by the province and we also determined that the 

individuals in those programs, even if they weren‟t in a 

Saskatchewan-paid seat, that they would also be eligible. 

 

So that was positive but the minister went on to state that 

universities would be consulted, the Labour Market 

Commission, businesses, as well as some other business 

associations, health institutes, the health care sector, which was 

identified through the organization of VPs [vice-president] that 

meet for human resources. 

 

So consultation is indeed a good thing, a wide spectrum is a 

good thing, but I gained the sense, Mr. Speaker, in the 

questioning and the answers that the minister and his deputy 

were almost making up these institutions as they went along. It 

wasn‟t, to me it did not come off as a clear plan because they 

kept adding institutions and other agencies bit by bit to the 

initial Enterprise Saskatchewan option. 

 

And as a side note I asked, well if this is in the next 30 to 60 

days, surely you have some meetings established because that‟s 

a good deal of consultations and meetings to take place. But I 

was not told that any dates were available. In fact it was more 

an issue of it would be rolled out in the coming days so it was 

not to me overly assuring that indeed there was a clear plan for 

how Enterprise Saskatchewan would be relating with the 

ministry that I‟m responsible for being the critic for. 

 

Another question that the minister stated about the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan approach, with the question that I raised to him, 

was that it wasn‟t binding, that it was simply a 

recommendation. To me that also goes against a good number 

of the statements that were made pre-election about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan actually calling the shots and removing the 

politics from the process. It‟s clear at the end of the day the 

decision does rest with the executive. 

 

I also wondered if Enterprise Saskatchewan is a sound 

cross-section of the population — which there are many 

accomplished, qualified people on Enterprise Saskatchewan — 

but if they have the time to meet, if they have the time to make 

these decisions, why the need to have so many other 

stakeholders consulted if this is in fact the silver bullet as the 

government would see. 

 

The 30 to 60 days was also another question mark, Mr. Speaker, 

that I had. If the role of Enterprise Saskatchewan is to be rolled 

out in the next 30 to 60 days, that‟s not an incredibly long time, 

Mr. Speaker. I‟m curious to see how in fact these 

recommendations will be made. I also asked the question how 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — the findings and the decision by 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — would be meshed with the other 

information that‟s received from all the other stakeholders and 

did not receive a clear answer on that. 

 

So indeed, in looking at my first theme of thoughts, to me it 

does seem that the Enterprise Saskatchewan approach is murky 

and, as The StarPhoenix put it, nebulous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this wasn‟t. My experience on the Human 

Services Committee was not unique. We actually did see this on 

another one of the standing committees and that‟s the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. And in this case, looking at the 

record of this discussion — I was not in the room, Mr. Speaker 

— but looking at the record of discussion, there was an 

exchange between the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

and the member from Kindersley where they were talking about 

the forestry sector. And the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote quoted from some of the documentation and the 

literature that we‟ve seen about Enterprise Saskatchewan as it 

relates to the forestry sector. A quote — a very specific quote 

— outlined the role of Enterprise Saskatchewan, and it says, I 

quote: 

 

“. . . [providing] a more defined accounting of our 

allowable sustainable cut. This government surveyed 

inventory will be aimed at finding where Saskatchewan‟s 

forestry industry fits into the world forestry market.” 

 

What would appear to be a fairly specific task, a fairly focused 

task. So when the member from Prince Albert Northcote read 

this information and had the opportunity to present it to the 

member from Kindersley, he asked about what would this 

relationship look like between Enterprise Saskatchewan and the 

forestry sector. What the member from Northcote said, and I 

quote: 

 

Thanks to the minister for that answer. Could the minister 

define for the folks here this evening how the relationship 

between the forestry branch of government and Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, how that‟s going to play out? What‟s the 

interaction going to look like? 

 

And the member from Kindersley said: 

 

At this point in time there hasn‟t been a great deal of 

interaction. Enterprise Saskatchewan is just recently 

constituted. The membership has been announced. 

 

And went on to state about some of the things that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will be doing. 

 

But then the supplementary question asked by the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote was, quote “So no formal arrangement 

within the department, or ministry, sorry.” And that was the end 

of quote. And the reply was: 

 

Well none at this point in time. I‟m not quite sure what 

you would call formal. I think there will certainly be 

industry sector participation from the forestry sector, 

interacting with Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

To me that does not sound like a clear-cut relationship that 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will be having with the forestry sector 

in terms of providing, in terms of providing the detail or 

meeting the detailed task that was designed in the 

documentation before the election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‟ve seen that members of the media see Enterprise 

Saskatchewan as a nebulous entity. And we‟ve seen how some 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

of the ministers themselves don‟t exactly know how Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will be interacting with their ministries. 

 

Now I‟d like to move on to another area beyond the murky 

nature of Enterprise Saskatchewan. And that‟s how I do see 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — as a destructive force for our 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. I see it as one that undercuts 

democracy. What we know in our, what we know about . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I hear the member from Northwest 

suggesting that my speech is worse than spending time in 

prison. I suppose I will take that as a compliment, Mr. Speaker, 

and I thank the member for his remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see Enterprise Saskatchewan as a destructive 

force for our democracy because it undercuts the work that our 

government does in the work of the legislature and the work 

that we do as elected officials. In fact I see the work of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan as outlined in the original Sask Party 

plan of divorcing politics from the decision-making process, 

really one of outsourcing the decision-making responsibility. 

 

We hear about the outsourcing of telecom jobs to India. This is 

really what I see as individuals who have been elected to serve 

in a role, to fulfill a purpose and to do it well, really giving that 

responsibility over to someone else. And beyond the problems 

associated with simply not doing that work, there‟s the wider 

problem for the electorate and how they view their government, 

I think. And I think that‟ll be the potential long-term 

consequence of the Enterprise Saskatchewan model. 

 

And I see how this could negatively impact and negatively 

influence the public‟s perception of government because of two 

issues. And one is how Enterprise Saskatchewan stands to 

decrease the transparency that occurs in government. That‟s the 

first. 

 

And the second one, Mr. Speaker, is how Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will in fact decrease the accountability that we as 

elected officials have for the decisions that we make, and this 

done all through the outsourcing of the decision-making 

process. As you know, Mr. Speaker, having . . . or as many 

members will know here better than I, having been members in 

this legislature for a longer period, one can never underestimate 

and one can never disregard the advice and the input that one 

receives from their voters, from the electorate, from people that 

voted for you and people that did not vote for you, the entire 

spectrum — and probably people that chose not to vote at all. 

So I think by abdicating one‟s responsibility as an elected 

official, by putting that responsibility on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan as the one who holds the buck at the end of the 

day, I really think that we are hurting our reputation and the 

way that we are viewed in the public. 

 

So no longer when one is grocery shopping on Saturday and 

someone comes up to you and says, oh, well Bill whatever, sort 

of I have some problems with; I would like to discuss this. I 

want to know how this decision was made, how this 

recommendation was made. It could be on Bills, government 

policies, and general procedures. If those decisions are being 

made, Mr. Speaker, by someone outside of government, 

someone who is not elected, to me that is a serious problem. 

 

When someone is elected, Mr. Speaker, the public often doesn‟t 

know too many things about the electoral process. Many people 

are so busy raising families, working jobs, and contributing to 

their communities that they don‟t follow the minutiae of what 

happens in this building. But what the public does know, what 

they do understand is that the people that they vote for at 

election time, the individual that they decide to put their X 

beside and send to this legislature to represent them, they 

understand that those are the people making the decisions and at 

the end of the day it‟s those people that they can go to if they 

have a problem. So if they bump into an MLA who has made a 

decision in the grocery store, individuals, as you know, Mr. 

Speaker, are happy to tell you what they think of that opinion. 

 

It‟s curious to me now, I‟m somewhat puzzled if the decision 

making process is no longer that . . . If the responsibility does 

not fall with the elected official, if it falls with an unelected 

group, to me that decreases accountability because those people 

are not able to access the individuals that actually made the 

decision. 

 

Another problem with the decision, if decisions are being made 

by Enterprise Saskatchewan we also don‟t have the ability for 

the electorate to hold those individuals to account at election 

time. They simply have to vote for someone else who actually 

didn‟t make the decision at the end of the day, if in fact 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is the group that is making the 

decisions at the end of the day. I think people understand this 

basic tenet of democracy, that the people that you elect should 

in fact be the people that make the decisions and the people that 

represent you. 

 

There are many indicators that one can look at when they‟re 

evaluating the health and strength of a democracy. People could 

look at levels of corruption and how well the civil service 

operates. People could look at how vibrant the party system. If 

there are clear political parties that are able to attract support, 

attract workers, attract finances — that‟s another indicator. 

People can also evaluate how strong and how vibrant a 

democracy is by looking at levels of civic engagement — if the 

wider community are involved in social movements, if the 

wider community is concerned about issues, and if the wider 

community is engaging with politicians with elected officials. 

 

[20:00] 

 

I think all those things are good indicators of how well a 

democracy is operating. But I think the most basic one that 

people understand is that the people they vote for are the people 

that should be making the decisions. And if they don‟t agree 

with those decisions, Mr. Speaker, they have the opportunity 

when the next election is called to turf those people. And that‟s 

a basic, basic fundamental aspect of any democracy that is 

healthy. 

 

We see it in Zimbabwe — and I will in no way say that our 

political system is approaching that of Zimbabwe — but the 

people in that country understand that the majority has voted for 

someone else who‟s made decisions . . . Or, the majority has 

voted for someone who has been in power for some time 

making decisions, and they want that person out. And sadly that 

is not coming to pass. 

 

But people in a variety of democracies, regardless of how long 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

that democracy has existed, how healthy it is, understand that 

the person that they vote for needs to be the person making the 

decisions. I think that‟s a pretty fundamental thing that‟s 

understood by people living in democratic countries. 

 

We see this, Mr. Speaker, through two general approaches that 

people have when looking at elected representatives. And this is 

the . . . There are two models that are generally viewed as how 

the society can view someone that they choose to elect, and 

that‟s the trustee model and the delegate model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The delegate model goes on the assumption that the individual 

who is elected should be doing his or her best to represent the 

interests of the majority in his or her constituency, or his or her 

group that elected them. It‟s the understanding that this person 

was selected by the majority, so they should do their best to 

understand what the will of the majority is and carry that out. 

So that can be done through a variety of means. It can be done 

through . . . some people have suggested polling as an 

appropriate approach to understand what the majority of one‟s 

constituency would like. 

 

Another approach, just through general visits that people have, 

the interaction that I talked about, the times where you‟re in the 

grocery store, general research that occurs by academia and in 

the wider community. And I would think also a good amount of 

the decision making in the delegate model is that of using one‟s 

gut, basically operating on hunches that people think the 

majority of the people support. 

 

The other approach, Mr. Speaker, is the trustee model. And this 

is the idea that those who are elected act on behalf of the people 

that were chosen. It‟s the understanding that no one person can 

encapsulate every view, can know everything that‟s going on. 

So you choose the person that you think will do the best job of 

going to represent, becoming informed of the issues, engaging 

in debate, and making the decision that is the best for the 

constituency. 

 

So we have the delegate and the trustee model. You‟ll know, 

Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the outsourcing of decision 

making. You‟ll see nowhere in that list of the delegate and the 

trustee approach is the elected representative as the outsourced 

decision maker. Simply not there because those that study how 

democracies operate understand that individuals at the end of 

the day, the people that are elected need to be making the 

decisions. 

 

And as I said, I think that the electorate knows this. They 

understand that the people that they elect in both of either the 

delegate or the trustee model . . . and in truth probably those of 

us in this room operate with one more than the other, or we 

have a type of hybrid that we identify with and do our best to 

follow. But the electorate knows that the person that they 

choose, the person that is sent from their constituency to 

represent them, is the one making the decisions. And they know 

that the one that is making the decisions, they are able to hold 

accountable at the end of the day. 

 

And that is something that the outsource model does not have, 

one example that comes to my mind, Mr. Speaker, in talking 

about how an elected official can represent his or her 

constituency, the recent Station 20 West decision. What we‟ve 

seen in the debate over the last few weeks around the Station 20 

West decision, I‟ve had a good number of people approach me 

as an elected person, someone who has a say in the 

decision-making process, albeit on the minority side of the 

legislature. But people are able to come to me with their 

questions and their concerns. 

 

I remember one morning I was pulling up to my constituency 

office and I was — it was before the opening of the hours — 

and so I was the first one there, and there was a woman 

standing at the doorstep before the hours actually opened and 

this was a woman who was concerned about the Station 20 

West decision. And she had woken up early — she was taking 

the bus to work — and she had worked in enough time into her 

schedule, had to take a different bus and come to the 

constituency beforehand to see what she could do, what role she 

might have in voicing her, her concerns about this decision. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, this individual . . . whether she voted for 

me or didn‟t vote for me in the election, that‟s beside the point. 

What the point is, is that she realised that I was the elected 

person for that area, so she was able to come to me with her 

concern, and I was able to give her advice. Now the advice on 

the Station 20 West decision was not made by Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. It was made by the Premier in cabinet one can 

assume. One could also probably assume that the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board, given their experience in the province and 

their insights, I‟m not so certain they would have made the 

same decision or recommendation; however the executive 

would like to frame it these days. 

 

But I was able to tell this person, well you know what I think 

the solution would be to rather than simply coming to me — 

I‟m an opposition member — I think you should go to other 

elected officials, other people that have been chosen and they‟re 

serving a role within the government. So my advice to her was 

well, write a letter to the Premier, straight to the Premier — 

he‟s an elected person, the head of government — and copy that 

letter to me. And I suggested that she should ask some pointed 

questions to the Premier and ask for some feedback in the 

correspondence to see if she could get any answers to the 

questions she had. 

 

Now this approach, Mr. Speaker, worked all right in that 

situation because the decision about Station 20 West had in fact 

been made by the Premier and those around him. But my 

question, Mr. Speaker — and I guess I‟m looking for direction 

on this point — in the future when decisions are made by 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, if their decisions are binding, if their 

decisions are at the end of the day the right decisions because 

they‟re divorced from politics, am I to now refer my constituent 

to write a letter to the board members of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan? Or should I say well, I don‟t actually know their 

mailing address because well they‟re not elected so that‟s not 

up on the Legislative Assembly website, but I do know one of 

them works at this corporation. And I don‟t know, but you can 

look in the phonebook, and I think their office is on the fourth 

floor. So if that‟s the individual that made the decision, I guess 

my advice would be to go talk to her. So, Mr. Speaker, if that‟s 

the approach that one is supposed to take now that the decisions 

are not being made by government, I think I would ask that 

members on both sides of the House are made aware of that 

process so that we are able to serve our constituents in the most 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

effective manner. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I see that Enterprise Saskatchewan . . . My 

comments about directing people to the Premier or directing 

people to Enterprise Saskatchewan, this is if at the end of the 

day the decisions that Enterprise Saskatchewan makes are 

actually the decisions that will be final. And in recent weeks, in 

recent months, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen some waffling on this 

issue. We‟ve seen some flip-flopping in a substantial way. 

Basically a lot of the pre-election rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, that we 

heard concerning how Enterprise Saskatchewan will operate, 

how its decisions will be binding, how it will be the final law in 

the land — metaphorically speaking — not practically but in a 

sense the de facto final law in the land if their decisions are 

binding, it‟s based on that assumption. But we‟ve seen 

flip-flopping on that. We‟ve seen some shifts, some changes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

One area where we have seen that . . . and I think this is a 

problem, this shift that‟s been occurring, because now we‟re not 

totally sure — to be honest — if the decisions rest with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan when it‟s convenient for the 

government or if the decisions actually still rest with the 

Premier and cabinet when it‟s convenient for that approach. So 

what we may see is some sort of ad hoc approach with respect 

to the actual authority that Enterprise Saskatchewan has. 

 

The one area where we have seen this is on the issue of royalty 

reviews, the issue that has been discussed in the media by 

members of cabinet and by the Premier and other, other 

individuals in our province. And so my comments here, Mr. 

Speaker, are not about whether royalty rates should be going up 

or down. That‟s not the intent of my discussion here. What is 

behind my reason for bringing this forward is that it speaks to 

the role of Enterprise Saskatchewan when it‟s convenient for 

the government or when it‟s not convenient for the government, 

when a decision is consistent with its ideology, when a decision 

is consistent with the majority of its members or when it‟s not 

consistent, or when it‟s contrary to what the Premier may want 

and the rest of the public may want. 

 

So we‟ve seen a number of quotes in the media concerning 

royalty rates. So this‟ll be to provide some background. We had 

the member from Swift Current stating on the John Gormley 

show, this was on November 22, 2007, not too long after the 

election, Mr. Speaker, when he said, “We‟ll want some advice 

from Enterprise Saskatchewan . . . on the royalty structure.” 

 

In the Leader-Post earlier, on November 17, 2007, the same 

member from Swift Current said: 

 

Let‟s make sure our royalties and our regulatory regime 

make us competitive, not just with conventional oil and 

gas, but non-conventional oil and gas (in Alberta). And 

that‟s a review we‟d want to conduct immediately through 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

So very early, and this was backed up by the member from 

Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, where the individual said and I quote: 

 

The Premier said through the election campaign that he 

would be looking at asking Enterprise Saskatchewan at an 

early opportunity to review those rates. I think it would be 

a prudent thing to do and we‟ll be looking to deal with 

that in a very short period of time. 

 

And that was from a scrum following the cabinet swearing in on 

November 12, ‟07. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those initial statements about the idea of a 

royalty review, the possibility of a royal review as it relates to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, was simply saying here‟s a task 

which we think is important, and here‟s a task that we think 

Enterprise Saskatchewan would be a suitable body to review the 

royalty structure. So this would fall into the camp, Mr. Speaker, 

during the era or the times when it is convenient for the 

decision to rest with Enterprise Saskatchewan at the end of the 

day. 

 

But the following quotes that I‟m going to read, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s been a few catches, a few conditions placed on this 

review in the following days since those initial announcements. 

And this is part of the shifting, part of the flip flopping, Mr. 

Speaker, that we‟ve seen about the role of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. And this is whether or not . . . and this all ties all 

back to the idea and the concern about Enterprise Saskatchewan 

being murky and nebulous and not really knowing how it will 

operate at the end of the day. 

 

And this is that in the days following . . . Again I‟m making no, 

no comment on whether or not royalty rates should be up or 

down. But what we‟ve seen is the Premier and members of his 

cabinet putting parameters around this review that would be 

done by Enterprise Saskatchewan. So we see what the Premier 

has also indicated . . . Excuse me, this is a quote from the 

member from Kindersley from November 22, quote, “What the 

Premier has also indicated is that he will want Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to have a look at it, but the parameters will be 

that we just don‟t think it is appropriate at this time to be raising 

royalty rates.” 

 

So on one hand, here‟s authority being given to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to do a review, but on the other hand here are 

restrictions being put on Enterprise Saskatchewan simply 

because it‟s the position of the government that at this time 

royalty rates are where they want to be, so they would hate to 

be put in a situation where this board that is separate from 

politics, this group that is separate from politics, would be 

making a recommendation that would be contrary to their views 

or contrary to their beliefs. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And I think that might be a fine position to take, Mr. Speaker. 

That might be a defendable position, but it‟s not a forthright 

position when giving a mandate to Enterprise Saskatchewan to 

be doing something because on the one hand you‟re saying, 

here are the marching orders, here‟s what we want you to do, 

this is the task we have at hand . . . oh hold on, wait a minute, 

this could turn out in a way that we don‟t actually want, a way 

that would be politically inconvenient for us, so what we‟re 

going to do is put these conditions and these parameters on it. 

So that‟s the concern, Mr. Speaker, that in adopting the 

outsourcing model approach of elected representatives, in 

adopting that model where the people that are elected aren‟t the 

ones who are accountable at the end of the day, you lose focus 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

on what the role of elected officials are and what the role of an 

advisory group should and could be. 

 

We heard a similar sentiment expressed from the member from 

Thunder Creek who has a very, obviously, a close role in the 

operation of Enterprise Saskatchewan. And on the CBC on 

April 11, not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, this individual said, 

quote: 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s tasked with reducing and 

removing barriers to growth. Reviewing royalty rates with 

any sort of a view to increasing them would be actually 

against Enterprise‟s mandate — and I don‟t expect that if 

ever we are going to review royalty rates that Enterprise 

[Saskatchewan] would be the vehicle. 

 

So now we have even a further statement about the role of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. On the one hand, they were originally 

a good place to be doing these royalty review, the royalty 

review of rates. Then we move to a middle position, Mr. 

Speaker, where, well okay, we‟ll still let Enterprise 

Saskatchewan do this review, but we‟re going to put the 

conditions in place, the parameters there that . . . We actually 

know the outcome. We know how this is going to pan out at the 

end of the day. 

 

And then more recently, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen the pendulum 

has swung even further, and what we have is the member from 

Thunder Creek responsible for Enterprise Saskatchewan saying 

that he actually doesn‟t think Enterprise Saskatchewan is a good 

place to be doing such a review, so a bit puzzling, Mr. Speaker, 

especially given the repeated statements by members of 

government about how Enterprise Saskatchewan will be such 

an appropriate place for this review to occur. 

 

On this whole point of Enterprise Saskatchewan and royalty 

reviews, it is clear that the position has been shifting. The 

position has been changing, and perhaps the position wasn‟t 

that well thought out — not unlike how Enterprise 

Saskatchewan might interface with the different line ministries 

that we‟ve seen from different ministers. When the outcome is 

guaranteed, it calls into question why one would go down that 

path in the first place. 

 

What we have seen . . . Here‟s another article, Mr. Speaker, 

from the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] on April 

11, and the title of the article is “Sask. rules out royalty review 

for more than a decade.” In here we have and I quote: 

 

An independent report found Albertans weren‟t getting 

enough for their natural resources. Alberta Premier Ed 

Stelmach later announced royalties would go up, 

prompting oil and gas companies to say they were cutting 

back their activities in the province. 

 

There will be no similar study in Saskatchewan, Boyd 

said. A Saskatchewan Party government won‟t consider 

the matter for at least three or four four-year terms . . . 

 

So 12 to 16 years, a considerable length of time. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m not making a comment as to whether or not 

royalty rates should be going up or down. My point is that the 

government‟s approach to using Enterprise Saskatchewan on 

this piece has not been consistent. It‟s been rather confusing. I 

think also to rule out any sort of royalty review and to rule out 

Enterprise Saskatchewan having that type of role is also I think 

somewhat, maybe not short-sighted, but it is somewhat one not 

being cognizant of everything that can happen in the world over 

the course of, as it was quoted, at least three or four four-year 

terms. That‟s a considerable length of time, Mr. Speaker. A lot 

can happen in the world over, I quote, “three or four four-year 

terms.” Not quite the length that I‟ve been alive but not that 

much less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to suggest that no review and to suggest that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is not the means to do that review, I think those 

comments weren‟t necessarily that well thought out, and we‟ll 

be seeing, with the position having changed so many times 

already on this, we‟ll see where it ends up. That will be 

interesting indeed. 

 

The idea of Enterprise Saskatchewan, how its role has been 

shifting as determined by the needs and wants of the Sask Party, 

it actually reminds me of a story, Mr. Speaker. In looking 

around, now I relayed to a few members that I was going to 

pass on a story, and a few people, given the name of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, thought that an allusion to Star Trek would to 

apropos. But, Mr. Speaker, I have decided that that wouldn‟t be 

the best approach . . . a little illustration to highlight the 

flip-floppy nature and how that‟s problematic, Mr. Speaker. It 

actually reminds me of the individual going in for a haircut. 

And looking around the Chamber today, Mr. Speaker, I see on 

both sides of the House, a good number of us have had haircuts. 

 

As everyone in the House knows, photos are coming up this 

week, so for the sake of posterity we want to ensure that the 

image that we are putting up on the wall of the legislature is in 

fact the image that we want people to see. So school groups for 

many ages can go by and see the image that you want so it is 

only fitting that one would want to get a haircut before a photo. 

I don‟t see a problem with that. 

 

But what I see . . . The Sask Party‟s approach with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, it‟s a bit like . . . I think when people go for a 

haircut, there are two types of people. I‟m the type of person, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not that complicated. 

 

I know what I like. I give clear instructions to the hair stylist. I 

say you know I like it fairly short, tight around the ears, clean 

on the back, a bit longer on the top of my head, and that suits 

me just fine. And I did get, I did get a haircut last Saturday, Mr. 

Speaker, and the individual followed the instructions that I had 

said — the instructions that as the person paying for the haircut, 

I felt it was my role to make that decision. 

 

But what we see, Mr. Speaker, there are some people, that they 

like to go into the hair stylist and say, you know what? I‟m not 

a hair stylist. You‟re the hair stylist. I think, I think you‟re the 

expert. I think you should decide what sort of haircut is 

occurring. So, Mr. Speaker, some people say well you have 

carte blanche to do whatever you want to my hair. So then the 

hair stylist says okay, well what I would like to do is I want to 

take a lot of hair off the top and put in some highlights and 

really do some drastic things. I think we could have some fun 

here. I‟m the expert. I think I‟m the person that should be doing 

this. 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

But then some people, Mr. Speaker, say oh no, no, no. I‟m 

actually quite satisfied with the type of haircut I have, and I 

know I said you could do anything you want. I know I said, Mr. 

Speaker, that you‟re the expert in the field. I know I said that 

you‟d be the person making the decisions, but I‟ve actually 

changed my mind, and you know I‟m quite fond of the mullet 

I‟ve had for many years, and I think I would like my hair just to 

stay as it is. Please don‟t touch anything. 

 

And the hair stylist said but you told me I could do what I 

wanted, Mr. Speaker. You said that I was the one making the 

decision. I was the one that could decide what to do. And the 

individual in the chair says, well tough. It turns out I can‟t have 

it appear that I‟m not actually calling the shots. I cannot have it 

appear that I‟m walking down the street with a mohawk when 

in fact I want a fairly traditional cut. 

 

So what we see I think, actually . . . Now I‟m of the position 

that the person paying for the haircut should be calling the shots 

on the haircut because that‟s what most people expect. What we 

have with the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve hung out this 

notion that Enterprise Saskatchewan will be calling the shots. 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is the one responsible. But at the end 

of the day we know that they actually are pulling the strings. 

They are the ones giving the directions. 

 

So the thing that I think Saskatchewan people need to 

remember is that if they don‟t like the haircut that they end up 

with — at the end of the day they‟re embarrassed and ashamed 

with the haircut that they have — the stylist can‟t be blamed, 

Mr. Speaker. The stylist did her best to do something different. 

The stylist tried to use her expertise, and that was what 

everyone was led to believe. But in the reality, we‟ve seen that 

the person getting the haircut was calling the shots at the end of 

the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moving on, Mr. Speaker, I do see the government‟s . . . Mr. 

Speaker, at this time, having covered how there are so many 

murky and nebulous aspects to Enterprise Saskatchewan and 

having covered how I see this as a destructive approach to our 

democracy, both in terms of how people view our democracy 

and in terms of how well it functions, I would now like to make 

some comments, Mr. Speaker, about how I view the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan as flawed. 

 

So whether they‟re ceding significant control as the Premier has 

said or whether they‟re simply using this as a puppet to give 

them political cover as we discussed — changing the mandate 

of Enterprise Saskatchewan — whatever the real motive behind 

this is, the model which they are implementing is terribly 

flawed. And we know that citizens are indeed recognizing this 

fact and citizens are concerned about this. 

 

First and foremost, Enterprise Saskatchewan is flawed because 

its unelected and unaccountable board members are not open to 

public scrutiny. There is no transparency and there is no 

accountability, Mr. Speaker. When we are elected as MLAs we 

are open to public scrutiny. If the unelected board members 

look like legislators, if they act like legislators, if they have 

their hands on the levers of the provincial economy, shouldn‟t 

they be accessible and accountable like legislators? 

 

We‟ve covered this, Mr. Speaker, in terms of people having 

concerns. I identified Station 20 West as one example. If 

decisions like that are being made in the future, certainly the 

people of this province should have the right to access those 

people, the individuals actually making the decision. 

 

One question, Mr. Speaker: if final decisions are being made by 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, I‟m curious if members of the media 

will be able to scrum members of Enterprise Saskatchewan. I‟m 

curious to see if in the same way that the media provides 

transparency and accountabilities to legislators in this 

Assembly, I‟m curious to see if final decisions are being made 

by Enterprise Saskatchewan if the media will be able to have 

unfettered access to those individuals. 

 

Another question that I have, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not 

members of the official oppositions can direct questions to the 

members of Enterprise Saskatchewan. If those individuals are 

making the decisions at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker . . . As 

you would know when we‟re in the legislature here during 

question period, we have the opportunity to ask questions 

directly to a minister. And it‟s part of the larger cycle of 

accountability and transparency. 

 

As we ask questions from this side of the House, we may or 

may not be satisfied with the types of answers that we receive 

from government members. But what it does, Mr. Speaker, it 

provides the media with a hint of something — the media with 

a story, the media to follow up with something through the 

scrum. So while we always want good answers in this House, 

we recognize that the role of an opposition and the media, those 

are two forces that do have a very significant and a very 

important role in ensuring that our democracy is healthy 

through being transparent and accountable. 

 

And the final question or one more question I have, Mr. 

Speaker, is how this group will in fact be accountable to the 

larger public. As I said in the election cycle, Mr. Speaker, if the 

masses are not pleased with a decision about something, those 

individuals have the opportunity to vote with their X. Those 

individuals have the opportunity to voice their concerns. So if 

decisions that are being made, Mr. Speaker, are through 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, if they‟re the final arbiter of how 

things will operate, how can the public ensure that 

accountability is maintained with those people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know, when MLAs are elected, we 

take an oath of allegiance or affirmation of loyalty to her 

Majesty the Queen and her heirs. We pledge that we are not 

serving our own interests, but rather we are serving the common 

good. So I wonder, Mr. Speaker, will Enterprise Saskatchewan 

board members be required to take such an oath? 

 

If individuals are in a position where they are able to have a 

very significant role in public policy, if they‟re in a position to 

make decisions about our economy, about our society, what sort 

of oath will those individuals have to take? Will they have to 

take a similar oath to elected officials if they are acting in a way 

that many legislators do in fact act? That is another question 

that begs an answer. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, that we as elected MLAs have to 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

deal with, and that is that we are subject to scrutiny from 

officers of the legislature. We file conflict of interest 

declarations which are made public, Mr. Speaker. People know 

our interests outside of our role as legislators. This is a very 

important point because people, in addition to knowing who is 

their representative in a local area, in addition to knowing that 

they can approach that person for answers to their questions, in 

addition to knowing that at the end of the day if they don‟t 

agree with the position that person has taken on a variety of bits 

of legislation, that they are able to vote against that person. In 

addition to that, Mr. Speaker, people of the public are able to 

find out where our interests lie, where our financial interests lie, 

where the financial interests of our immediate family members 

lie, what we have been involved in. 

 

As you know, we file a report with the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner and we have an interview with him. I had my 

interview some time ago, Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago or 

something like that. It‟s a good exercise I think not only for the 

transparency and the accountability of the democratic process, 

but it‟s a good exercise simply for the elected person as well. 

It‟s a reminder in that conversation, in filing those reports. 

 

And the first reports one files when they are elected are fairly 

lengthy. It took, you know, a while. I don‟t have an extensive 

portfolio as some in this House, Mr. Speaker, but you do have 

to spend some time getting all the paperwork in line and getting 

the numbers. It‟s something that many people might view as a 

bit of a thorn in their side, something that they have to do. But I 

think it serves a very important role because the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner in his judgment can determine if the 

interests that we have, the financial interests we have, could 

cloud some of our decisions, Mr. Speaker, if they could have an 

influence on the decisions that we make, if they could, if an 

elected individual could make a decision that could benefit their 

own interests or that of their family. 

 

So my question, Mr. Speaker, is if they‟re making crucial 

decisions about our provincial economy, will they be subject to 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner? If they are serving as 

quasi legislators, surely they ought to be. As we know from the 

sectors that the members of Enterprise Saskatchewan come 

from, they come from a wide cross-section of Saskatchewan 

society and Saskatchewan economy. So there‟s certainly many 

areas where they could in fact make a ruling or make a decision 

that has an influence on the current area where they are 

operating. When we are elected as MLAs, Mr. Speaker, we put 

our day jobs on hold and ought to be first and foremost working 

for our constituents. How will board members manage to carry 

on with demanding careers and still be effective members of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

 

When we are elected as MLAs, Mr. Speaker, we suspend 

activities that could compromise or even have the appearance of 

compromise and impartiality. That‟s an important point —not 

only activities that might in fact compromise, but activities that 

could have the appearance. So basically it‟s, you know, it‟s a bit 

of a smell test — if you think this is something that you could 

announce to all of your constituents, if they would be fine with 

you still being involved in a certain area. 

 

How are unelected board members, all of whom are very active 

in their respective fields, realistically expected to park their 

diverse and often competing interests at the door, Mr. Speaker? 

 

By no means, Mr. Speaker, am I criticizing the appointees of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. Each of them is certainly 

accomplished in their respective fields. Rather, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m criticizing a system that I see as setting them up for failure 

through its flawed design. It is the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

model that is flawed. It‟s flawed in its initial format as 

announced by government of completely divorcing politics 

from the decision-making process. 

 

It‟s also flawed in the shifted approach that we‟ve seen 

government take with the Enterprise Saskatchewan model. The 

idea that, well when it‟s convenient, it‟s binding; when it‟s not 

convenient is there‟s actually parameters and restrictions put in 

place . . . And it‟s also flawed in the aspect, Mr. Speaker, that 

for some things the Sask Party will just flip-flop on the issue 

altogether and say, well at the end we actually don‟t want that 

topic to go to Enterprise Saskatchewan. It‟s too problematic for 

how we might look at the end of the day. So it‟s not a criticism 

of the people on Enterprise Saskatchewan. It‟s a criticism of 

this flawed design that I have been talking about. 

 

It doesn‟t take much to imagine some of the challenging 

situations that board members will be put into. Each of these 

appointees is still working in full-time, high-profile day jobs. If 

a person cannot serve two masters, Mr. Speaker, how can we 

realistically expect these board members to be able to park their 

diverse and competing perspectives at the door and exclusively 

work for the common good? So the membership of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, touching on many areas of Saskatchewan‟s 

society as we have talked about, whether it‟s education sector, 

industry sector, the labour movement sector. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, if an individual is not meeting with the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, if they‟re not first and 

foremost an MLA, if they‟re not approaching the role of 

decision making as a very heavy responsibility and one that is 

very important, if it‟s simply a side pursuit, if it‟s simply a side 

project that they‟re involved in from day to day, Mr. Speaker, I 

don‟t think that‟s the kind of group, I don‟t think it‟s fair to ask 

those people to make the decisions that really matter to people 

and the decisions that have long-lasting impacts, long-lasting 

influence on the wider population in this province. 

 

There are also, Mr. Speaker, other questionable aspects of this 

Bill. For instance, why does section 5 of this Act say that 

Enterprise Saskatchewan can accept contributions or receive 

monies from any source? Does this mean that lobby groups can 

donate financially to Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

 

Why would Enterprise Saskatchewan need non-government 

funding? With no accountability mechanisms in place, it‟s clear 

that this is a flawed approach. If it‟s an option to be contributing 

financial resources, if it‟s an option to be contributing money, 

clearly there needs to be an accountability mechanism in there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It still appears uncertain whether decisions will be made on a 

consensus basis or by a simple majority. We‟ve talked about 

how diverse the Enterprise Saskatchewan board is, how it 

represents many interests, how there are many people involved. 

While many times I would imagine that consensus could be 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

reached, while many times I would think that consensus would 

be an achievable outcome, there are other times, Mr. Speaker, 

where I think consensus just won‟t be achievable because 

people have different perspectives, people have different 

viewpoints. 

 

With such diverse and competing interests represented on the 

board, the media asked the minister if the option of a minority 

report will be available to board members who disagree with 

the decision of the board. And he said, he hadn‟t thought of 

that, just hadn‟t thought of it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that‟s another question really, around the idea 

of how dissent within Enterprise Saskatchewan will be handled 

— dissent occurring within Enterprise Saskatchewan, within the 

board members that are there. And I guess also the wider 

question is, what happens when Enterprise Saskatchewan 

decides on something that is contrary to what cabinet or the 

Premier wants? What happens in that situation? Is Enterprise 

Saskatchewan . . . If a majority of the individuals on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan were of one opinion, but perhaps the two 

ministers sitting on Enterprise Saskatchewan were of a different 

opinion, does everyone‟s opinion get reported? How does this 

operate? 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the press conference at the end of February, the 

minister said that the board will meet no more than one day per 

month. In fact I‟m told he said that the board will meet 

hopefully less than one day per month. With so much 

responsibility being handed over to this board by the 

government, one can‟t help but question what can truly be 

accomplished with less than 12 meetings per year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s also — this point of the frequency of the meetings, the 

length of the meetings, the intensity of the meetings — it‟s 

interesting if we go back, Mr. Speaker, to the earlier statements 

that we saw last week on Thursday from the Standing 

Committee on Human Services and the Standing Committee on 

the Economy. We were told that consultation with, in the case 

of Advanced Education and Employment, the consultation on 

the issue that we were discussing in committee would be 

occurring within the next 30 to 60 days. 

 

Well a long, long, long list of stakeholders were identified in 

this list on a sort of off-the-cuff way. It wasn‟t a crisp list that 

was provided in written form. We see that if this is happening in 

one ministry, we could certainly see it happening in a number 

of ministries. So I‟m curious, Mr. Speaker, that if Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is in fact meeting once a month, how they are 

expecting to get this all this work done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the concept of intelligent design does not 

apply to the Enterprise Saskatchewan model. Rather all I see is 

a very flawed design. This legislation is a sort of primordial 

soup and how it will evolve is still very much unknown to not 

only the people of Saskatchewan, but apparently its creators 

who sit opposite. 

 

And we‟ve seen this, Mr. Speaker, through how the directions 

given to Enterprise Saskatchewan really have been shifting in 

the sand. We‟ve seen how it started out as, no, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan word is the law; it‟s the final and ultimate 

decision. Now we move to a middle position as identified, Mr. 

Speaker, where well Enterprise Saskatchewan — we‟ll take 

their opinion when it‟s convenient with us, when it‟s consistent 

with our ideology. That is okay. And then we move to yet 

another position, Mr. Speaker, where, well for some things 

probably we don‟t even go to Enterprise Saskatchewan because 

we‟re too worried about what the final outcome, the final 

recommendation or if it‟s stronger than a recommendation, 

what the final verdict will be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I get to my conclusion, Mr. Speaker, with such 

uncertainty about the real motives behind this Bill, with such a 

destructive design no matter what those motives are, and with 

so many flaws within the model, it is no wonder why so many 

Saskatchewan people and so many of my constituents in 

Saskatoon Massey Place are scratching their heads and 

wondering what the government is thinking. The signals have 

indeed been mixed and confusing. Saskatchewan people are 

confused about the intent behind this legislation. People are 

uncertain about the rationale — as we‟ve discussed it‟s very 

murky — and the purpose of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan people are asking why we need this new entity 

now, especially given how well our economy is doing, given as 

I referenced in the initial part of my speech, Mr. Speaker, the 

very positive statements that were made in The Globe and Mail 

concerning what has been happening in Saskatchewan really 

over the last decade. 

 

And Saskatchewan people are asking who will be held 

accountable for these decisions. If Enterprise Saskatchewan is 

calling the shots, if they are the ones at the end of the day 

responsible, people want to know how they could hold those 

people accountable. Can they do it through the electoral 

process? Can they do it through writing letters? Can they do it 

through showing up at their offices? 

 

The intent behind this legislation is unclear. Either the 

government is ceding significant decision-making power to an 

unelected body or they intend to use this new entity as an 

expensive puppet to carry out some unpopular actions. Mr. 

Speaker, it may be the case that this government simply wants 

to blame Enterprise Saskatchewan for a possible bad haircut at 

the end of the day. 

 

Either way, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is destructive because it 

undercuts democracy. It either outsources the decision-making 

responsibilities that belong with government and legislatures as 

we‟ve talked about — the need to comply with the different 

officers of the Legislative Assembly — or, Mr. Speaker, it adds 

a shroud of secrecy to what should be a transparent 

decision-making process. 

 

On this point, Mr. Speaker, if decisions are made by a group of 

unelected people from time to time — once a month, every now 

and then, here and there — how will these people be kept 

accountable? Will the media have a role? Will opposition 

members through questioning have a role? What will this look 

like? 

 

And the Enterprise Saskatchewan model itself is fundamentally 

flawed in its design in so many ways. It sets the unelected board 

members up for failure as they try to balance their diverse 

interests with their new role as quasi legislators. It allows for 

influence peddling by accepting financial contributions from 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

outside of government. And there is no accountability and 

transparency built into the model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it‟s clear that we need a lot more discussion about this 

Bill, and even more importantly we need to look, we need a lot 

more answers from the government about this Bill. I look 

forward to hearing the other speakers as I seek to address my 

grave concerns about this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I conclude my remarks now, I would like to 

thank members on both sides of the House for their attention. 

And I would like to thank them for the opportunity to pose 

these questions — questions that I think indeed deserve a 

question, Mr. Speaker. So with that I will conclude my remarks. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[20:45] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to be able to rise and add 

my comments to the Enterprise Saskatchewan Bill, An Act 

respecting Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was reading with interest the headlines in the 

newspaper the other day, and the headline said “Province‟s 

economic forecast is positive.” The article went on to talk about 

high commodity prices, a favourable business climate, and 

Saskatchewan being poised to replace Alberta as Canada‟s 

economic growth leader in 2008. Record prices for 

Saskatchewan‟s resources are fuelling our very strong economy 

and it‟s been building over the last few years and we‟re really 

beginning to feel it now. 

 

Economic indicators show that Saskatchewan tops the nation in 

percentage growth, and retail sales here in Saskatchewan for 

January are number one across Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

was very some very good news when they said in the year 2007 

Saskatchewan‟s population grew by 16,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that we can all feel it. We all know 

that prosperity is a mark of Saskatchewan. Wholesale trade and 

international export values are also holding down number one 

spot in Canada. And I think we can all agree that our economy 

is booming and that secret of that Saskatchewan advantage that 

we‟ve known all along about is a secret no longer. 

 

And with all this momentum and good news I‟m curious as to 

why the Saskatchewan Party government is bound and 

determined to embark on this expensive experiment that we call 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, with a budget so far projected at $8 

million for Enterprise Saskatchewan, and not a wheel or a piece 

of paper has turned. Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s plan of laying 

the groundwork and removing barriers to economic growth has 

seemingly been left in the dust by our economy. 

 

So why is Enterprise Saskatchewan needed when we‟ve heard 

all these glowing reports about our economy, all the projections 

by financial institutions for the coming year? We can see it in 

the economy. We can see it across the province. So what‟s the 

purpose of having Enterprise Saskatchewan come up behind all 

the activity, and do what? For a cost of $8 million to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, what exactly is this bureaucracy 

going to do. 

 

Even we can go back where the Premier acknowledged in a 

letter as early as 2004 that the province has a reputation as a 

business-friendly environment. Now we didn‟t often hear him 

say that in those days but I guess he did put it in writing a 

couple of times and must have believed it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what purpose will Enterprise Saskatchewan serve and what 

areas will be focused on by this corporation? The Premier has 

stated that Enterprise Saskatchewan will be “free of the 

temporal influence of politics.” Then he went against earlier 

announcements of an outside person chairing the board of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and appointed the minister as Chair 

and another minister as a board member. So much for free of 

temporal influences of politics. 

 

The government then hand-picked the organizations that 

received an invitation to put forward names for membership on 

the board. Then this government used some unknown process to 

hand-pick board members for the board which it chairs. The 

government drew up the legislation that governs the board and 

this government will also write and approve detailed regulations 

that define the Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let‟s see how this goes. They appoint the 

minister to be the Chair. They hand-pick the board. They write 

the rules and the regulations, plus set the mandate. So for a 

price tag of $8 million we have an Enterprise Saskatchewan free 

of the temporal influences of politics? I don‟t think so, Mr. 

Speaker. This $8 million is a huge question mark: what it‟s for, 

what it will be spent for. And the big question is why. 

 

So as we‟re going through this process to establish Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, this government seems extremely reluctant to 

actually give up the political influence they have sought for so 

long and are busily picking their own projects and priorities — 

and while set-up continues for the corporation that is to provide 

consistency in three points that are identified in the legislation. 

The first being that taxes are competitive with other 

jurisdictions. The second is that barriers to economic growth are 

reduced and removed. The third is labour laws are balanced and 

fair to employers and unions. 

 

But what have we seen over the past couple of months? Elected 

government members comment at length on various tax issues. 

Yes, we will review royalty rates. No, we won‟t review royalty 

rates. If only there were a better word for it, I think the Premier 

commented in Calgary. Is this not part of the proposed 

Enterprise Saskatchewan mandate? 

 

Education property tax, this government didn‟t wait for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. They appointed an MLA to study yet 

again this issue and to report by the end of the year — nicely 

pushing the topic off this budget cycle and probably off next 

budget cycle and delaying any serious decisions for at least a 

year or two. Isn‟t this part of Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s 

mandate? Is not property tax, the education portion of property 

tax identified by SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] as a barrier? But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

government doesn‟t seem to be able to grasp the concept, free 

of the temporal influences of politics. 

 

On the second point, barriers to economic growth are reduced 

and removed. This is part of the mandate to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. In the last few short months we‟ve seen some 

large-scale projects announced without details and without any 

sort of timelines. The intermodal facility announced outside of 

Regina with no details and no input for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Major highways projects have been announced 

with no input from Enterprise Saskatchewan. Training seats 

have been announced with no input from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Uranium clean coal project has been announced 

with no input from Enterprise Saskatchewan. Uranium 

enhancement, refinement, or a possible reactor have been 

mused about by various elected members, again with no input 

from Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Are there barriers that would make these projects better or are 

there other projects that may be more beneficial to the 

province? We‟ll never know. They‟ve never been given a . . . 

Because what we‟ve seen is that Enterprise Saskatchewan has 

been given an end run by this government who‟ve really 

circumvented all the processes that they have put in place. 

 

So who will answer the questions as to why they‟re building 

this corporation — spending millions of taxpayers‟ dollars — 

when they‟ve already made many, many decisions that will 

need to be funded for the next three to four years? With 

multiple sector councils and committees, what will they do over 

this period of time? Will they put forward recommendations, 

give advice to government when decisions have already been 

made and resources committed, or will they just be agreeing to 

projects already announced by this government, doing a nice 

little rubber stamp saying, what a wonderful job you‟re doing? 

It‟s rather expensive to have an $8 million rubber stamp 

following around the government approving all their decisions. 

 

The trouble is, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t seem to be able to wait 

for the Enterprise Saskatchewan board or the sector councils or 

the committees to give recommendations or advice. They‟re 

frantically trying to jump out in front of every possible parade 

passing by. 

 

The next point in the mandate is the labour laws — ensuring 

that labour laws are balanced and fair to both employers and 

unions. When we review Enterprise Saskatchewan papers from 

its early beginnings way back when the Sask Party members 

jumped on a plane for Ireland to check out Enterprise Ireland, 

we see a paper that didn‟t change much until more recently. 

Nowhere in any copies or speeches on the topic of the economy 

do we see labour laws highlighted as barriers to growth. There 

is absolutely nothing in the economic plan put forward by this 

Saskatchewan Party to suggest labour laws are a barrier 

anywhere to economic growth, yet here we see it in The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. 

 

When the paper was first launched in 2004, no mention of 

labour laws. In 2005, with the Saskatchewan Party release of 

The Promise of Saskatchewan: A New Vision for Saskatchewan 

. . . there is again no mention of labour laws. This economic 

paper, 10 months later, changed to include “Non-negotiable and 

foundational to the terms of reference given to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will be changes to labour legislation . . .” 

 

So why all of a sudden — when the Premier had acknowledged 

in letters in ‟04 what a business-friendly environment we have 

— all of a sudden it‟s not acknowledged in any of the economic 

papers, but then we see 10 months later it starts to appear in 

some of their platform material and stump speeches that they 

did around the province and in Alberta? 

 

Proposed labour law changes have been tabled and with no 

input from Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Why would you jump out ahead again of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and start making changes before you have this 

corporation up and running? Why make labour laws part of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s mandate and then move ahead with 

the current proposed changes? It doesn‟t make sense. Why are 

we making the decisions ahead of time? 

 

Why are we committing the province‟s finances for three and 

four years and beyond with the clean coal project? Why are we 

talking about long-term highway programs, but we‟re turning 

this over to Enterprise Saskatchewan? The decisions are being 

made already by this government so what are they going to 

spend $8 million on Enterprise Saskatchewan to have them do? 

 

Why circumvent a major plank in their commitments to 

Saskatchewan voters? When first announced, when Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was first announced, many worried that this 

government did not trust their own judgment when it came to 

making economic decisions and that they were just distancing 

themselves with an unelected board to guard against failure. 

That could be, but they just can‟t give up on the lure of political 

influence they so often railed against. Why are we spending 

millions of taxpayers‟ dollars to establish a corporation — a 

corporation which is growing and expanding daily — to make 

decisions that are no longer relevant or necessary because this 

government has circumvented the very process they‟ve talked 

about and put in place or are working to put in place? 

 

Why seek advice on the direction the province should be taking 

when they‟ve already decided which road to take? Why seek 

advice or recommendations on the appropriate training and 

support for job creation if you‟ve already announced where and 

what type of training seats you will expand and where your 

priorities are? If this government doesn‟t trust its own judgment 

on economic, taxation, or labour issues, then is this truly the 

right process to put in place? And what about a government that 

campaigned on being transparent and accountable? And this 

legislation definitely does not accomplish that promise. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of blogs that have some 

very good analysis on Enterprise Saskatchewan and raise many 

questions. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read just a couple of 

those to put them on the record. How many sector teams will 

there be? How will they be selected? What qualifications are 

required for membership? How much will they be paid? Will all 

names be made public? Will board, committee, and sector 

meetings be open to the public? Will reports and 

correspondence be accessible to the public? 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

[21:00] 

 

When you look at the actual legislation and you see section 

5(1)(d), the agency can “accept contributions or receive moneys 

from any source . . . [to carry] out its purposes.” 

 

Will names of donors and amounts contributed be made public? 

Will the agency be permitted to receive contributions from 

organizations whose members sit on either the board or a sector 

team? Will members of the board, sector teams, and committees 

be covered by the conflict of interest Act? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a huge issue and a huge question about the 

accountability of this operation and conflict requirements. 

When you look around this room, any of us that are charged 

with the responsibilities of managing public resources also have 

requirements for accountability and openness. What processes 

will be in place to safeguard public resources and ensure 

accountability for this unelected board and multiple unelected 

sector councils and committees in Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

 

The numbers of questions on this whole initiative continue to 

grow daily, especially when we take into consideration the 

Premier has written letters stating the province has a reputation 

as a business-friendly environment. In an April 2007 news 

release, he referred to Saskatchewan as one of the “lowest cost 

jurisdiction . . . with fewer trade barriers and restrictions than 

either B.C. or Alberta.” 

 

So with these glowing comments on our economy, with the 

glowing comments from the Premier, with the glowing 

comments from the members opposite, why are they still 

looking to turn over . . . I‟m not sure what decisions are left 

because a lot of money has been spent, a lot of money has been 

committed to some long-term projects. They‟re really setting 

the course that Saskatchewan is on, but yet they‟re going to 

spend $8 million to establish a series of boards, committees, 

and councils to give advice. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s pretty difficult to give advice 

when you‟re after the fact of the decisions. Now I guess maybe 

that‟s the way they do it because they actually tabled legislation 

before the department started to do any work on it, being it was 

brought in from an outside source. So maybe this is the way 

they work, kind of backwards from making a decision. Go work 

backwards and do the groundwork. I don‟t know, but it doesn‟t 

make any sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is still there: why is this Sask Party 

government determined to embark on this questionable 

economic experiment at a time when Saskatchewan‟s economy 

is booming? We are the envy of many provinces right across the 

country and beyond. The people of Saskatchewan are working, 

have worked, and will continue to work to make this province 

the best place in Canada to live, work, and raise a family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it seems rather after the fact, and we‟re kind 

of putting the cart in front of the horses here with establishing 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. And I truly do question the $8 million 

that it will cost for Enterprise Saskatchewan. That‟s $8 million 

that could‟ve done what? Built Station 20. That $8 million that 

could go towards the Moose Jaw Union Hospital renovations. 

That‟s $8 million that could go to build roads in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But no, what we‟re doing, we‟re having some friends of the 

Saskatchewan Party set up on boards, so they can sit around and 

talk about how well the province is doing. Well they‟re a little 

bit late. 

 

Everyone knows. We‟ve seen it all in the media. We know the 

province is humming. And we know that the opportunities are 

there to continue building. Mr. Speaker, the question remains, 

why are we building Enterprise Saskatchewan? Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to rise to talk about this particular legislation. 

 

And I have to say that when I heard this legislation was going to 

be introduced in the fall, it struck me, you know, kind of 

interesting way. I can kind of remember the first time I 

wondered about the word enterprise. 

 

And this is many years ago, but there was a huge ship coming 

into Vancouver harbour, and they were concerned that it 

wouldn‟t make it under the Lions Gate Bridge. And it was 

called the USS Enterprise, and it was an aircraft carrier. And it 

was part of the American fleet that was obviously travelling 

around the world to show the strength of the United States 

during the ‟50s. And, Mr. Speaker, I wondered why a ship like 

that would have the name Enterprise. 

 

And I remember looking it up and trying to figure out, well 

what does this actually mean? And then it wasn‟t too many 

years after that, that we all heard about the Enterprise as a ship 

again, only this time a ship in space on the Star Trek show 

which then in many ways became the encapsulation of a whole 

idea about how we would, as humans, venture out into space. 

And there are many people that are still captured by that 

particular vision. 

 

But as we know, this term has come into more recent use as a 

result of some of the things that have happened in Ireland and in 

other countries, and it does have some positive connotations 

around the concept of doing things together, doing things in a 

way that allows for the whole of a community to be a joint 

enterprise or a common enterprise or a co-operative enterprise. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what struck me as I was looking through 

what kinds of attributes we see in this particular legislation was 

actually quite curious, and I know that you sort of try to figure 

out, well what exactly is this. And ultimately I had to return to 

one of our famous Saskatchewan poets, a woman named Lorna 

Crozier. 

 

She‟s teaching out in Victoria right now, but she‟s from Swift 

Current where our Premier is from. And she wrote a great book 

quite a number of years ago called The Sex Lives of Vegetables. 

And one of the poems was written about the cauliflower, and 

this is the poem. And I would like to read it to you. 

 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Cauliflower 

 

The garden‟s pale brain, 

it knows the secret 

lives of all the vegetables, 

holds their fantasies, 

their green libidos, 

in its fleshy lobes. 

 

That‟s the whole poem right there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

strikes me that in a kind of a weird way, this Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is the cauliflower brain of the Saskatchewan 

Party that has all its lumpy lobes where they‟re trying to figure 

out which direction we go. And what we see from the initial 

application of this idea to what we have here and to what we 

think we‟re going to see as this is amended or more pieces 

come together, is that it is malleable. It‟s possible of being 

cooked and being mushy because it never quite knows exactly 

what it‟s going to do. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to think that the best 

description of Enterprise Saskatchewan, so far, is not just fresh 

cauliflower but cooked cauliflower, that kind of soft cauliflower 

that we know because it‟s malleable and it‟s changeable. And in 

fact rather than being something independent and something 

quite strong like a fresh cauliflower, it actually has ministers 

right in the heart of this thing which will defeat the initial 

purpose of this which was to move the economic issues out of 

the political realm into some other realm. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that when the members opposite 

sat down to try to design this along the concept that they‟d had 

a few years ago, that there were a number of challenges of 

trying to control fresh cauliflower. It‟s a little too strong. It‟s a 

strong taste. But if you cook it a bit, then you can control it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we have now is that mushy version. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the original concept had some positive 

values. Like I say, as you go back to the word, enterprise, what 

it means, it means a whole task that you intend to do together 

with a number of people who are part of that. But what we see 

now is substantially less than that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s another aspect of this, and I‟ll 

come at it with another description. And basically it relates to 

what happens when you have people working together within 

an organization, and there‟s a fellow that wrote a book a few 

years ago, his name‟s James Surowiecki, and it was published 

in 2004 by Doubleday. The book is called The Wisdom of 

Crowds — Why the Many are Smarter Than the Few and How 

Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and 

Nations. Now this is a serious book about how decisions are 

made. 

 

And this book talks about the fact that when you have a large 

number of people, quote, “under the right conditions”, you can 

almost invariably make a smarter decision as a group even than 

the smartest individual among them. And some of the examples 

from this book are quite interesting, and I‟ll tell you some of 

them because I‟ll think you‟d be interested to hear about it. 

 

One of the first examples was a submarine that went down, and 

they were trying to locate this submarine at the bottom of the 

ocean. And they ended up deciding what they would do was get 

all of the information from everybody who had some 

knowledge of where the submarine might have been. They put 

all this information together and then made a decision about 

approximately where it would be based on the information from 

everybody. And they came within 200 metres of where the 

submarine was, and they were able to retrieve it. 

 

Another similar example — and this is over 100 years old, this 

example — involved people going to a fair, an exhibition like 

one of our exhibitions here in Saskatchewan 100 years ago. And 

they were all asked to guess from looking at a live beef cow that 

was there in the fair how many pounds of dressed meat would 

come out of that cow after it had been butchered, and what they 

. . . It‟s kind of like guessing, you know. What we see more 

often is guessing the number of jelly beans in the jar or 

something like that, but this was a guess. And the people that 

were making the guesses were people who were involved in the 

cattle business, and when they ended up taking all of the 

guesses and putting them into a calculation, they came up with 

a number that was very close to what the dressed weight was of 

that butchered beef. 

 

And so the point of these kinds of stories is that it also reflects 

what happens in the stock market. The stock market is a good 

guess by many, many people making choices with their own 

money as to what happens. And so what comes of something 

like this is that you end up then with the wisdom of many 

people making some choices. 

 

Now one of the problems that arises in making decisions 

coming from the results of many, many people‟s advice is that 

there has to be a diversity of opinion that‟s involved. The 

people that are involved have to be independent in what they 

do. The decision making has to be decentralized. And when you 

aggregate the information, when you put the information back 

together, you have to be careful how that‟s done. 

 

But one of the key points that comes out of this kind of 

discussion about how decisions are made — whether it‟s a 

management decision in a business or whether it‟s a decision by 

a government or decision by something like Enterprise 

Saskatchewan — is that it‟s absolutely crucial that you have the 

whole array of opinions involved in what‟s happening. 

 

Now one of the positive parts of this particular legislation is that 

there is a group of 12 people that appear to have quite a wide 

array of opinions and so there hopefully will be some dissent in 

the advice that comes through Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

[21:15] 

 

But if in fact there ends up being a way that the wide variety of 

information in this Enterprise Saskatchewan is somehow 

squelched or sidelined which appears to be more what‟s 

happening, then it will not have the effect that anybody 

intended three years ago or which is what‟s true in other 

particular jurisdictions where they have this kind of a common 

enterprise or common plan together. 

 

Now when one gets involved in any kind of activity, it often 

comes down to who are the leaders? Who are the people who 

provide the advice? And that can become a major problem and 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

once again to give you a couple of interesting examples. 

 

People are trying to move a desk through a door and they can‟t 

get it through. And they finally come to the conclusion they 

have to take the door frame off and actually damage the house 

to get this particular piece of furniture into the house. 

Somebody comes along who has nothing to do with moving or 

with this major problem and says remove the door and allow it 

to get in. What happens, what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that 

quite often the kinds of advice that we get from different groups 

is ignored or is not used. 

 

Now there‟s another recent book out — and I think it‟s 

published actually in this year even, maybe in 2007 — called 

Executive Intelligence. And the whole premise of the book is 

that when you have leaders who are going to provide direction 

for a government, for a company that there are certain people 

that seem to have an ability to look in another way than what 

everybody else expects. 

 

And I think if I use some of the terms that are used . . . there‟s 

one of the managers, Jim Collins, he calls these people, the 

right people. The right people are in control. Jack Welch who 

we all know is a CEO [chief executive officer] said they‟re the 

stars of your operation. Peter Drucker, another professor, who 

calls them the masterful conductors. And the question becomes, 

well what is it that makes these stars or these right people better 

at doing things than others within your organization? And I 

think this also talks about what makes an organization — or in 

this case we‟re talking about a government — one that people 

will respect and actually say, well they‟re doing things that 

make sense to us. 

 

And when one looks at, well what is executive intelligence? 

What is that smart factor that makes for a difference in what 

happens in people‟s lives? One of the factors that‟s not always 

recognized is that these stars, or these masterful conductors, 

have the ability to not to fall into the trap that political parties 

fall into. And I would argue here that this is where the Sask 

Party is, is that it goes forward with imperfect data. It goes 

forward without getting involved in getting all of the 

information, or they process it in a way that destroys what‟s 

going on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this book they talk about common errors 

of business judgment. And I want to talk about this because I 

think Enterprise Saskatchewan falls into the traps that we hear 

already here tonight in the response from some of the members 

who are sitting here. 

 

The first common error of business judgment is called undue 

optimism or overconfidence. And, Mr. Speaker, we see that, we 

see that all over the place here. And this is not a personality trait 

as it relates to an individual. It‟s a trait that relates to a whole 

group of people working together. And it‟s the tendency 

basically to subconsciously overestimate how much they know 

about a particular subject. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my argument here tonight is that this 

particular legislation is a reflection of this common error of 

business judgment, of overconfidence, in that it seems to play 

into this, well we know exactly what we‟re going to do here and 

we‟re going to in fact diminish the broader role of advice which 

this Enterprise Saskatchewan was originally set up to pull back 

into the vision of the party and the vision of the control of the 

ministers. And this goes back to the speech I made last week 

about the centralizing of control. 

 

So then you talk about . . . well what is another error of the 

business judgment that shows up, and that‟s a sign of somebody 

who doesn‟t have this star quality or this executive intelligence. 

And the second one is called availability bias. And effectively 

what it is, is that often people assume the most recent 

information is the best information, and they make decisions 

based on that. 

 

And this is, I think, the bit of the arrogance around what is 

happening now — that a vote on a single day means that they 

can cut off a lot of the good advice that‟s been part of the 

community for a long period of time. And this kind of snap 

judgment is not unusual. It‟s kind of how people have evolved 

to make decisions because you have to make decisions often in 

tight situations. 

 

But in a situation like what‟s happened around this particular 

business, it becomes like an optical illusion. It‟s a trick. You‟re 

dealing with things where you‟re making decisions based on 

some short-term information rather than looking at why a 

previous government made decisions that they did, why senior 

civil servants — who unfortunately a number of the best ones 

have been diverted out of the whole structure — why they gave 

the kinds of advice they did over many, many years. 

 

And so you end up then getting caught where you don‟t have 

the right information and that causes a business error as well. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is also a major challenge that 

we have here. 

 

A third error, a common business error that‟s made is called 

frames. Or I guess another way of putting it is that there are 

certain files where we end up . . . if you‟re using programming 

language, there‟s certain files that you use to filter out the 

information that you‟ve got. And I don‟t think there‟s any 

question at all that that‟s what we‟ve been seeing on the 

legislation as it relates to the trade unions. That‟s what we‟ve 

been seeing about the legislation that relates to a whole number 

of areas — that there‟s almost a filter that pushes out any of the 

other ideas. 

 

And this once again becomes the characteristic of a common 

business error, is that the files are used inappropriately. And it 

takes a big person, a special person, a star to say you have to go 

on a broader basis and look at more of the information than 

what is coming from the sources that you use. 

 

And I think that‟s crucial, and sometimes it‟s a hard thing for a 

new government to do because they‟re so convinced that what 

they‟ve been working at for a number of years to get elected is 

what got them there, as opposed to looking at all of the 

information that‟s right across the whole situation. 

 

And then I think the fourth and final error where it‟s a common 

business error that shows or reflects that people don‟t have 

executive intelligence, they don‟t have this ability to be a star, 

and that relates to the concept of what people call pattern 

matching. 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

They get so used to making decisions in one way that when 

they get a little bit of information they assume that it‟s going to 

match a previous pattern, and they go down a certain track. And 

one of the characteristics of an intelligent executive, of a star or 

somebody who‟s running a business properly, is that they don‟t 

let themselves get caught into those kind of tracks or traps. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that what we see in this legislation, 

especially as it‟s been changed, reflects that use of decisions or 

decision making that follows a pattern or a track and that is 

going to get us all into trouble if there isn‟t a recognition that 

you need to step back a bit and take some time in doing what 

you‟re doing. 

 

So I think the point of me raising this issue of star quality of 

decision making or executive intelligence is that we seem to 

hear from the members opposite that this particular legislation 

is crucial in providing direction for the province in the years to 

come. Unfortunately what we‟re hearing and what we‟re 

picking up as we listen to the descriptions of what‟s going to 

happen here, it misses the point in quite a number of areas that 

are common business errors. 

 

And so I would say to the members opposite, slow down a bit 

here. Look a little more broadly at what kinds of advice you‟re 

going to get, and in fact be like a good executive or a good 

leader and seek advice right across the board, and make sure 

that you don‟t get caught into some patterns that are going to 

cause not just you trouble but our whole province trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the economy of this province has moved and is on 

a very good track right now. And this is not a short-term track 

or this hasn‟t developed in a short period of time. This has been 

people working together over many years to build a base to 

move forward, and I know that the intention of the members 

opposite is that they will continue that track and continue things 

going on a positive basis. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

see in this legislation a clear pattern or path that provides 

confidence to me or to the community that there‟s some sense 

that people know where they‟re going. And I think that‟s the 

part that people need to work at, and if in fact that isn‟t as clear 

as they all seem to think some days, slow down, take some 

time, get this right, because if we get on the wrong track with 

this particular piece of legislation then we‟re all in trouble. 

None of us want that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that this legislation has the feel 

of cooked cabbage. I‟m hoping that it will be something 

different, that it will in fact be the enterprise that the original 

ideas around economic enterprise have had. I think if the 

province is able to capture the economic leadership and ideas of 

many of the people who are working across our province in 

their particular communities and do it on a broad basis for the 

province, then that can be a positive thing. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see that in what we‟ve 

seen so far. And I‟m very fearful that we‟re going to end up 

with something which diverts the attention of everybody from 

the task at hand, which is to build a community together which 

will withstand all of the rigours of the world economy. So thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to join in this debate and particularly early in this 

debate before everyone gets tired and cranky and grumpy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We‟ve been waiting for you. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The member from Saskatoon Southeast says 

he was waiting, so here I am. Mr. Speaker, the story of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is a relatively long story in 

Saskatchewan politics. Harold Wilson, Prime Minister Harold 

Wilson once said, “A week is a long time in politics”. And so 

five years is a very long time — it‟s made up of over 250 

weeks. I could go into how many hours in a week. We‟d sitting 

most of them, I think, this week and for the next four weeks 

after that. 

 

[21:30] 

 

But the original concept of Enterprise Saskatchewan actually 

predates the current Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. The 

former leader, Elwin Hermanson, who is no longer with us, 

originally came up with the idea of Enterprise Saskatchewan in 

2003. And that was the Saskatchewan Party plan to focus the 

major Crowns on what he called their core services. Now core 

services for SaskTel would be mostly things that don‟t make 

money, Mr. Speaker, and at least for that Crown corporation 

would have been the privatization of SaskTel without a doubt. 

 

Now that particular policy was tested in the 2003 election and 

wasn‟t found to be particularly popular. But Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, at least the term Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

survived. And it survived, I think, in large part, Mr. Speaker, 

because the Saskatchewan Party was desperate to try to be 

saying something different about what they would do about the 

economy. 

 

Having the province‟s finances having been restored, he had an 

economy that was growing and was growing in the resource 

sector particularly. But it was growing in industrial sectors. It 

was growing in exports. It was growing in investments, both 

public and private, and the economy was just growing. And the 

Saskatchewan Party opposition, as it then was, kind of casting 

about for what could we possibly do or say that would sound 

different than what the government is obviously — the 

government of the day, the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government — is obviously being so successful at? 

 

And it was difficult. It was difficult, Mr. Speaker. It was 

difficult for them because, you know, if they didn‟t have 

anything different to say about corporate taxation and they 

didn‟t really have anything different to say about very much 

else . . . And I think it was sometimes a little frustrating for the 

opposition of the day, the Saskatchewan Party opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, because . . . For example, one day the leader of that 

party said, after listing a whole group of essential platitudes, 

Mr. Speaker, and nothing different than what the government of 

the day was doing in any distinctive way, had one distinctive 

thing to say. He said, my party, the Saskatchewan Party, would 

consider — consider —bringing an end to mandatory 

retirement, and that was the news hit. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the government had already put 

into the House, had introduced the legislation, hadn‟t received 

first reading yet, but had already introduced the Bill eliminating 

mandatory retirement — not considering it, Mr. Speaker, but 

doing what governments are supposed to do and acting and had 

already acted. 

 

So it was frustrating, but there was still this idea of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. It was just, what do we say about it that makes it 

sound different? Well they said a very dramatic thing, Mr. 

Speaker. They said we will essentially blow up the Department 

of Industry and Resources. We will do away with that 

department. We will turn that department and its role in 

economic development, we will turn that over to a private group 

of non-political people who will make those decisions. 

 

And if you go to now the Premier‟s papers on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, you will see that Enterprise Saskatchewan was 

conceived as being something much different, much different 

than this legislation anticipates it being. And this legislation, it 

is clearly anticipates something much different than this 

government is going to allow, Mr. Speaker, because, as former 

speakers have said, Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s mandate has 

been almost completed by a group of ministers who have made 

declarations about labour law and declarations about resource 

royalties going forward 10 years. And what is left of what‟s 

even set out in the legislation, Mr. Speaker? Practically nothing. 

And what‟s left of the original concept of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan in the legislation? Well also very little. 

 

On December 8, 2005 the leader of the official opposition — as 

he then was; now our Premier — spoke to the North Saskatoon 

Business Association at the Delta Bessborough Hotel in 

Saskatoon. And he said a lot of things, and most of them aren‟t 

substantive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But he wanted to talk about what would happen in the first 180 

days of the new Saskatchewan economy. That would be the 

new Saskatchewan economy after a Saskatchewan Party 

government was elected, that is the 180 days that are now 

drawing to a close, Mr. Speaker. What would have happened in 

the last 180 days or fairly close to it? What would be almost 

done by now, Mr. Speaker, in other words? 

 

Well he says, in week one we would fix the next election date, 

and we‟ve heard about that legislation. Now actually, Mr. 

Speaker, I do want to stay on this Bill because I know the 

members opposite are very concerned about relevance, but the 

fixed election date Bill doesn‟t say the election will be on that 

date. Essentially it says, Mr. Speaker, it won‟t be after that date. 

It says, unless the legislature‟s dissolved the election will be on 

that date. So I‟m not sure that commitment‟s fully fulfilled but, 

Mr. Speaker, I may have an opportunity to speak to that Bill 

later and I will go back in to Bill No. 2. 

 

So what did the leader of the opposition, now Premier, say 

would happen in respect to Enterprise Saskatchewan in week 

one of a Saskatchewan Party government? That is, Mr. Speaker, 

as we now know, the last week of November, because the 

government was sworn in November 21. What was going to 

happen that week, Mr. Speaker? According to the leader of the 

party who became Premier that week, a public-private 

partnership called Enterprise Saskatchewan is announced as the 

replacement for the Industry department . . . of the Department 

of Industry and Resources. 

 

All right? I don‟t think that announcement actually did take 

place that week, Mr. Speaker. But this is what he went on to say 

at that December 8 speech, and I quote: “There will be terms of 

reference for Enterprise Saskatchewan that will not require the 

new government to wait for its first report to begin action.” 

 

So Enterprise Saskatchewan was supposed to be up and running 

the first week of the government and in fact it would have terms 

of reference in place for that first week and the new government 

wouldn‟t have to wait for its first report to begin action. Now 

how the government, in the mind of the leader of the opposition 

of the day, was going to take action on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan‟s recommendations before Enterprise 

Saskatchewan had a chance to report on them, I don‟t know, 

Mr. Speaker. But that‟s what was said. 

 

Then to continue with the quote from the remarks of the then 

leader of the opposition, now Premier, quote: 

 

Non-negotiable and foundational to the terms of reference 

given to Enterprise Saskatchewan will be changes to 

labour legislation to ensure that it is fair to workers and 

employers, as well as competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just as an aside, a competitive labour 

environment is one of the things that the Saskatchewan Party 

did talk about in opposition. They didn‟t want to say what that 

meant when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker, but they did 

say it didn‟t mean — it did not mean — essential services 

legislation when clearly it did. 

 

So whether passage of The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act fulfills 

an election promise or not, I‟m not so sure. There was no 

mention of legislation anywhere in the leader of the 

opposition‟s speech of December 8, 2005. But the way they 

have pursued what they used to call, quote, “a competitive 

labour environment” certainly doesn‟t conform with their 

election promises. As a matter of fact it contradicts what they 

undertook during the election. 

 

More importantly — aside, aside, Mr. Speaker — more 

importantly it‟s clear from the leader of the opposition‟s 

remarks back on December 8, 2005 that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was to look at the fundamental issues of the 

labour environment. “. . . foundational to the terms of reference 

given Enterprise Saskatchewan will be changes to labour 

legislation . . .” So they were obviously required or expected to 

bring forward changes. That was assumed from the start. 

 

But it was foundational to the terms of the reference that they 

would be providing recommendations or . . . the term 

recommendations never used at this point. 

 

This is now the Department of Industry and Resources. 

According to these remarks and according to the papers 

prepared and presented at the time, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no talk 

about an advisory council, Mr. Speaker. Not at this time. At this 

time these are the decision makers and they are all drawn, 

they‟re all drawn from outside of government and they will be 

the ones deciding what changes there will be to labour 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

legislation. 

 

Well how quickly that changes after the election, Mr. Speaker, 

how very quickly. The only thing that happened in that order, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the Bill creating the agency, the advisory 

council, or whatever we might want to call it preceded Bills 5 

and 6. But Bills 5 and 6 were drafted at I assume roughly the 

same time as Bill 2. 

 

The appointments to Enterprise Saskatchewan or the 

appointments to the board of this agency — what is essentially 

becoming an advisory council and an advisory council on very 

little, Mr. Speaker, as we will see — the appointments to this 

board, this 12-person board, come much after the introduction 

of the labour legislation that the government says is fair to 

workers and employers as well as competitive with other 

jurisdictions. 

 

The legislation itself says in the mandate of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is going to be labour law and immigration law, 

but no. As a matter of fact, no, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think . . . 

Well I know for a fact that the board of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan wasn‟t formed before the labour legislation was 

drafted. It certainly didn‟t meet before it was drafted. And 

although it‟s received a speech from the Labour minister, Mr. 

Speaker, has it received any information according to what the 

government‟s been able to provide on labour issues from 

anybody else? 

 

So we are going to have labour legislation, it appears, passed by 

this House without any public consultation and without any 

work on that legislation by Enterprise Saskatchewan, which is 

both contrary to what the now Premier, leader of the opposition 

said back in 2005, two years before the election, and actually 

contrary to the stated mandate provided to the board and to the 

agency itself within the legislation. 

 

The then leader of the opposition, now Premier, goes on to say 

in his remarks as follows. And he‟s speaking about the sector 

teams. So as a matter of fact, I‟ll start to quote that early, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

At the outset, we will direct Enterprise Saskatchewan to 

establish sector teams for the economic sectors that 

business has told me can drive true job creating and 

economic growth in Saskatchewan. 

 

Each team will have one month to prepare its first 

inventory of the barriers to growth holding that sector back 

from reaching its full potential. (resource surcharges, 

infrastructure, etc.) 

 

We won‟t need to appoint a forestry task force as the 

Premier did in the wake of the recent Weyerhaeuser 

announcement — one will already exist. 

 

These sector teams will report publicly and the new 

government will respond publicly with its plans to deal 

with those barriers to growth within two weeks. That is 

one to two months for the first action on barriers to 

growth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s see. That action would have taken 

place if the opposition leader, now Premier, had carried through 

on the commitment that he made in this speech back in 

December 8, 2005. That would have meant the first action on 

barriers to growth, as the government calls whatever they call 

barriers to growth, Mr. Speaker, that the first action would have 

been by the end of January. That‟s one to two months, two 

months to be generous, Mr. Speaker, from the formation of the 

new government. 

 

Well what did we have by the end of January, Mr. Speaker? We 

didn‟t have second reading on this legislation. We could have 

had second reading on this legislation. We could have had 

second reading in December on this legislation but we didn‟t 

have that. We certainly didn‟t have any plans to deal with 

barriers to growth. We didn‟t have anything from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Enterprise Saskatchewan hadn‟t done anything. 

And the 180 days were ticking away and are still ticking away. 

And fortunately, Mr. Speaker, Enterprise and Innovation will 

proceed without any action from this government and will 

continue to proceed without any action from this government 

because I‟m not sure this government has any intention to do 

anything innovative. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But the most interesting part, I think, of that quote, and I‟ll read 

it again, quote: 

 

We won‟t need to appoint a forestry task force as the 

Premier did in the wake of the recent Weyerhaeuser 

announcement — one will already exist. 

 

Well that‟s a fascinating quote, because of course we do now 

have an agency called Enterprise Saskatchewan. We don‟t have 

the legislation passed yet, but that‟s in part because the 

government didn‟t want to bother with second reading until 

fairly recently, Mr. Speaker. That‟s not for any other reason 

other than that, the government‟s unwillingness to actually get 

down to debating this legislation. But we did have the agency. 

We do have the board. We do have the announcement of sector 

teams. We now have the announcement of strategic issue 

councils. And what do you know? The OSB plant, the oriented 

strand board plant at Hudson Bay closes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure all the people affected by that 

closure are just so pleased and just so happy and take just so 

much comfort from the fact that there‟s already a sector team in 

place. That there‟s no need to create a forestry task force 

because Enterprise Saskatchewan will already be — the Premier 

predicts back in 2005, before he‟s Premier — will already be in 

place and will have this thing under control, will already be 

examining the forestry industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

think they were. And I don‟t think they did anything to prevent 

that closure, and I don‟t think they‟ve done anything to respond 

to that closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So high, high hopes and high standards were set by the now 

Premier, the leader of the opposition in his speech of 2005. But 

what the government has done, or I should say failed to do, in 

respect to meeting its own agenda, is far, far different than that. 

 

So the mandate of the board of Enterprise Saskatchewan is to 

examine a barrier to growth. The legislation doesn‟t actually 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

define what a barrier to growth really is. Is this an examination 

of environmental regulations? Well, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t 

know. We don‟t know with certainty what the Saskatchewan 

Party government considers to be a barrier to growth. 

 

They certainly considered the labour environment in 

Saskatchewan to be a barrier to growth, but as I pointed out, 

Mr. Speaker, the growth that took place and is taking place now 

and that the government is so proud of in Saskatchewan took 

place as a result of 16 years of NDP government. But more 

importantly to the point, Mr. Speaker, to the point, it took place 

within the labour environment that currently exists — that is 

within the essential services environment that already exists and 

within The Trade Union Amendment Act that already exists. 

 

So the growth that the government is so proud of takes place 

within that labour environment, but I think it‟s fair to say that 

this government thinks that that environment that facilitated and 

allowed that growth of which they are so proud is actually a 

barrier to growth although the evidence is to the contrary. 

 

But was Enterprise Saskatchewan allowed to examine labour 

legislation? Was it allowed to look at the labour climate? Was it 

allowed to bring forward even recommendations, Mr. Speaker? 

No, it was not. 

 

It‟s much ballyhooed that there‟s a labour representative on the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan board but the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board isn‟t allowed to make recommendations 

about what should be in The Trade Union Amendment Act. 

And the Minister of Labour is scrambling to continually amend 

the Act to catch up with what he had to backtrack on in the 

scrum. But he‟s not going to Enterprise Saskatchewan first to 

find out how many members there should be on the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

Once he concedes that maybe, maybe his number was wrong, 

then he brings forward new amendments, Mr. Speaker. He 

doesn‟t go to Enterprise Saskatchewan even though Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is supposed to have, you know, in its original 

concept and even in the mention and discussion of mandate 

within the legislation as currently it‟s drafted, Mr. Speaker, 

which is quite a walk back from what the now Premier said. 

 

What The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act purports to do is to take 

away from the Minister of Labour and from the entire 

government decisions about labour and immigration policy. 

And why, Mr. Speaker? Why? Because the government said, 

we want to take politics out of these decisions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ll come to how well they have designed this 

organization so as to take the politics out of economic decision 

making, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan now as we see in this legislation could 

not, could not possibly be more political or . . . of course 

anything is possible, Mr. Speaker, but it certainly is far, far 

more political than it was held out to be before the election took 

place, and as a matter of fact far, far more political than they 

held out to the very day that the government introduced the 

legislation in the House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You weren‟t expecting us to appoint half 

of your friends to the board, were you, Frank? 

Mr. Quennell: — And the member from Cypress Hills 

wonders or asks the question did I really expect the government 

to appoint my friends to the board and actually I hadn‟t taken 

dispute and I don‟t have a dispute with the board. 

 

As matter of fact I‟ll come back to the membership of the board 

but since the member from Cypress Hills raises the point and 

wants to assist me with . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

actually no I hadn‟t yet got to that point but the member from 

Cypress Hills says, what about the composition of the board? 

What‟s wrong with the composition of the board? No, no the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, the structure is more political. 

 

The members of the board are a fine group of people on 

balance, Mr. Speaker. It‟s the government that‟s treating them 

like trained chimps. It‟s the government that‟s saying these are 

important people that are going to advise us on matters of 

importance, Mr. Speaker, except every single matter of 

importance will be decided before they have a chance to meet 

and make decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s the government‟s treatment of these people that I think they 

will lose a number of the better members of that board because 

of the way they have decided to treat this agency as a front for 

decisions that are going to be preordained, made before they 

ever get to the board of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

The original Enterprise Saskatchewan document said it would 

examine labour laws. As a matter of fact the legislation says it 

will do that as well, but we know that Enterprise Saskatchewan 

will not be looking at Bills 5 or 6. And you have to ask the 

question as to why this agency‟s being set up and why it is 

being codified in legislation because you certainly don‟t need 

legislation for an advisory council if you‟re just going to bypass 

the agency, if you‟re going to make decisions and then say, but 

these are decisions that were made by Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Well the decisions about mineral royalties aren‟t being made by 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. They‟re being announced by a 

minister in a scum. The decisions about labour legislation 

clearly weren‟t being made by Enterprise Saskatchewan or by 

its board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has been all over the map, for example, on the 

issue of royalty revenues. First they said that a royalty review 

would be the first order of business for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. That‟s what that party said, Mr. Speaker. They 

said, first thing we‟ll want Enterprise Saskatchewan to do, the 

first thing they will do is they will review the oil and gas royalty 

rates for the province of Saskatchewan because, the government 

says, because we want to take the politics out of those 

decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I said in my remarks on the budget, Mr. Speaker, that if 

backtracking was an Olympic event, the gold medal team would 

be sitting on the government benches led by the Finance 

minister. And I went through four issues on which they‟ve been 

backtracking. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund was one; previous 

budgets being deficit budgets, now balanced budgets, was 

another; and there were a couple of others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I didn‟t mention this one. I didn‟t mention the backtracking 

they did on Enterprise Saskatchewan and its role on oil royalty 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

reviews. I said that was a job for Enterprise Saskatchewan. That 

wasn‟t a job for government, that was a job from which we 

wanted to remove politics. That was a job for private citizens 

with expertise in business, and in the economy in a more 

general sense, to make or at least to make recommendations on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they sure ran away from that quickly. The 

government decided to set the policy themselves. And again, if 

Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s such a great agency, why won‟t the 

government trust it to develop policy? Why won‟t they let it 

develop policy in the very areas — in the very areas — that the 

government draws attention to? 

 

We don‟t want, the government says, to wear the decisions on 

oil royalty revenues. We don‟t want to wear the decision on gas 

royalty revenues. We want to take the politics out of that 

decision. We want to give that decision to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well no, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of Energy and 

Resources has pointed out that this is the largest industry in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. It‟s become the largest industry in the 

province but it is one . . . The largest industry in the province is 

one where there is a large government interest, Mr. Speaker, 

because of resource revenues and the place resource revenues 

play in equalization discussions. It is an industry in which the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan are 

very interested in, even if it wasn‟t the largest industry in the 

province, but it now is the largest industry in the province and 

this is an industry in which Enterprise Saskatchewan was to 

have a key role in removing barriers to growth, until the 

government decided that no, we don‟t want to remove politics 

from these decisions. 

 

No, we will make these decisions. And we won‟t just make 

these decisions for this year, or next year, we‟ll make some 

declaration about 12 years from now. 

 

Well that, as I counted, with a two-year term on the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board, which seems like a very short time for 

people for whom you have supposedly a great deal of respect, 

that that‟s six terms on the Enterprise Saskatchewan board 

before the Saskatchewan Party government would perhaps 

allow an Enterprise Saskatchewan board to make a decision on 

the question of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s a difference between who they are and how the 

government treats them, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a difference 

between who they are and how the government treats them. 

 

Now I might come to this in a little bit more detail later, Mr. 

Speaker, but the nomination process for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was very interesting. Hundreds of groups sent in 

nominations, but it was up to the minister to decide who gets to 

sit on the board. As a matter of fact, the . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ask 

about the composition of the board, and I‟ll say it again. I have 

no problem with the makeup of this board. It‟s a very good 

group of people, Mr. Speaker. I think the members opposite 

understand that. 

 

My question is about how, it‟s about how this government is 

treating these people who are a front, who they are expecting to 

just rubber-stamp these decisions, these decisions, Mr. Speaker, 

that they have made. The decisions that this government said 

they would be making, but now they have taken away from 

them, we have taken away from them. 

 

Now it is — and I‟ll come to this in a little bit more detail later, 

Mr. Speaker — but when questions were being asked in this 

House in December, in December before the legislation was 

introduced and so before the structure of the board was known 

by anybody but the drafters of the legislation and the 

government, before we could know who would be on the board 

and how they would be selected, at that time both the Minister 

of Enterprise and Innovation and the Premier compared 

Enterprise Saskatchewan to the Tourism Authority and said, 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin shouldn‟t 

be so concerned about Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

I know what we said about it, says the Premier, I know because 

he does. I mean, he said it was going to be so much. It was 

going to do so much. And it was going to take so much power 

away from government. But it‟s really closer to, say, the 

Tourism Authority. And it‟s not . . . And the member from 

Kindersley is not expressing cabinet solidarity from his seat. He 

said, that‟s true, unfortunately. So if he wants to dissent from 

cabinet positions, Mr. Speaker, perhaps he shouldn‟t be doing it 

in the House where I can hear him. 

 

[22:00] 

 

An Hon. Member: — I was talking to Serge about an entirely 

different matter. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Okay. Then I withdraw. Then I withdraw, 

Mr. Speaker. But previously the member was responding to my 

remarks so I thought that maybe he still was, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it was an understandable mistake. I think it was an 

understandable mistake. 

 

In any case, it‟s not like the Tourism Authority in the way that 

the board is made up because if you go to the Act governing the 

Tourism Authority and you see how the board is made up, it‟s 

not only composed of representatives from organizations. The 

appointments are made by those organizations, Mr. Speaker. So 

this is not as private and non-political and arm‟s-length from 

government as even the Tourism Authority is, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

not, because the Tourism Authority members are chosen largely 

by the organizations. They don‟t make nominations, Mr. 

Speaker, and have a minister appoint their members. They 

appoint their members from a collection of organizations and 

each collection of organizations sends a member. 

 

But the government that said it wanted to take the politics out of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan had so little confidence in these 

organizations that it didn‟t allow them to appoint their own 

members, even though the government was going to have the 

minister chairing the board, have another minister sitting on the 

board, select another member from the public at large. Nine 

members that the organizations could have if they were going to 

follow the structure of the Tourism Authority, which the 

minister and the Premier said they would. Nine other members 

that could have been chosen by the organizations but were not, 

Mr. Speaker. They were not. 

 

They were chosen instead by the government. There‟s some 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

kind of point system, something to do with agreeing with the 

philosophy of the Premier, no doubt. And when the chief 

executive officer or the acting chief executive officer of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan spoke at SARM he said that he was 

very pleased that the Premier appointed the representative from 

SARM that he did — that the Premier appointed the 

representative that he did, Mr. Speaker — which I thought was 

an interesting slip for the deputy minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation and the acting chief executive officer of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to make, Mr. Speaker, a very interesting slip to 

admit that at least the one person was appointed directly by the 

Premier, whatever the point system that the government devised 

was actually meant to elicit in the way of information, or 

whatever cover it was supposed to provide for the decisions that 

were going to be made. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, gets more and more 

bureaucratic. The sector teams are mentioned in the legislation. 

The strategic issue councils are not, Mr. Speaker. They‟re an 

addition. I think it was either the deputy minister or the minister 

that said, well the strategic issue councils are mentioned in the 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, in fact they are not. And there seems 

to be the same problem with the Minister of Labour not 

knowing what‟s in his legislation and what his legislation‟s 

effect is. 

 

When Enterprise Saskatchewan was first conceived, it was 

supposed to streamline government by replacing a line 

department. In reality all it‟s doing is adding to the level of 

bureaucracy. This caused The StarPhoenix to call Enterprise 

Saskatchewan in a quotation — I‟ll probably quote it at greater 

length later — quote, “a highly nebulous entity.” 

 

How will it actually work? It‟s unclear. What will be the 

reporting structure? That‟s to be determined. How will the 

subcommittees report? No one knows. The government hasn‟t 

decided. How often would the board and subcommittees meet? 

Not sure. How will board governance work? Government won‟t 

say. 

 

The level of bureaucracy keeps growing and growing. There are 

now at least 12 sector teams prescribed in the legislation but 

there are also an unclear number of strategic issues councils 

which appear nowhere in the legislation, appeared nowhere 

during the campaign, and never merited a mention when the 

Leader of the Sask Party was describing the board in its early 

days, despite what the minister and his communications people 

are now saying. 

 

And how many other layers of bureaucracy are they hiding and 

funding with $8 million, Mr. Speaker? How many members 

will each sector team have? What about the issues council? The 

minister mentioned about 300 nominations for the board. Can 

we expect 300 committee and subcommittee members? 

 

And on top of becoming more bureaucratic, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is becoming more and more political. Not only 

do they get to appoint the board, but they‟re already breaking 

the commitment they had to having the board chaired by 

someone from outside of government. A matter of fact changed 

the legislation from what was promised by the now Premier, the 

Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, to ensure that the board was 

chaired by that minister — not just chaired by a cabinet minister 

but we have to have apparently another cabinet minister on this 

board in our attempt to remove politics, of the government‟s 

attempt to remove politics from economic decision making. 

 

Any why in section 23 does Enterprise Saskatchewan have the 

power to transfer Crown or public assets to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan in section 23? I will be coming to in more detail 

later, Mr. Speaker. Enterprise Saskatchewan is an 

accountability boondoggle waiting to happen. 

 

In a democracy the government has to be held to account for its 

decisions, but how can the government be held to account for 

bad decisions made by Enterprise Saskatchewan? How binding 

will board decisions be? The government claims to oppose 

privatization of the Crowns, makes a bow, a nod, and a 

meaningless preamble to the legislation in that direction, but if 

the board came out and made a case for privatization, will the 

government use that as a shield to break their promises? Or is 

that yet another economic decision that this board in fact is not 

allowed to make? Just as they weren‟t allowed to review 

royalties. Just as they were not allowed to review labour 

legislation. Just as they are not allowed to review royalties — 

not just oil and gas — but we found out, I think today, Mr. 

Speaker, any mineral royalties whatsoever. 

 

Will the government just hide behind Enterprise Saskatchewan 

every time an unpopular idea comes up? Is this all that Bill 2 

leaves of the grand ideas the Leader of the Sask Party has 

expressed in his papers and in his speech of December 8, 2005 

— just a shield, just a cat‟s paw, Mr. Speaker, for ideas that 

may be unpopular, and if they are, the government will ignore? 

We know the board will report to the public, but we still don‟t 

know how. And will the subcommittees be open to public 

scrutiny? 

 

The legislation allows the board to spend money on marketing 

and promotional activities as well as acquiring property — sort 

of a private unelected government, Mr. Speaker. What 

accountability measures will be in place since this is public 

money? And as the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow asked 

— and it‟s too bad that the member from Moose Jaw North 

perhaps wasn‟t listening more carefully and he might not be 

asking the question he constantly seems to ask — but as the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow asked, will there be clear 

conflict of interest guidelines in place? After all you‟ll have 

people with a stake in particular sectors of our economy 

essentially making recommendations to government on public 

policy, whatever areas of public policy are left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What‟s more, these people and their companies will be able to 

donate money to the board. Very curious provision to the 

legislation is they can receive money from any source, Mr. 

Speaker. Very curious provision. I don‟t know what the 

members of the government who instructed the draftspeople 

were thinking when they put that in. And I‟d be very interested 

when I have an opportunity to ask that question in committee, 

and not just rhetorically, to find out why they wanted to put this 

very dangerous provision in. 

 

You have unelected people who the government would say still 

have some power. It‟s difficult to say exactly where that is, and 

no limits on their ability to actually provide the agency with 

funds. As a matter of fact the funds particularly allows it, the 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

legislation particularly allows that the funds and funds for the 

agency can come from anywhere. It‟s an odd provision, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What measures will be in place in light of what the legislation 

actually says, Mr. Speaker? What measures will be in place to 

ensure the board does not accept money from companies who 

are actively seeking certain policy changes or at least 

recommendations? And won‟t this just open the door to 

influence peddling? And why would the government want to 

take that risk, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Why does Enterprise Saskatchewan need the power to raise 

funds? Isn‟t $8 million enough? Are there any restrictions on 

who can donate the money? Are there any restrictions on who a 

board can consult with after receiving money? Doesn‟t this 

open the board up to the appearance of impropriety, Mr. 

Speaker? Questions that I think should be asked, I would think 

would have been asked before that provision was put in the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, but apparently were not asked. 

 

Now there‟s been some press comment about this legislation. 

And I know that the members opposite assume that we over 

here in the opposition oppose for the sake of opposing, spent 

considerable period of time when we were discussing the rule 

changes, Mr. Speaker, arguing, as a matter of fact quoting an 

argument of John Diefenbaker. That was our job . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And I think the member from Cannington is 

agreeing with me that that is the job. But it‟s not just us. It‟s not 

just us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would quote from, I would quote from The StarPhoenix, 

January 19, 2008. And this a columnist who is commenting on 

the changes that have been made in the vision for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan as reflected in the legislation but as a matter of 

fact reflected even more in how the legislation will apply and 

will actually work. And I quote from the column which is 

entitled, “Reality deals another blow to new agency.” Quote: 

 

One need only look at Premier Brad Wall‟s promise this 

week that the government has no plans to change its oil 

royalty structure to realize that his much ballyhooed 

Enterprise Saskatchewan agency remains a highly 

nebulous entity even as it recruits members for the board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I promised earlier to give a further quote on 

the highly nebulous entity. The column goes on to state that: 

 

. . . his message diminishes the role he had touted for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan not so long ago. 

 

When Wall first trotted out the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

idea as Opposition leader, he made it sound as if the 

agency would consist solely of representatives nominated 

by key sectors of the economy. They would be asked to set 

economic priorities and initiatives for Saskatchewan, and 

would replace the economic development bureaucracy 

within the former Industry department. 

 

Wall said Saskatchewan needs an about-face from the 

60-year practice of having politics drive economic 

development in the province. 

 

Yet, the highfalutin promises made from the Opposition 

benches about turning over economic guidance of the 

province to an arms-length agency saw a marked change 

by the time Wall finally got himself in the position to 

deliver on Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

When the bill to establish the agency was presented to the 

legislature in December, it featured legislation that 

ensconced the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation as 

chair and another cabinet member as part of the board, 

along with representatives from key sectors such as 

business, labour, aboriginals, municipalities, education, 

co-ops, resources and farming, and one member at large. 

 

In seeking nominations for the latter position, Enterprise 

and Innovation Minister Lyle Stewart said in a news 

release this week that the agency‟s job “will be to identify 

and monitor competitive advantages and disadvantages in 

each sector and to prescribe appropriate actions and 

strategies to enhance Saskatchewan competitiveness and 

growth” [Mr. Speaker]. Stewart‟s boss might have added 

that there will be limits to that job. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Wall might also have pointed out that despite everything 

one promises in Opposition, reality bites once one is in 

government. 

 

The premier is learning that the critics were right when 

they suggested that it‟s not really a wise idea for a 

government to take a back seat and turn over economic 

development in its jurisdiction to a group of unelected 

appointees, no matter how trustworthy and competent they 

are deemed to be. A little thing called accountability under 

democracy requires politicians to be held to account for 

public policy. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what was promised by the leader of the 

opposition and what is in the legislation are two very different 

things. But the argument for accountability doesn‟t explain why 

even the mandate for this advisory council, this agency, in the 

legislation is not being permitted to be exercised by them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The column goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

So it‟s left to citizens to figure out just what‟s so great 

about Wall‟s Enterprise Saskatchewan model, what it will 

do that various other advisory bodies established by 

former governments couldn‟t or wouldn‟t, and what 

benefit it offers over the industry consultations conducted 

by ministers in the past. 

 

Whatever Wall hoped to accomplish with the agency he 

envisioned in 2004 has undergone a wholesale political 

transformation. If, as Wall says, Enterprise Saskatchewan 

has no role in advising the government on fashioning a 

royalty structure that‟s competitive with Alberta in the oil 

and gas sector that‟s now key to this province‟s economic 

growth, the board is then relegated mostly to tinkering on 

the edges [Mr. Speaker]. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

And after this column was written, not only did they lose the 

ability to advise on oil royalties, they lost the ability — it was 

taken away from them by the Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation — to advise on any mineral royalty regime 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s not just the oil and gas 

industry, the largest industry, but the mineral industry, which is 

a large industry in Saskatchewan, where the members of the 

board of Enterprise Saskatchewan have been told, Mr. Speaker, 

hands off, as we‟ve already decided about labour legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another columnist, the Leader-Post financial editor, Bruce 

Johnstone, said, and I quote: 

 

“Sask. Party should be cautious” . . . [that] the party‟s 

Enterprise Saskatchewan scheme should not be used as 

“an excuse to slough off responsibility for 

decision-making on economic development issues.” 

 

Johnstone says, quote: 

 

“Under Wall‟s „bold new vision‟ [and that‟s in quotation 

marks as well, Mr. Speaker, because I think that‟s what the 

now Premier called it] a Saskatchewan Party government 

would cede control of economic decision-making to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, a joint government/ 

private-sector body that would assume the economic 

development functions of government. Instead of 

bureaucrats or politicians, Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s 

independent board of directors would make the big 

decisions about such issues as key economic sectors, the 

barriers to growth, taxes to cut, businesses to attract, and 

investments to make. In essence, Wall would privatize the 

economic decision-making functions of government to this 

new body.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what he said he would do for better or 

worse. Mr. Speaker, that is not what he has done. What he has 

done is brought forward legislation that has a board that is 

appointed by government, chaired by government, controlled by 

government, and before the legislation is even passed, Mr. 

Speaker, in every fundamental economic decision that needs to 

be made by this government has been preordained, set in stone 

by the Minister of Energy and Resources and the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation. And what is left for the board of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is to hear interesting lectures on 

strategic issues from the Minister of Labour, Mr. Speaker, and 

I‟m sure they‟ll be fascinated doing that. They‟ll want to meet 

quite often, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Murray Mandryk in The StarPhoenix on January 12, 2008 had 

this to say, quote: 

 

What exactly is the model Premier Brad Wall wants to 

adopt with Enterprise Saskatchewan? How feasible is it 

for this model to function? And why do we need it? 

 

Unbelievably, these basic considerations are yet to be 

addressed. 

 

He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize for the 

language but it‟s contained within the quotation: 

 

How‟s it gonna work? Why the hell do we need it? And if 

Enterprise Saskatchewan merely is some kind of advisory 

board that‟s on par with your local Regional Economic 

Development Authority or is a version of Tourism 

Saskatchewan, why do we need a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. As much as the member apologized, I 

must remind the member that the rules say we can‟t use 

indirectly what we can‟t use expressions directly. So it may be 

in a quote but it‟s still inappropriate language for the Assembly. 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The member from Cypress Hills has 

suspicions, Mr. Speaker, but I would have to digress from the 

Bill, and I don‟t want to do that. Mr. Mandryk goes on to say: 

 

. . . I don‟t consider myself the sharpest knife in the drawer 

and I‟m certainly no expert on corporate governance. But I 

truly don‟t get the model or the purpose of what Wall is 

envisioning. 

 

I did not read that quotation so that I could quote Mr. Mandryk 

saying that he wasn‟t the sharpest knife in the drawer. I did read 

that quotation because that is an independent, disinterested, 

objective party looking at the government‟s proposal and 

wondering why, why we are doing this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to return to my earlier remarks, Mr. Speaker, basically this 

is one of the things the government is doing for no other reason 

now, given what‟s in the legislation, how different it is from the 

original model, and given how they‟re actually treating their 

own board, their own agency, Mr. Speaker, the only reason 

we‟re going to have Enterprise Saskatchewan is because the 

Saskatchewan Party said that we would. And if it has nothing to 

do after the government finishes making economic policy, well 

so be it, Mr. Speaker. But we will have an Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Mandryk goes on to say, quote, “Is Enterprise 

Saskatchewan supposed to be the management board for the 

province‟s economy?” Well now we know, Mr. Speaker, in fact 

it‟s not. And then he goes on to say further, quote: 

 

And, really, how would such a diverse group agree on any 

meaningful change, such as on oil royalty rates? Would 

anyone seriously consider its recommendations as 

binding? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government could not be bothered to 

wait to hear what they had to say anyways. So I guess we‟ll 

never get the answer to Mr. Mandryk‟s question. 

 

Finally he concludes, more or less, Mr. Speaker, with these 

words, quote, “Then again, could it be that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is just a clever ruse — itself, being a distraction 

offered simply to present an appearance of consultation?” And 

is that what this is really, Mr. Speaker? Is this just the 

appearance of consultation? That‟s what it‟s becoming to look 

very much like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Mandryk does wrap up practically with this quotation, 

quote: 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

But if it‟s only to be an advisory body, as Wall and 

Stewart suggest, why all the fuss and bother? Why not 

simply have it report to a minister of economic 

development as the Provincial Action Committee on the 

Economy did? Why blow up an entire department, as the 

Wall government has done? 

 

Very good questions, Mr. Speaker, questions the government 

doesn‟t seem to be prepared or able to answer. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s some other questions raised about, not the 

advisory council to which I‟ve directed most of my attention to 

this evening, but other sections of the Act, and I do want to go, 

before I wrap for the evening, to the Bill itself and what it says. 

 

And the Bill begins with a preamble, Mr. Speaker, and the 

preamble of course is with, completely without teeth. The 

preamble has no legal effect. The preamble is there, well it‟s a 

political show, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s important to remember 

when we‟re looking at section 23 of — which I may want to 

look at later in the debate — when looking at section 23 of the 

Bill, the section 23 will have legal force and effect when this 

Bill is in place and the preamble will not. So where it says in 

the preamble of Bill No. 2 that The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Act will be respected, it‟s interesting that the 

government put that in the preamble, Mr. Speaker, because that 

has no force. That has no effect and that has no teeth. 

 

Now the interpretation section of the Act states that the 

“„agency‟ means Enterprise Saskatchewan established pursuant 

to section 3”. So later on when I refer to agency, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟ll be referring to Enterprise Saskatchewan because that is how 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is defined in the Act. Section 5, Mr. 

Speaker, sets out in subsection 2: 

 

Subject to subsection (4), the agency may: 

 

(b) sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any of the agency‟s 

property in any manner that the agency considers 

appropriate. 

 

Now it‟s interesting. When I suggested that the effect of the 

legislation was to allow Crown assets, including the land and 

Crown employees, to be transferred into the agency and then 

sold out of the agency — first brought into the agency under 

section 23 and then sold out of the agency under section 5 — 

that the minister didn‟t deny that that was the case, but the 

acting deputy minister was sent out to make some comments. 

And this is what the deputy minister said on December 18, 2007 

as quoted in the Regina Leader-Post. It said: 

 

. . . the section that deals with transfers to and from 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is anticipated to be used in areas 

such as the limited transfer of furniture or equipment as 

the agency . . . [is established]. 

 

The “transfer out” power from Enterprise Saskatchewan 

back to the government or Crown corporation, not to the 

private sector, he said. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not what section 5 says. Section 5 

does not say that the agency may sell, lease, or otherwise 

dispose of any of the agency‟s property back to the government 

or Crown corporation and not to the private sector. That‟s not 

what section 5 says. Section 5 says that the agency may “sell, 

lease or otherwise dispose of any of the agency‟s property in 

any manner that the agency considers appropriate.” 

 

If that‟s what the government intended, that‟s not what the 

government drafted and legislation is interpreted by what it 

says, not what somebody says it meant, when what that person 

says it meant and what it actually says are so radically different, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the member from Saskatoon Southeast as a lawyer 

rejects being lectured on such a simple point, but every now and 

then the member from Moose Jaw North asks what I‟m talking 

about and . . . need to keep it simple, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislation does not say what the deputy minister says it 

says. It says that in section 5 that the government can transfer 

property, the agency can transfer property in any way it 

considers appropriate, Mr. Speaker, not in the limited ways that 

the deputy minister said the section was meant to set out . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, and a little late, Mr. Speaker, 

but now I‟ve heard from the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

In section 6 membership in the agency is set out and it, unlike 

the Tourism Authority, doesn‟t allow the organizations to 

actually make the appointments, only the nominations, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a group of organizations that if they had been 

involved with the tourism Act would have entrusted to appoint 

their board in large part but Enterprise Saskatchewan was not 

entrusted with that despite the government‟s assertion that this 

was to take the politics out of economic development. 

 

And then under section 7 we have a most interesting . . . a term 

of appointment, Mr. Speaker, not exceeding two years. And 

now we know that some members will only be there for a year. 

So as I said before, Mr. Speaker, we have a very good board of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, a very impressive group of people 

who aren‟t allowed to do anything important, Mr. Speaker, but 

a very impressive group of people . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And the member from Kelvington-Wadena wants to give 

them a quote, and I trust that she‟ll give them the full quote, Mr. 

Speaker, because I didn‟t talk about who they were. I talked 

about how the government was treating them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you see a full quote, I don‟t think any of them would 

have difficulty with that, Mr. Speaker. They may not agree that 

that‟s how the government is treating them, Mr. Speaker, but 

it‟s certainly a legitimate opinion about how they‟re being 

treated, Mr. Speaker. And the member knows that I didn‟t say 

what she‟s saying I said, Mr. Speaker. She knows what I 

actually said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[22:30] 

 

So we have a group of people who are appointed by the 

government, Mr. Speaker, for a term not exceeding two years. 

Now that‟s a very, very short term for a group of people you 

trust to make important decisions of a long-term nature, two 

years. Some of them will only be a year, Mr. Speaker, of the 

first ones. The board that we see two years from now could be 

very different than the board that we are currently being 

presented with, Mr. Speaker, because everybody can change in 

two years. Anybody that doesn‟t toe the government line could 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

be gone in two years. Some of them can be gone in one year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members are eligible for reappointment, so if the 

government likes the member of the board, they could be there 

four years from now, Mr. Speaker. If they do not, they could be 

gone one year from now, Mr. Speaker. Now, is that taking the 

politics out of economic development policy-making, Mr. 

Speaker? I don‟t think so. 

 

I was thinking about this because I served on the board of 

governors for two consecutive three-year terms for the 

University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those were 

three-year terms. And I was thinking about what the universities 

of this province would look like if the government decided to 

take the politics out of universities — by their definition, taking 

the politics out of matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan, University of Regina has a 

board of 12 people, Mr. Speaker. Six are appointed by the 

government. Six are not. The president is not. The chancellor is 

elected by convocation. There‟s two members elected by the 

senate. The student union president sits there. There‟s a member 

elected by the faculty. The government doesn‟t have a majority 

of the appointments, Mr. Speaker. It has half the appointments 

on the board, and those appointments are there for three years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Imagine if the government decided they just didn‟t want to take 

the politics out of economic development. They wanted to take 

the politics out of universities. Well, Mr. Speaker, then we 

would have a board where it was chaired by the minister, 

another minister was a member, and the government appointed 

all the other 10 members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well anybody who is concerned about university autonomy 

better hope — better hope, Mr. Speaker — that the government 

doesn‟t decide to take politics out of the universities the way 

they decided to take politics out of Enterprise Saskatchewan 

and out of economic . . . because, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot less 

politics in those appointments than the way they structured this 

board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, further, Mr. Speaker, you know, when 

they decide that after a year they don‟t like the 

recommendations, they don‟t like what‟s coming out of a 

member of the board and they decide not to reappoint that 

member of the board, they don‟t have to fill that vacancy. The 

section, section 7(7), states, “A vacancy in the membership of 

the board does not impair the power of the remaining members 

of the board to act.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have this, you know, ballyhooed 

concession from the government that there will be a labour 

representative that they will choose — the government will 

choose — on the board of Enterprise Saskatchewan. When that 

person is gone, Mr. Speaker, when that person is gone, there 

doesn‟t have to be a reappointment. The board can carry on 

without that person. Mr. Speaker, we are seeing a board now 

that I expect, Mr. Speaker, will be very different, very different 

from the board that we will see in a year and the board we will 

see in two years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course the other problem is how long will people be 

interested in serving on the board that doesn‟t have the power 

that was held out to them and doesn‟t even have the power and 

decision-making power that is stated in the legislation? Matter 

of fact the government won‟t even let the agency decide where 

its head office is going to be, Mr. Speaker. That is sent off to 

cabinet as well. Even that, even where the head office is going 

to be is decision that the cabinet will not delegate to the agency 

itself. 

 

And that brings me to section 23, Mr. Speaker. And for the 

moment all I would do is quote from the section and comment 

on it briefly. Section 23(2), quote: 

 

Notwithstanding any other Act or law or any provision of 

any contract: 

 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order, 

subject to any terms and conditions that may be set out 

in the order, transfer or assigned to, and vest in the 

agency: 

 

any personal property, assets, liabilities, debts, 

interests, rights, obligations, and contracts of the 

Crown, a Crown corporation or agent of the Crown; 

and 

 

any lands, interests in lands, mortgages, charges, 

encumbrances or other real property interests of the 

Crown, a Crown corporation or agent of the Crown; 

 

And in 2(c): 

 

the president, chief executive officer or other head of a 

Crown corporation or other agent of the Crown may, by 

agreement with the agency, transfer any employees or 

class of employees of a Crown corporation or agent of the 

Crown to and cause them to become employees of the 

agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very much like the original plan for SecurTek that 

the member from Cannington outlined before he had to say he 

misspoke himself, the whole structure for what he said would 

happen is set out in section 23 of The Enterprise Saskatchewan 

Act. And if you believe the deputy minister, we need to have 

provisions in this legislation for the transfer of lands, interests 

in lands, and other real property interests of a Crown 

Corporation to the agency so that this agency can get used filing 

cabinets from SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well what he said about the reason for section 23, getting 

equipment from a Crown corporation in the transition period, 

does not explain why there‟s a provision for the transfer of land 

of a Crown Corporation, real property of a Crown Corporation, 

any property assets of a Crown Corporation to this agency, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟ll have more to say about this provision, having 

spoken I think at some length about the advisory council 

provisions, Mr. Speaker, and very little about the privatization 

provisions. 

 

I‟ll have more to say later in this debate but for the moment, 

Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 1 — The Growth 

and Financial Security Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

tonight to speak to Bill 1, which is An Act respecting 

Saskatchewan‟s Growth and Financial Security and repealing 

certain Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on election night in November of 2007 the 

member from Swift Current in his acceptance speech told the 

people of Saskatchewan that we could expect something 

completely different. He seemed to be referring to a different 

type of leadership and a different type of government — and 

it‟s now clear to the public that what he really meant, and I 

quote, “And now for something completely different!” — than 

what we promised in the election. 

 

There isn‟t a clearer example of this government‟s flip-flop than 

the growth and financial stability Act. The members opposite 

couldn‟t say often enough how much they hated the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And no matter how many times that we tried 

to explain it to them, they simply couldn‟t believe that we had a 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And here tonight, we‟re debating the 

growth and financial stability Act which in essence is the 

identical thing. 

 

Now we tried to explain it to the members opposite many times. 

We said that it was necessary to allow government to govern 

effectively in an economy that was vulnerable to fluctuations, 

particularly because we are a resource-based economy. 

 

They yelled and hollered accusations and insults, and it didn‟t 

matter then that other governments across Canada also has 

similar funds. They tried to make political hay, but they went 

even further than making political hay. They promised not to 

have a fund of their own, and they promised to strengthen 

financial accountability which they said meant getting rid of the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Now in their election platform — and 

I want to quote — it says: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will pass the 

Saskatchewan Growth and Financial Security Act to 

ensure the budget is balanced every year, surpluses are 

dedicated to debt repayment and economic growth 

initiatives and that government departments and agencies 

remain accountable to Saskatchewan people for the 

services they deliver. 

That‟s the end of the quote. Well it‟s important to note, Mr. 

Speaker, the promise was not to rename the fund as we‟re doing 

here tonight. The promise was to get rid of it. 

 

So you can imagine the surprise of the opposition, not to 

mention the public‟s surprise, when the much-touted growth 

and financial stabilization Act was unveiled and we found out 

that in fact the government had done the exact opposite of what 

they had promised in the election campaign. And what they 

simply did was give the Fiscal Stabilization Fund a new name. 

 

Now the irony wasn‟t lost on reporters. And I just have to read 

this into the record because I‟m not sure the public has heard all 

of this. I want to read this excerpt into the record because it‟s 

important. The reporter asked, quote, “What is the difference 

between what you‟re planning to do with this fund and what the 

NDP did with this Fiscal Stabilization Fund?” 

 

And the Minister of Finance responds, and I quote: 

 

Fundamentally there is very little difference. We‟re 

combining the Infrastructure Fund and the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund into this new Growth and Financial 

Security Fund and the ability. 

 

Reporter follows up: “But you called that a phony-baloney 

fund. So there is no difference. You have a phony-baloney fund 

with a new name.” That‟s the reporter. And the Minister of 

Finance says, quote: 

 

Well we have a fund that could be used in two significant 

ways. One is to assist with the balancing of the current 

budget. The other purpose for the Bill or for the fund is to 

provide for infrastructure initiatives. 

 

And then the reporter says, and I quote, “But how is that 

different from the NDP who used their fund?” And the Finance 

minister says, and I quote, “It isn‟t substantially different.” And 

then the reporter says, “Well then explain to me why you‟ve 

adopted the phony-baloney fund.” 

 

And the Finance Minister says: 

 

Well because the reality is that because in the wildly 

swinging income gyrations of the provincial economy, you 

need to be able to set aside funds in good years so that you 

can draw on them in poor years, and you have to be able 

to. 

 

And then the reporter says: 

 

Mr. Cline said that too. And you said that was phony. Will 

this fund have cash in it, or will the government go into 

debt when it accesses it? 

 

Then the Finance Minister says, quote: 

 

The fund will be an accounting mechanism. If we have a 

surplus and the fund has revenues in it, we can choose in 

order to save short-term interest to apply the fund against 

short-term debt to reduce interest expenditures and so it‟s 

a bulk entry if you like. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

Then the reporter says, “So was it just rhetoric when you called 

their fund phony-baloney?” And the Minister of Finance says, 

“Well certainly we believe we need to account for this fund in a 

transparent and open way, and that‟s what we‟re undertaking to 

do.” Then the reporter says, “Is there some reason it would be 

inappropriate to call you a hypocrite?” And then the Minister of 

Finance says, and I quote, “I‟ve been called other things.” 

 

I‟ve been called other things; that‟s what the Minister of 

Finance . . . that was his best shot at defending why he is or 

isn‟t a hypocrite for announcing a Bill with his very own Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of other things that one might 

want to use to describe a person or a group of people who make 

a big deal about something and then do the exact opposite 

themselves. Now there‟s a number of descriptions you could 

use. You could use the description of a pretender or a fraud or a 

counterfeit or a charlatan. Maybe one might describe this as a 

full-blown phony-baloney. But it could be a hypocrite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think now might be a good time to go down 

memory lane and remember some of the creative terms that the 

members of the opposition used when they described the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. Here‟s one. The member from 

Canora-Pelly, and I quote: 

 

“. . . there‟s one way the NDP could give us an honest 

picture of the province‟s finances. They could listen to the 

Provincial Auditor and give us a budget that shows the 

complete picture.” 

 

No more phony-baloney transfers from a so-called rainy 

day fund . . . 

 

The same member had this to say on I think it was March 28, 

‟02, and I quote: 

 

. . . nobody is falling for the minister‟s smoke and mirrors. 

Nobody is falling for his worn-out old accounting tricks. 

Nobody believes this fudge-it budget. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Canora-Pelly believes his own government‟s new Growth and 

Financial Security Fund is, and I quote, “smoke and mirrors”; 

quote, “worn-out accounting tricks”; quote, “creative 

accounting”; and his next budget will no doubt be, and I quote, 

“a fudge-it budget.” 

 

[22:45] 

 

Now then we have the member from Silver Springs, and he was 

the Finance critic at one time, and he called the fund and I 

quote, “. . . a make-believe bank account that doesn‟t exist.” He 

called it, and I quote, “voodoo economics” and, I quote, 

“phony-baloney election slush fund.” So the member must be 

giving some very harsh words to his own government and the 

Minister of Finance who admits today that it is the same as the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 

Now the member from Silver Springs took it a bit farther. He 

said that the . . . saying the argument that one needs a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund because of market volatility was false, and 

indeed all we had to do was grow the economy. He said, and I 

quote: 

 

The Finance minister talked about volatility in the 

markets, his concern about the volatile nature of the 

Saskatchewan economy. Well I have a suggestion . . . If 

he‟s worried about volatility, grow the economy, diversity 

it, and our revenues will follow . . . 

 

But then his very own Finance minister talked about the 

gyrations of the economy or the gyrations of the natural 

resource economy. So it‟s interesting. Now they have their own 

fund. And what‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, they use the very 

same arguments we used when we created the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And then we have . . . Oh and they say, we 

put money in the fund. There was money in the fund when they 

took over. 

 

Now the member from Cannington said, and I quote: 

 

The government likes to call this the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. Actually probably a better name for it is the fancy 

slush fund because the government claims it‟s going to use 

this to maintain its . . . [balanced budget]. 

 

Well you know, what‟s really ironic, the Finance minister was 

outside in the rotunda, telling reporters that his own 

government, and I quote, he called it, “a fancy slush fund.” 

Well the member of Cannington was inside the House on more 

about the stabilization fund, talking about how the NDP set it 

up to balance the budget. Well what‟s so interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in their very own budget document this year, in 

describing their budget, they said it was the 15th straight 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And what‟s so interesting is that 

they used some of the proceeds from the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund to balance their budget. 

 

And then we have, I guess, the member from Cannington, he 

obviously doesn‟t get memos on SaskTel or his government 

legislation from the member from Swift Current. 

 

Now the whole situation with the Sask Party criticizing the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund and then making their very own fund 

would almost be laughable if it wasn‟t that this isn‟t the only 

example we have of them saying one thing to get elected and 

doing something quite different once they are elected. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they said they had a plan to address school 

closures. So they don‟t have a plan. They say that there was no 

need for essential service legislation and guess what? We 

debated essential services legislation today. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

they say one thing before the campaign and during the 

campaign and do something quite differently once they‟re 

elected. 

 

So this Bill, which introduces its own Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 

is just another example of the Sask Party saying one thing and 

then doing something completely opposite. And I suspect we‟ll 

see many more examples of this from the Premier and his 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s something else that‟s interesting 

that‟s come out of the scrum following the Minister of 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Finance‟s unveiling of his very first piece of legislation. And 

what I find so interesting is that this is Bill 1. This is supposed 

to be a brand new Bill of the brand new Sask Party — the 

financial growth and stability Act. 

 

Well a reporter asked the Minister of Finance if he would call 

his budget balanced if he accessed funds from the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. And the minister answers, there are 

some thoughts. So I‟m going to once again read those answers 

into the record. And the reporter says, and I quote: 

 

If you have to access the funds to balance the budget, as 

you know the auditor says that‟s not a balanced budget, 

and you guys roundly criticized the NDP for if they spent 

more than they took in, and they used the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund to draw down and balance the books, 

you guys said that wasn‟t a balanced budget. As Finance 

minister if you access the funds in order to balance the 

books, will you call it a balanced budget? 

 

Now here‟s what the Minister of Finance said. I quote: 

 

I‟ll call it a balanced budget, but I‟ll give notice, and we‟ll 

highlight the fact that in order to balance the budget funds 

will be drawn from The Growth and Financial Security 

Act to do it. 

 

And then the reporter asked again: “Why would you call it a 

balanced budget when you are in government, when you didn‟t 

call that same circumstance a balanced budget when you were 

in opposition?” And the Finance Minister responds, quote: 

 

Well we can. We can call it an unbalanced budget and 

drawing on the fiscal growth, or the fiscal growth and 

fiscal stabilization fund in order to provide the cash 

balance, if you like it. 

 

He didn‟t even know the name of his own first Bill entered into 

this House. And then the reporter follows up by asking, quote: 

 

Well I would like to know if you‟re going to put out news 

releases like the NDP did, saying another consecutive 

balanced budget. What you guys said was a lie. If you‟re 

going to do that when you‟re government or not, that‟s 

what I want. 

 

The Minister of Finance responds, and I quote: 

 

No, I would think we would point clearly to the fact that 

it‟s a deficit budget. The shortfall has been made up with 

funds transferred from the Growth and Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. 

 

Reporter, quote, “So deficit budget, that is what you as Finance 

minister pledge to call it if you draw down the funds.” Answer, 

“Yes.” 

 

Well I don‟t know about that, Mr. Speaker. I have to say I 

haven‟t seen the news release yet from the Minister of Finance, 

although I suspect the Premier may have a thing or two to say 

before a news release goes out denoting a Saskatchewan Party 

government deficit budget. I guess we‟ll have to see whether or 

not, before the end of this session, we see such a press release. 

Now the other thing that this government promised through this 

financial growth and security Act is that they‟d limit the growth 

of the public service when the population of Saskatchewan was 

not growing or declining. And there are a lot of questions about 

how they‟re going to decide to do this. How and when will the 

government decide whether or not to decrease the public 

service? Will the government look at the population monthly or 

yearly to determine whether or not there should be changes to 

the size of the public service? 

 

One . . . [inaudible] . . . by the government that there should be 

a change in the size, i.e., will they decrease? Who will they go 

after? And how are they going to make it happen? Will they 

decide who loses their job? Will they work with departments or 

ministries to see who should go? Will they take into account the 

needs of the province before they start reducing jobs based on 

pop stats? Or are they going to work with departments in 

deciding if the population is going up, how many public 

servants we need to add? These are all questions that we as the 

public need to have answers for. In fact they are answers that 

we in the official opposition need before we conclude the 

proceedings on this Bill. 

 

There are also questions on whether or not this is good policy 

and how much it‟s going to cost the government to keep this 

policy. Does it make sense then when your population is 

declining, that you start laying off people? Might that just 

exacerbate the problem? If population declines or is seen to be 

the result of problems in the province or our provincial 

economy, and not just fluctuations in population, does it make 

sense that the government should employ an adequate number 

of people to assist with remedying these problems? Mr. 

Speaker, will these people be fired because of a population 

decline? Will they receive a severance, given that they‟ve been 

fired without cause? Other questions: will this apply to the size 

of the Premier‟s staff or the ministerial staff? 

 

It seems from our observation that this seems to be the fastest 

growing and most costly part of government at the moment. 

Instead of firing civil servants at the first sign of a population 

decline, maybe the Premier could decide to let a few of his 

political advisors go. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House are 

indeed proud of our financial accountability when we were in 

government. We worked hard to make changes to the way 

business is done in this Assembly in order to ensure that 

mistakes of the past are never repeated. 

 

When our government came to office in 1991, we were greeted 

with a debt of over $15 billion. Saskatchewan‟s books were a 

mess. Our credit rating was falling. And more importantly the 

public was losing faith quickly in government. 

 

Once elected in 1991, we delivered strong leadership, good 

government. We delivered accountability, transparency, and 

strong financial management. Our record certainly set 

Saskatchewan as having the highest standards in Canada for 

financial responsibility and accountability. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we were the first jurisdiction in our country to balance our 

books in the 1990s, and we were the first jurisdiction to 

introduce balanced budget legislation. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

Mr. Speaker, since 2004, an NDP government reduced the debt 

by $1.2 billion, taking the Saskatchewan debt to GDP [gross 

domestic product] to its lowest level in over 20 years. And, Mr. 

Speaker — even confirmed in your own budget — an NDP 

government balanced our budget 14 consecutive years in a row. 

And in fact we saw 16 straight credit upgrades. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker . . . Well they can say no. They 

can say no. But read your own document — 15 balanced 

budgets, 14 of those balanced budgets were NDP balanced 

budgets, and there were 16 straight credit upgrades. And we‟re 

waiting with bated breath to see what kind of credit upgrades 

the members opposite can manage. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I call everybody to order. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, we are indeed proud of the 

work we did. And we find it quite hypocritical that tonight we 

are debating a Bill that replaces the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, a 

fund that the members opposite called phony. They found it 

baloney. They called it a slush fund. They called it voodoo 

economics. They called it fudge-it budget. They . . . Oh he said 

they had no money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it had. I think when they took office, 

we left them with $2 billion in the bank at the Crown 

Investments Corporation and in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

And they can spin it any way they want, but the facts of the 

matter are we left them with $1.2 billion in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, and, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, a pile 

of money over at CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. And we‟ll be watching to see what they do with 

it. We will be watching to see what they do with it because we 

really know where they came from. 

 

We know where they came from. We know their history, and 

we‟ll be seeing in the next couple of years whether or not they 

use the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, or I guess it‟s called The 

Saskatchewan Growth and Financial Security Act, to balance 

their budget because thus far, Mr. Speaker, in this budget they 

used, they used money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to 

balance their budget, and they called it a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. So hypocrisy reigns supreme from members of the 

Sask Party. They say one thing before the election. They say 

another thing during the election, and they do something quite 

differently once they‟re elected. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — I am extremely pleased to stand tonight and 

enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to start 

by saying that this piece of legislation is very much an 

important piece of our province‟s history, and I‟m going to talk 

about why it‟s an important piece of our province‟s history in 

the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

start by talking about a book that is compulsory reading in 

about grade 8 or 9 called a Brave New World by Adolf Huxley. 

 

Many of you probably read it. Maybe some of you had a chance 

to read it two or three times. The member from Cannington 

knows the name well. He had a chance to read it several times 

as he repeated grade 9. But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a very important 

Bill. And the book talks about a brave new world where 

everything should change and everything is going to change, 

right, Mr. Speaker? But do you know what happens, Mr. 

Speaker? In the real world not much changed. 

 

And in the Brave New World that was written by Aldous 

Huxley, not a whole lot changed either, Mr. Speaker. So what 

happened on November 7, 2007? We had an election. We had 

an opposition who when they were in opposition said oh, we 

didn‟t need a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We didn‟t need any of 

that type of phony-baloney, you know, balancing fund, Mr. 

Speaker. We just, they would do away with it all. We didn‟t 

need any of that phony-baloney stuff and they called it a 

phony-baloney fund. 

 

[23:00] 

 

Well do you know what we find out after November 7, 2007? 

The Finance minister eats a lot of baloney sandwiches is what 

we found out, Mr. Speaker, because his phony-baloney fund 

that he kept referring to when he was in opposition, he bought it 

hook, line, and sinker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact, it was really kind of ironic to see the first budget 

being brought down, Mr. Speaker, and in particular when he 

introduced this piece of legislation. Because for all the things 

they made fun of in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker, 

all the things they made fun of, time and time again, they made 

fun of it — they said it wasn‟t necessary, they‟d never have it, 

they‟d do away with it — and what‟s the first, what‟s the first 

piece of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed with your point of order. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member, 

I believe, was making reference to the eating habits of a 

member on the opposite side of the House. And I think that‟s 

inappropriate and I would like him to withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Well I will remind the members that 

eating of food is not permissible in the Chamber. I will just 

remind members not to make personal remarks about the other 

members and to carry on with the debate. I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve heard 

of lame ducks before, but that was one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before, we had every comment 

you could imagine by the members opposite why this fund 

wasn‟t needed, why it was so unimportant. They called it a 

phony-baloney fund. They called it many different names, Mr. 

Speaker. And the reality was, what‟s the first piece of 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

legislation they introduced? 

 

The very first Bill, Mr. Speaker, is An Act respecting 

Saskatchewan‟s Growth and Financial Security and repealing 

certain Acts, Mr. Speaker. And what‟s its primary purpose, Mr. 

Speaker? To put in place or keep in place the same fund with a 

different name, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is not hypocrisy, I don‟t know what 

is, Mr. Speaker. To say that they don‟t need it, they don‟t want 

it, and shouldn‟t have it and then the very first Bill they put in 

place, Mr. Speaker — the very first Bill — is a Bill establishing 

that fund with a new name. And they think they‟ve created a 

brave new world, Mr. Speaker. Well I don‟t know who they 

think they‟ve fooled. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they talk about it‟s got money in it. Well 

who do they think they‟re kidding? There was money in the old 

fund too. If they didn‟t know that, Mr. Speaker, what‟d they do 

for the number of years they were in opposition they couldn‟t 

figure that one out, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and then what‟s the second thing we hear 

from them very, very early after they form government? We 

heard about the stark condition of the province‟s finances, Mr. 

Speaker, when they‟re sitting on $1.2 billion that we left them, 

Mr. Speaker, and a surplus that was continuing to grow, a 

surplus that was continuing to grow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the irony of those types of 

statements being made by the members opposite. And how even 

the media reacted was amazing, Mr. Speaker. They were left 

with more money than they know what to do with. They‟re 

sitting on a mountain of money left to them, Mr. Speaker. They 

say they don‟t need a Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and the first 

thing they do is put one in place. Now, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn‟t do much for their credibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then what do we hear on budget day? After 

hearing year after year after year after year that we never had a 

balanced budget, we never had one single balanced budget — I 

heard that every single year I‟ve been elected in this House — 

then what do I hear in the Finance minister‟s budget speech? 

What do I hear right off the bat, Mr. Speaker? I hear that this is 

the 15th balanced budget, consecutive balanced budget. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you can‟t have it both ways. You can‟t say 

for eight years that I‟ve been in this House, Mr. Speaker . . . I 

can‟t hear it for eight years that there‟s never been a balanced 

budget, and then all of a sudden when they‟re the government, 

there‟s been 15 consecutive balanced budgets. And now the 

members opposite say now they‟re the government they can say 

whatever they want, Mr. Speaker. Well who do they think 

they‟re fooling out there? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one of the most political provinces in the 

whole Dominion of Canada. People pay attention out there. 

They know you can‟t say for eight, nine years that you never 

had a balanced budget and then claim 15 in a row. Mr. Speaker, 

it doesn‟t add up. 

 

Now I don‟t know who‟s running the outfit over there, but first 

off they didn‟t want a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Then they said 

they never had a balanced budget. And I hear the leader of the 

opposition when he was in opposition, he went on at random 

about how we never had a balanced budget. And then all of a 

sudden when they‟re the government, they‟ve got 15 balanced 

budgets. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s just a start. These guys, Mr. Speaker 

— the opposition then, the government now — how can they 

have any credibility in these types of financial issues, Mr. 

Speaker? They won‟t even acknowledge that we had 16 

consecutive credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker. No, that didn‟t 

occur. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t give them to ourselves. 

Those are done by bond rating agencies, done by Standard & 

Poor‟s and others who examine the books of the province and 

look at how well the province is doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We got 16 consecutive upgrades. That‟s incredible. Mr. 

Speaker, our ratings went from, you know, incredibly low to 

being among the best in the country. Mr. Speaker, over the 

same period of time our debt-to-GDP ratio went from about 70 

per cent down to about 14 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Incredible 

progress. 

 

But I hear from the members opposite day after day that nothing 

happened in the 16 years we were government, Mr. Speaker, yet 

today about six months into their government, they haven‟t 

changed anything to do with the oil royalties. So what we did 

must have worked, right? 

 

They haven‟t changed many things, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

continuing to follow up with exactly what we did, Mr. Speaker. 

There‟s no major change in economic policy. 

 

Mind you they did put forward this new idea of the starship 

Enterprise, Mr. Speaker, where the minister responsible picked 

them by saying, beam me up, Lyle. You know, all you have to 

do to get up to the starship Enterprise is say, beam me up, Lyle, 

and up you go, Mr. Speaker. But it doesn‟t seem to be doing a 

whole lot yet, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not even in place yet and 

operating. Nothing‟s changed. 

 

So how did we go from a situation where nothing happened in 

16 years to billions of dollars, literally billions of dollars in 

surplus, Mr. Speaker? How does that happen if the previous 

government did nothing? How did that happen, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in The Globe and Mail today it said 

basically, to summarize it, that this new government has just 

continued with the NDP‟s plans. They continue with the NDP‟s 

agenda, and things are working relatively well. 

 

Well we‟d like to let them know that we‟re happy they‟re 

carrying on with our agenda and things are working relatively 

well. It‟s going real well, Mr. Speaker, because so far in this 

first quarter of this year we‟re already up about $78 million 

over what we expected in revenue due to land sales. And we 

should all be happy about that. The province is doing well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, things don‟t change overnight. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be nice if the members opposite would 

acknowledge once in a while that what they believed when they 

were in opposition isn‟t necessarily what they believe today 

when they‟re in government, because the way you view the 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

world in opposition is to oppose everything, they think, I guess, 

Mr. Speaker, and then when they become government to just 

follow along with the plans that were in place from the previous 

government. Makes sense if things are working. We thank you 

for acknowledging that things are working well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today we have a $1.3 billion Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. I‟d still like to call it that. You like to call it 

Financial Stability Fund. Same thing. But we have a $1.3 billion 

fund and it‟s growing. It‟s growing every day, Mr. Speaker, 

because this province is doing very well. Oil is now at about 

$1.05, $1.09 a barrel — somewhere between $1.05 and $1.09 a 

barrel. It‟s fluctuating each day. We booked there at about $80 a 

barrel, Mr. Speaker, so every day we‟re making more money 

and that‟s good. That‟s good for the province, it‟s good for the 

residents, and I‟m glad that we‟re doing that. And we should all 

be glad. This is our province; this is our home, and we want to 

have the best possible environment for our children that we can, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it‟s growing. And what did the average citizen get in the 

cities and towns and communities of our province, Mr. 

Speaker? They got about a $27 property tax rebate. We call it 

the pizza rebate, Mr. Speaker. Pizza rebate, Mr. Speaker. So the 

average urban taxpayer, whether it be in the hamlets, villages, 

towns, cities of Saskatchewan, got about $27, Mr. Speaker — 

$27 when we‟re sitting on over $1.3 billion. 

 

And you know what you got if you rented, Mr. Speaker? Do 

you know what you got if you rented? You got nothing, same 

time your rents are going up, Mr. Speaker, dramatically. 

Dramatically rents are going up particularly in the cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon, Lloydminster, and some of our other 

communities — Estevan, Mr. Speaker. We got $27 as an urban 

dweller, Mr. Speaker, if we owned our home. And if you were 

renting, you got nothing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I remember when we gave a rebate back on 

the utilities back a number of years ago and the member from 

Canora-Pelly, when we gave a $30 rebate — a $40 rebate, 

pardon me — called it a pizza rebate. He made fun of the rebate 

saying it wouldn‟t even buy him a pizza and it was 40 bucks. 

Well we got $27 about four years later so, Mr. Speaker, we got 

half a pizza. Half a pizza. We didn‟t even get a full pizza. Prices 

went up. Prices went up and we got about half a pizza for all 

our efforts, Mr. Speaker. When we‟re sitting at $1.3 billion, we 

got half a pizza. Now I don‟t know — a half a pizza when 

you‟re sitting at $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s one other significant aspect of this Bill . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, they‟re saying, 

what do we give them? Well what we proposed in the election, 

Mr. Speaker, was a 30 per cent reduction in property tax and 

that would apply to renters as well — everybody, everybody, 

everybody, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, when we had the 

opportunity we put 10 per cent in in one year — 10 per cent one 

year, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite gave 2 per cent. We 

put 10 in, they put 2, Mr. Speaker, so it moved from 10 per cent 

to 12 per cent, $27 the average urban dweller, Mr. Speaker, so 

half a pizza. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are one or two aspects of this Bill I 

think I need to in my next few minutes — if the member from 

Kindersley would let me have the floor — I‟d like to talk about, 

Mr. Speaker. One of the major things is that this Bill 

significantly changes how you can utilize the funds from the 

sale of Crown assets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, previously the revenue from the sale of 

Crown assets had to go against the debt, Mr. Speaker, or go 

back into reinvestment in the Crown Investments Corporation, 

Mr. Speaker. Today they‟ve changed it so they in fact can 

utilize that money in the General Revenue Fund. And if they 

hadn‟t used that in the General Revenue Fund this year, Mr. 

Speaker, they wouldn‟t have a balanced budget. 

 

Of course they could have simply taken more from the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, which is what the fund is there for, is to 

balance the budget in times when the revenue doesn‟t actually 

cover it. Or, Mr. Speaker, they could have known like they 

should have known that oil is going to produce significantly 

more revenue than what was projected at $80 a barrel. So, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re going to have the revenue to balance the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what they need to do, Mr. Speaker, is consider what the 

people of Saskatchewan got out of this budget, the people who 

ultimately own every penny of money the government has, 

which are the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Governments have no 

money that don‟t belong to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers own that $1.3 billion and 

they could use a little bit of it, a little bit more than half a pizza, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal now specifically with this 

Bill, the Bill that they said we didn‟t need, the fund they said 

we didn‟t need, the fund they said they wouldn‟t have, Mr. 

Speaker. We now have it. And you know, it had money in it 

when it was called the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. It had money 

in it when it was the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

And now it‟s got money as the new, the new Saskatchewan 

growth and financial security Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve entered into a brave new world, a 

brave new world when you claim something‟s different when 

it‟s the same, Mr. Speaker. It‟s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 

hear, we‟re government; you‟re not. So you can claim 

anything‟s what it is, whether it isn‟t or not. That doesn‟t add 

up to many people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell the members opposite — if 

they‟d just give me a minute — it‟s okay to admit you made a 

mistake. All right. It‟s okay to have made a mistake and admit 

it. 

 

The need for a Fiscal Stabilization Fund is recognized because 

of volatility in resource revenues, and they can fluctuate quite 

significantly. That‟s been the purpose for many years. We‟re 

glad that you finally see the light. We‟re glad that as you move 

forward in this brave new world where you‟re the government 

that you actually see the world as it is. Mr. Speaker, we‟re glad 

that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I think there will be many hours of 

debate in the next few days. I think everybody will get a 

chance. I would like to hear the member that‟s on his feet right 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

now. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we‟re 

getting to the wee small hours of the end of this day, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to just talk about, it is okay to admit you made 

a mistake. It is okay to put something in place you said you 

wouldn‟t do. But just for Pete‟s sake, own up to it. Say we were 

wrong. We learned something. We know we need this now, Mr. 

Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s pretty simple. It‟s a pretty 

simple concept. We all make mistakes. We‟ve all made 

mistakes. The real challenge is whether you‟ll own up to it or 

not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[23:15] 

 

So they made a mistake. They said they‟d never have this Bill. 

Now we have it, Mr. Speaker. We will acknowledge that it‟s 

good legislation, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll acknowledge it does what 

it should do. It gives us that stability across the many years as 

you look at balancing off the resource revenue, the volatility in 

resource revenue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the same fund as it was before, Mr. 

Speaker. The reality is it‟s the same fund. And those members 

who are saying, except there‟s money in it, Mr. Speaker, 

obviously didn‟t understand what there was there before 

because there was money in it too, Mr. Speaker. And nobody 

can deny that that was elected previously, Mr. Speaker. They 

know there was money in it. So to say that there wasn‟t money 

in it . . . The member from Moose Jaw North, who said there 

wasn‟t money in it, wasn‟t elected before. I don‟t know who 

gave him the bad advice or the bad information, but I want to 

assure the member if he goes back and looks at the previous 

records, there was money in it. There was money in it, and your 

veteran members like your Finance minister would have to 

admit that. Your member of Government Services, he wouldn‟t 

deny that that there was money in it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the same fund. We got it renamed. So 

why would we ever be against a fund we put in place, Mr. 

Speaker? We wouldn‟t, obviously. We would support such a 

fund, Mr. Speaker. It makes sense to support what we did, Mr. 

Speaker. But to think that you can simply change the name and 

people are going to view it any differently, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t 

know, Mr. Speaker, that‟s irony or hypocrisy. It‟s many 

different things, Mr. Speaker, none of which the public is going 

to buy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is basically a decent piece of legislation. It 

does what‟s always been in place. It‟s unfortunate though that 

with the government sitting on more than $1.3 billion in the 

bank, growing every day, as we say about $78 million in the 

first few days of this month thanks to the land sales for oil and 

natural gas exploration production, Mr. Speaker. We . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . 73? Well the minister corrected me 

and said, 73. I appreciate it, Mr. Minister. I appreciate you 

updating me, and it‟s actually 73 million. That‟s good for the 

province. We‟re happy, and we should all be happy about that. 

 

And as the situation gets better, I‟m hoping that they‟ll take 

some of that revenue and accelerate their property tax rebate, 

Mr. Speaker, because the citizens of our cities and towns have a 

need right now. With the situation we‟re facing with significant 

property tax increases in our urban areas, Mr. Speaker, and 

across the province, 2 per cent and $27 doesn‟t cut it. Two per 

cent doesn‟t cut it. 

 

So we have the Minister of Energy and Resources saying 

they‟re going to accelerate the property tax. Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Minister if you would tell us how you‟re going to accelerate it, 

we‟d appreciate if you‟d share that information with us. If 

you‟re going to accelerate the tax rebates, Mr. Speaker, we‟d be 

very happy with that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a good piece of legislation. We do 

appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, that you‟re moving forward with 

this legislation. It‟s good for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s ultimately what we‟re all here for, is 

to serve the people of the province of Saskatchewan. New name 

or not, it does the same thing, Mr. Speaker. It does the exact 

same thing. It‟s a little ironic, Mr. Speaker, that we have to be 

sitting here talking about the same fund that‟s been in place for 

years, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s actually a little bit fun talking about 

this type of fund, Mr. Speaker, because the members opposite 

continued to deny its existence, its need, and in fact that there 

was money in it. 

 

But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, how can we vote against 

what we put in place? Pretty difficult. My colleagues and I 

understand that we couldn‟t vote against this because we put it 

in place. So, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day this is a good 

piece of legislation. It will accomplish a great deal for the 

province of Saskatchewan. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟ll continue with what we‟ve done for the last number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. It will work to create that stability we need 

in volatile revenues, Mr. Speaker. It will allow us to move 

forward with balanced budgets in outer years of their volatility 

in revenues, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a tremendous piece of legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that I just want to say to the members, 

thank you for taking our advice, moving forward with our 

legislation, keeping it in place. We appreciate that. The people 

of Saskatchewan appreciate it. It‟s good. Your brave new world 

is just the old world repeated. But, Mr. Speaker, that‟s all right. 

Sometimes it‟s okay to make a mistake. It would be nice if they 

would once in a while admit it. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

going to take my chair. Several of my colleagues would like to 

have the opportunity to share a few minutes of their ideas with 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 

given the hour that we‟re at, and I know it‟s prime time for 

many people who are watching news this evening, so they may 

not want to come and watch this channel. But I think what we 

should do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is go to a bit of a quiz show 

format and see what we can figure out here as we go this 

evening. What I‟m going to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I‟ll 

ask the home audiences to get out their paper with a pencil, and 

they can see how many of these quotes they can get, see if they 

can get them right. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

So first off, this is a quote, and let‟s see if we can guess who, 

who made this statement: “. . . fundamentally, there is very little 

difference” between the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and the Sask 

Party plan. Anybody know who said that? Well let‟s, let‟s . . . 

Anybody in the crowd here? Well the answer to that one is on 

December 14, 2007, that was said by the member from Melfort, 

the Finance minister. 

 

So let‟s go for another one here. Let‟s, let‟s try another one. 

Now let‟s see who can guess who said this: 

 

They are now running a $478 million deficit but they try to 

hide it under the Fiscal Stabilization Fund which is really a 

false bookkeeping procedure . . . We have met with the 

various banks in Canada, we have talked to the auditor, 

and they all agree that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund does 

not exist. 

 

Now could anybody tell me who said that? I‟m hearing some 

suggestions, but they‟re all quite, quite far from the answer. I 

know that . . . no? This was made, this comment was made on 

March 21, 2002, by the member from Biggar. Now 

unfortunately . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That was a 

comment made six years ago by the member from Biggar. 

 

Now let‟s try another one. Okay. This is, this is one: 

 

. . . [the] Fiscal Stabilization Fund . . . was a . . . shell 

game that had nothing under it, Mr. Speaker. When they 

lifted the shell up there was nothing there. 

 

So who said that? Well we‟re getting a lot of suggestions, but I 

haven‟t heard one that‟s even close yet. That comment was 

made on March 25, 2002, by the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone who is now the Minister of Health. 

 

So well we‟ve got another one, Mr. Speaker, how about, let‟s 

see if anybody can guess who made this comment: “I won‟t 

support this budget because it relies on the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund.” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think it‟s either getting a little late or 

everyone‟s just waking up. But I would suggest it‟d be better if 

we didn‟t involve the other members in the debate, and we 

might keep, maintain the decorum of the House. I recognize the 

member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, I‟ll continue with 

this because my real participatory audience is the audience at 

home, and so they I know they‟re very curious to hear all these 

quotations. 

 

So who said this: 

 

I won‟t support this budget because it relies on the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, which most people now realize has no 

money it, and coincidentally never has had any money in it 

. . . 

 

. . . [how can you] transfer money from a fund that doesn‟t 

really have any money to balance a budget that really isn‟t 

in a deficit . . . the Minister of Finance admitted, 

technically speaking, in a cash balance scenario, we‟re in a 

deficit. 

 

This is a paper fund. 

 

So who made that statement? Well that statement was made by 

the member from Cypress Hills who‟s now the Minister of 

Transportation. That was made on April 4, 2002. 

 

Now here‟s one, I think people might get this one. This is 

another quote: 

 

If they took that money instead of putting it into the phony 

baloney Fiscal Stabilization Fund . . . 

 

The fiscal stabilization phony-baloney NDP slush 

fund. . . . 

 

But the phony-baloney Fiscal Stabilization Fund is not 

going to help anybody. 

 

So who made that statement . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, 

that was made by the member from Silver Springs on 

November 21, 2005. 

 

So I‟ll give you another quotation that I think will . . . let‟s see 

if anybody can guess who said this? Quote: 

 

The government likes to call this the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. Actually probably a better name for it is the fancy 

slush fund because the government claims it‟s going to use 

this money to maintain its balances in the budget. That 

means they‟re going to park the money there for a period 

of time until they believe they need it within the 

Consolidated Fund to balance the books . . . 

 

What is actually in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or the 

fancy slush fund is a little note, Mr. Speaker, signed in 

crayon by the Minister of Finance that I owe me money 

. . . 

 

They‟re shuffling money off into their fancy slush fund 

. . . But there‟s no money there; they‟ve spent it. 

 

And so when they‟re claiming they use it to stabilize their 

fiscal resources of this province, what they‟re doing is 

trying to stabilize the political resources of the . . . 

[province]. 

 

Now it‟s quite a long quote, but I wanted to make sure I got the 

full flavour of it to see if anybody could guess who said that. 

That was said by the member from Cannington on May 26 in 

2000. And I think the key point there is that he calls this an IOU 

signed in crayon by the Minister of Finance to himself that says, 

I owe me money. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that the reference back to the 

member from Melfort, the Minister of Finance where he says, 

fundamentally there‟s very little difference between the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund and the Sask Party plan that‟s coming 

forward. And he just said that a few months ago. I think there‟s 

a reflection here that some of the comments that have been 

made over a number of years by many of the members who are 

now on that side are, I guess, the height of hyperbole around a 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

fund that actually has a use and is an appropriate way to deal 

with the finances in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill was a surprise to us because it 

was an affirmation of how the accounts had been prepared by 

the Government of Saskatchewan over the last 16 years. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the praise and the imitation that the 

members opposite have brought forward in this particular 

budget because we know that it reflects a great deal of respect 

for the work that our Finance ministers have done over quite a 

number of years. 

 

It‟s the same kind of respect that the bond rating agencies have 

had for the province as we have dealt with the problems of the 

‟80s and early ‟90s. And when we get 16 credit rating upgrades 

by the bond rating agencies, what that reflects is the fact that we 

have worked very diligently as a government, but also as all of 

the people in the province working together to make sure that 

the finances of the province are in order. 

 

So when the government brings forth Bill No. 1 — which goes 

contrary to a lot of the very strange comments that I‟ve just 

quoted here — we want to say that, I guess, thank you for 

recognizing that the way that the books have been organized in 

this province over the last number of years reflect the volatile 

resource revenues that we have in this province, but they also 

set out a plan that allows for the government to actually do the 

kind of work that‟s necessary in this particular province. 

 

And so when the members look at the things that they said 

before and they convey those same comments to their Finance 

Minister, I think they need to reflect back on the kind of 

position that they were in three, four, five years ago, and 

recognize that once you actually have the information as to how 

the financial workings of this province go ahead that you will 

support the plans that have been set out for the province. 

 

[23:30] 

 

Now the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a lot of 

cash right now in this fund. And some of the choices that have 

been made have not been made in an appropriate way to deal 

with the response of people in the province. And I think it‟s 

especially difficult by some of the choices made by the 

members opposite as it relates to situations like Station 20 in 

Saskatoon or some of the housing issues or, more importantly, 

what‟s happened with the municipal taxation issues. Because 

many of the people in the province who had high hopes for 

many of the things that could happen with this economy are 

holding judgment. They‟re stepping back and saying, well I 

don‟t think what these people set forward in their election plans 

are the kinds of things that are informing what they‟re doing. 

 

But one of the ways that we were able to continue to balance 

and deal with the books of the province was to use the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And on that basis, I know that all of us are 

appreciative that this is an area where they‟ve listened. Now 

practically I say that, also encouraging them to, as a 

government, to listen in a number of other areas. And they will 

see that the way things that we set out were managed is a way 

that actually will be of benefit for the people of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that they have brought forward 

this type of legislation. I just hope that they use it in an 

appropriate way so that the people of the province will benefit. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join in the debate as well in reference to the Bill, The Growth 

and Financial Security Act Bill. And you heard from my 

colleague that some of the hypocrisy over the last several years 

about the whole notion behind having this fund put in place and 

having it there as a — I use the phrase — buffer fund in times 

of less money coming into the provincial coffers and being able 

to balance the budgets and being able to sustain some of the 

gyrating sources of income that the province has, whether it‟s 

oil or gas and from some of the agricultural commodities that 

sometimes do have their ups and downs. And these switches, if 

you will, are fairly dramatic, so I think the overall thought 

process behind creating such a fund to buffer Saskatchewan 

people and of course the programs and support services that 

they expect from their province, there‟s lot of thought and merit 

to that school of thinking. 

 

But I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, suppose I was a 

backbencher over there. And suppose I wanted to make a big 

difference for the people that sent me to Regina and said go 

forward and make a difference for whether it‟s Lloydminster or 

Meadow Lake or Carrot River or whatever the case may be. 

And we want a new government. We want a change. That was 

the general mode of thinking. 

 

But when the people sent the representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Party here, they wanted to see some exciting 

times. They wanted to see some great new property tax relief — 

not three years from now when it‟s politically appropriate to do 

that. Because that‟s what the senior guys over there are telling 

the backbenchers and those that didn‟t make the cut to cabinet. 

Be patient because the first year we‟ll go through all the bad 

stuff. We‟ll do exactly what the NDP has said they‟re all about. 

We‟ll do exactly what they‟re doing because what your reward 

will be is three years from now we‟ll announce a PST cut. We‟ll 

pave a bunch of roads. We‟ll do a bunch of property tax relief, 

and you guys will get elected again in the Lloydminsters or the 

Meadow Lake or the Carrot River. 

 

And so the handlers over there are telling all these young people 

or these people that have been sent here on a mission, hold your 

philosophy, hold your thoughts, and hold all the ambitions that 

you had, and we‟re going to simply stay the course and follow 

what the NDP have put in place for Saskatchewan until it‟s 

appropriate for us to make a change and that‟s usually going to 

happen in year 3 or year 4 of our term. 

 

So these poor backbenchers are sitting back there and 

everything that our new government is doing is what the NDP 

put in place already. And even this fiscal fund that they‟re 

talking about, well that‟s exactly what we said we wouldn‟t do. 

So the backbenchers over there are being stifled, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re being stifled so when they go back to their appropriate 

places people are asking them, okay we need some agricultural 

programs in place here. We really need some help here, and we 

need help now. Whether it‟s the pork producers needing help, 

Mr. Speaker, or whether it‟s property tax relief, we don‟t need it 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

in four years. We need it now because you guys have the 

money; you have the money now. 

 

And what are these guys going to say, because, when we were 

in opposition, the Sask Party used to say, that Fiscal 

Stabilization funding, the people need the money now. The 

people need the money now. And what you‟re doing is actually 

what the NDP have been doing for years. They‟ve been putting 

that money away to buffer Saskatchewan over the tough times 

that we sometimes go through as a province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what are those backbenchers going to tell their people that 

elected them? You‟re doing exactly what the NDP have done. 

They‟re putting money into a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. You‟re 

boring. You‟re unexciting, and you‟re not taking our fight 

forward. You‟re not taking our fight forward. And how could 

you justify all the cuts that you‟re going to be cutting and all the 

programs you‟re not going to be funding? Well isn‟t that part of 

being a new exciting government is to do things right off the 

hop and make things happen? Didn‟t we send you to Regina to 

make this big difference for us and Lloydminster or Meadow 

Lake? And never mind the pie in the sky stuff. We need 

programs in progress right now. 

 

But the handlers over there — we‟re not sure if they‟re liberals 

or conservatives, Mr. Speaker — the handlers over there are 

telling the entire backbench, no we‟re going to do this, and you 

guys are going to be part of this scene. And if you ever think 

you‟re going to ever make cabinet, you‟re going to listen to 

what we tell you; otherwise you guys will be gone from your 

seat within the next couple years, and we‟ll find somebody else 

that‟ll follow this path laid out for you. 

 

Well I point out to the backbenchers over there that what you‟re 

doing here is you‟re, quite frankly, going back on your word 

when you said you wouldn‟t be doing some of these things 

before the election, and that‟s exactly what you‟re doing now 

that the election is over. Don‟t you think that‟s going to have a 

price to pay, when you look at some of the things that you said 

you wouldn‟t do and then you end up doing the moment you‟re 

elected? 

 

And these poor backbenchers, they got to follow the directive. 

They got to follow the marching orders. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

marching orders is what . . . [inaudible] . . . they‟re going to 

have a tough time explaining to their people back home — why 

certain roads can‟t be done, why certain programs can‟t be put 

in place, why certain programs have to be cut when you have 

$1.3 billion in the bank. When the economy‟s booming, why 

would you would make these cuts? Why would you have to do 

these things in this way in this year? Why? Why? 

 

So if there are backbenchers over there that had any, any 

backbone, they‟d start out asking, why are we doing the things 

that we fought against during the election that were all NDP? 

And we said to people, we‟re not going to be like that. We‟re 

not going to put money away when people have needs. We‟re 

not going to put money away in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

and claim we have all these balanced budgets. We‟re not going 

to do things like that. We‟re going to invest in education and 

health care and agriculture. We‟re going to do that. 

 

But what happened to that argument? What happened to that 

argument? All of a sudden it‟s very quiet over there, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s very quiet, but guess what? We‟re going to put this 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund in place. And all the ambitions that the 

backbench had, all the ideals, Mr. Speaker, all the plans that 

they had, they all of a sudden are muted. They‟re muted 

because the agenda has been set. And you have to ask the 

question, who‟s in charge over there? Is it the people or is it the 

handlers of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now quite frankly from our perspective, we know what‟s going 

to happen. They‟re going to put money in this Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. We can complain about it all day and night 

here, but they‟re going to do exactly what we were doing — 

putting money away for the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to buffer 

Saskatchewan. By the same token, what they‟re going to do is 

tell their backbenchers and the people wanting to see things 

happen, be patient because this is a three- or four-year process. 

We‟ll do things for you guys, but in the meantime this is the 

plan laid out to you, and you have no choice but to accept that 

plan. 

 

And one of the things that I think is very, very important, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — very important — is that if you want to have 

success in political life, then you‟ve got to acknowledge people, 

and you‟ve got to share with people your vision, and then you 

give these people hope. I heard that quote one day, and that‟s so 

very true. And how you give people hope is you don‟t wait for a 

political agenda. You get things done right now, right off the 

start when you‟ve got a fresh start. 

 

So what I feel really bad for, Mr. Speaker, is . . . The electoral 

success that they enjoyed — fine, we‟ll give them that. We‟re 

given a time-out as a party, and we‟ll accept, as our leader has 

said, we‟ll accept that mandate and that responsibility. And we 

probably will accept that mandate and responsibility. But what I 

feel awfully terrible about, Mr. Speaker, is what the opposition 

over there has to go through and the marching orders the 

backbench has, to say this is what we‟re going to do and you 

guys are going to follow that path. You can park all your 

ambitions. You park all your plans. You park all your projects 

because we‟ve got a better deal for you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, everything they fought against during the 

election, and I know the entire backbench fought against that. 

They fought against everything the NDP represented, including 

our Fiscal Stabilization Fund plan. And now today they‟re 

doing exactly what they said they would not do, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re doing exactly what they said they would not do. 

 

So I ask the backbenchers, where in your presentation to the 

public, where in your discussion with the voters and the people 

out there that thought maybe this guy or this lady can bring 

forward our arguments, and maybe we can get that excitement 

going . . . What happens? They come to Regina and it‟s the 

same old same old. You‟ll simply park your ambitions, park 

any kind of idealism that you had, or any project that you had in 

place. You‟re going to follow the main agenda set forward by 3 

or 4 or 7 or 8 select people. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Not 

only does hypocrisy reign over there, but they‟re now quelling 

any kind of exciting opportunity that any backbencher may 

have over there. And how in the world, how in the world can 

they now stand up and park their ambitions aside, saying no, 

I‟m not going to do this for a certain area that I represent; I‟m 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

now part of this team that has everything all figured out for me. 

 

And when you do that, when you do that, when you park your 

ambition, all of a sudden what you‟re doing is you‟re destroying 

democracy, destroying democracy for people that are handling 

the ambitions and opportunity for your region. And I believe 

that‟s the worst thing that any new person coming to this 

particular place or coming with a particular party in mind could 

do to their own people, Mr. Speaker. So not only are they 

parking their ambitions; they are now supporting something that 

they said they would never do during the campaign. 

 

They said they would never do this, and they argued till they‟re 

blue in the face. And today now what‟s happening, Mr. 

Speaker, is they‟re doing exactly what the NDP had done. They 

have put a Fiscal Stabilization Fund in place under a different 

name. So I‟ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that no matter what 

happens, no matter what happens on that end, I look across the 

way, I see a bunch of people that are disappeared in the back 

room, in the back benches. They did not come here for this, Mr. 

Speaker. They came here to make sure they made a significant 

difference. And what happens? These seven or eight people tell 

them what‟s going to happen over the next two years, and they 

follow along like little sheep. Like little sheep. 

 

And all the arguments they made, individual arguments, 

because if you‟re going to be an MLA, then you got individual 

issues, you got individual projects, you got individual ambition 

to make sure you‟re able to represent your area well, 

professionally, and with dedication. And what happens? You 

come to Regina. All of a sudden here‟s your marching orders. 

You‟re told what to do. And to add on to that, Mr. Speaker, 

what happens? They come along and they tell people, well 

we‟re not going to do that any more; we‟re going to do what the 

NDP done. That‟s the second whammy they get. 

 

So not only are they parking their ambitions for their people, 

they‟re going to follow the things they said they wouldn‟t do 

before they were elected. So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the 

things that people ought to know is that not only are you 

quelling your ambitions and really parking your promise. 

What‟s happening now is you‟re now compromising what your 

beliefs were when you first joined this effort to be a part of the 

political process and hopefully be part of political change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[23:45] 

 

But for the backbenchers over there, that‟s not going to fly, Mr. 

Speaker. It ain‟t going to fly because no matter what happens 

— look across the way — and I don‟t care if the entire bench 

over there said anything negative about the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. They‟ve said it all ten thousand times and I couldn‟t care 

less what they said two years ago. 

 

But I‟ll say today the people of Saskatchewan won‟t be fooled 

because what they‟ve said is they wouldn‟t do this. The point is 

they are doing it today, and that‟s the fundamental message 

with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund under a new name that they 

have put forward, Mr. Speaker. So quite frankly I don‟t care 

what they said in the past. It‟s not the issue, and I‟ll point it out 

again. It‟s not the issue. 

 

The issue is they said they wouldn‟t do this, and today they are 

doing it. And how are they doing it, Mr. Speaker? They‟re 

doing it at the expense of their backbench. They‟re doing that at 

the expense of some programs that are out there, and they‟re 

doing it at the expense of democracy and at the expense of the 

people that expected something better — something dynamic, 

Mr. Speaker — and they never got it. 

 

So it goes back to our point is that they compromised their 

beliefs and they went totally against the grain of what their 

people wanted. So now they‟re sitting there and talking to these 

guys and they‟re told — and we know this as well, Mr. Speaker, 

we know this as well, Mr. Speaker, that they‟re been told — 

look you guys, hang tough. The economy‟s going really well. 

Oil and gas prices are high. You know, we have all this money 

coming in. Within two or three years, you know what we‟ll do? 

We‟ll start giving the municipalities more money. We‟ll give 

them property tax relief. Maybe we‟ll redraw a few electoral 

boundaries. Maybe we‟ll pave a few streets. Maybe we‟ll knock 

down the PST [provincial sales tax]. We‟ll do all these 

wonderful things. And guess what? You guys get elected again. 

 

That‟s what their strategy is. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

That doesn‟t work because we know what their interests are. 

We know what their plan is. It‟s very plain as to what they want 

to do. And over here we see what is happening. But today, 

today I ask the backbenchers over there, the backbenchers 

themselves, what program did you park? What principle did 

you sit on? And what ambition are you now stifling because all 

of a sudden you‟re told, this is the plan; we‟re going to do this 

and that‟s it. And you‟re going to sit there for the next four 

years, hopefully make cabinet. 

 

In the meantime, you‟re not dynamic. You‟re not having the 

effect and impact that people sent you here to Regina to have, 

Mr. Speaker. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, to add insult to 

injury, you are now going to do exactly what you said you 

wouldn‟t do and that‟s mimic what the NDP have done to the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. That‟s what you‟re going to do. 

That‟s what you‟re going to do. 

 

So you‟re parking your ambitions and you‟re following what 

the NDP done and that‟s the worst thing you can do for voters, 

despite the fact that you said you wouldn‟t do this and you did 

it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I quite frankly know in opposition we can 

promise a lot of things and we‟ll certainly make sure we deliver 

if we‟re ever government. 

 

But over there right now, the decay on government begins the 

day your backbenchers are told to park your promises and park 

your ambitions and park your desire and your idealism. Because 

today you‟re part of a team and here‟s the marching orders, 

here‟s the plan. And not only is this a plan that doesn‟t 

recognize you, it‟s a plan that the NDP put in place. So you‟ve 

got a double whammy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‟s why I say, I say to the people today, whether it‟s the 

Hudson Bay area or whether it‟s the P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp 

mill or whether it‟s essential services, whatever the case may 

be, the people of Saskatchewan really wanted some change. 

They are going to experiment with these guys. And, Mr. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

Speaker, once again, they have not failed to prove in spades that 

they‟re not capable of governing. All they‟re going to be is 

simply the same old, tired selves in the sense that we‟ll follow 

our lead from other parties because we don‟t know how to 

govern ourselves. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that old phrase, imitation is the sincerest form 

of flattery, what‟s happening now is that, because they have lost 

their way, Mr. Speaker, because they‟ve lost their way they‟re 

going to simply park their ambitions as I said and take the 

tried-and-true and the safe method of following what the NDP 

would have done. That‟s what they‟re saying to themselves. 

 

And over there across the way, I know a lot of them have views 

on the Crowns, views on private health care, views on a number 

of other issues, Mr. Speaker. But right now, they‟re quelling, 

they‟re zipping their lips because they don‟t want to make any 

statement that could cost them the next election. So we on this 

side know that the pressure‟s on them. And if they don‟t deal 

with their backbenchers, they‟re going to lose a lot of exciting 

people. 

 

And you think you have this grand scheme and this grand 

strategy all figured out and instead you‟re saying you‟ll spend 

the next . . . In the next three years, we‟ll spend all this money, 

a PST cut maybe, maybe a big chunk of money going towards 

land taxes in the city. We‟ll do all these things and then we‟ll 

convince the voters to give a second term. 

 

But where does that leave the backbenchers? What are they 

going to argue when they go back to their community? What 

have you done for a certain area? What have you done for a 

certain group of people? What have you done when you spoke 

to us earlier about what we want to do when you got to Regina? 

And the sad thing is, Mr. Speaker, they‟re going to have to say, 

well I‟m sorry, I parked my ambition, I parked our plan for this 

region and I‟m not part of a bigger team. And oh by the way, by 

the way, we set up this Fiscal Stabilization Fund just so we 

don‟t, we buffer Saskatchewan from all these bad times that 

might be coming. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are a lot more 

intelligent than that. They‟re a lot more intelligent than that. 

And that‟s why I say today when they moved this agenda 

forward, when they moved this agenda forward on this side we 

quietly said, Fiscal Stabilization Fund is probably good 

economics for us despite what those guys across the way have 

said. We‟re probably smart to do this. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, across the way, they cannot go back to 

their constituency, they cannot go back to their constituency 

and say, I‟m about change, because they advocated change 

when they ran. And they come here, they‟re doing exactly what 

we think they ought to do and put their money in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund to buffer Saskatchewan for future problems 

that will occur, Mr. Speaker, when you have a dramatic shift in 

your income as a province. 

 

Now I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the pressure is on them. The 

pressure is on them and I don‟t know how in the world that they 

are going to go back and explain to people that elected them, 

explain to people why they‟re defending now a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund that they fought against and advocated 

against. And more so the people that were here before them. 

I‟m talking about the old guard over there. The ones that were 

here before them used to criticize this plan on a regular, 

consistent basis and you‟ve heard all the quotes. And now the 

government is saying oh, oh, no, no, this is a good fund; this is 

something that we need to do. 

 

So how now with all honesty and all vim and vigour can you go 

back and explain to the people that elected you, this is a good 

thing to do because all you can really, truly defend — all you 

can really, truly defend — is not the lack of program that you‟re 

not able to do now because you‟ve been told what you can or 

can‟t do here, but really all you can defend is this is a good plan 

that may get us a second term. This is a plan that might give us 

a second term and we‟re going to do exactly what the NDP 

says. 

 

We accused the NDP last time of buying the next election and 

that‟s exactly what they plan on doing, Mr. Speaker, to the 

fiscal stabilization Act, or so-called financial and growth and 

security Act. They‟re going to do exactly that. They‟re going to 

wait. They‟ll have the fund for the next two or three years, 

announce a bunch of property tax rebates, maybe a PST cut, 

maybe more paving, a wild variety of things they could offer. 

And that‟s it. That‟s all they can promise their backbench, Mr. 

Speaker, is a bunch of opportunity four years from now. 

 

And after eight years, after eight years, Mr. Speaker, the 

backbench is going to look at themselves if they haven‟t made 

cabinet, or even if they‟ve made cabinet — what have I 

accomplished? What have I accomplished? And that is why, 

Mr. Speaker, that is why they ought to stand up as a backbench 

and tell the front row guys: front row guys, you want us to be 

part of your team, you‟d better be part of our team as well. 

 

And if all we‟re doing is following what was laid out in front of 

us, what are we here for? What are we here for? Where is our 

democracy? Where is our fight? Where is our priority? Why 

aren‟t we doing things that I said I was going to do? And all the 

things that I was going to fight against, why are we now 

supporting, Mr. Speaker? So they‟re looking really bad out 

there. 

 

So once again I point out that if they don‟t fight, if all they‟re 

going to do is simply follow and follow and follow, then they‟re 

doing a great disservice to not only their constituents that they 

promised things would happen for them, Mr. Speaker, but 

they‟re doing a great disservice to democracy because they said 

one thing when they‟re running and when they‟re in opposition, 

and they‟re doing exactly a different thing when they became 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, no matter what happens out there, no matter 

what happens . . . If any one of those opposition members or 

any one of those government members, especially the 

backbench, how do you explain to your constituents why all of 

a sudden you‟re putting in a same fund that the NDP put in? 

How are you going to explain that? Are you going to use the 

usual lines that are given to you? 

 

This is the lines you will use with media. This is the lines you 

will use when media calls you on this fund. This is what you‟ll 

do when they call you asking about a certain specific program 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

or a project. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

look across the way, and I say there‟s a mosaic of parties over 

there, Mr. Speaker. There‟s western reformers; there‟s 

Conservatives; there‟s Liberals. There‟s a bunch of mix over 

there. And as I look across and I see the mosaic, I say to them, 

boy, you know, somebody‟s playing somebody over there 

because first of all you look at the Liberals, the Liberals in that 

. . . [inaudible] . . . they‟re given all the bad assignments. 

They‟re given all the bad assignments. We‟ll give that Liberal 

this file, we‟ll give another Liberal that file. And in the 

meantime, at the end of the day about the only party that‟ll 

survive over there is not going to be the backbench, it‟s not 

going to be the Liberals. It‟s going to be the Conservatives, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s why I point out today, why on earth would 

they be supporting that process, that process when clearly it 

doesn‟t have their interests in mind? 

 

So to the backbenchers I say to you today, this is but one small 

example of how you‟re told you will park your ambitions, you 

will follow the lead, and at the end of the day what you do quite 

frankly is you quite frankly displace your entire constituency. 

 

So why don‟t you get up and speak up and say, why are we 

putting in a Fiscal Stabilization Fund under a different name 

and then they‟re telling people they wouldn‟t do that. Why are 

we doing that? Why can‟t I have programs in Meadow Lake? 

Why can‟t I have programs in Carrot River? Why can‟t I have 

programs in Watrous? Why can‟t I have all these programs we 

spoke about during the election? And they‟ll be told no, no, no, 

we‟re putting the money away so we can buy the next election. 

 

And the thing about it is it‟s no secret, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that‟s what they‟ve got planned. It‟s no big secret. It‟s not a 

CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] conspiracy here. We know 

quite frankly it‟s going to happen. That‟s their plan. 

 

In the meantime to the backbenchers I say, how could you say 

one thing to people out there . . . and what‟s even going to be 

crucial, a crucial test for them, Mr. Speaker, is what are they 

going to say to their constituents when they‟ve got to go home 

and go on the radio or go on the newspaper? You know what 

they‟re going to do? You know what they‟re going to do? 

They‟re going to say, well this is our lines we‟re given and 

we‟re going to follow them. Because why? Because I might be 

in cabinet two years from now. Oh, you know what‟s even 

better? I might be an MLA eight years from now. 

 

But in the meantime you‟re parking your ambitions and you‟re 

parking your projects for something that you said you wouldn‟t 

do. And that is a double whammy, Mr. Speaker. That is a 

double whammy and that‟s why I say to the backbenchers over 

there, the facts have been laid out, the plan has been designed, 

and you guys have no influence to make that change, none 

whatsoever. 

 

And people are picking your government apart left and right. 

And I don‟t know who‟s doing it, Mr. Speaker, but I say one 

thing. There is somebody doing something to that opposition 

and I can‟t figure out for the life of me what their strategy is 

behind all that because at the end of the day it‟s going to catch 

up. It‟s going to catch up. So quite frankly when I look at the 

government today, Mr. Speaker, and I see really quite frankly a 

lot of opportunity for discourse, because they said one thing 

before the election and they‟re doing exactly opposite. They 

talked about the NDP being so bad and doing all these different 

things like the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and now they‟re doing 

it. 

 

[24:00] 

 

So I don‟t care what they said two years ago. That don‟t mean 

nothing to me. What happens from this day on is what means a 

significant amount, to not only persons like me in opposition, 

but the people that elected them over there. 

 

There are people right now that need money for housing. There 

are people that need money for post-secondary. There‟s 

infrastructure needs. Mr. Speaker, they need money at the mill 

in P.A., Mr. Speaker. They need money for agriculture. They 

need money for teachers, for nurses. 

 

They need money all over the place, Mr. Speaker, and yet what 

are they doing? They‟re telling their people, no, park their 

ambition, park their plan. We got a plan in place, you‟re going 

to follow it, and, Mr. Speaker, that is a problem, is you‟re 

destroying democracy, and you‟re not keeping your word, and 

that is the worst thing you can do to the people that sent you 

here. 

 

And the worst thing you can do yourself as a backbencher is to 

park your plan and your ambition. Because people like 

ambitious young people. They do. They like ambitious young 

people, but when the older guard tells them, this is what you got 

in front of you; you‟re going to follow it and swallow it, and 

that‟s it. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? That is a discredit to the 

constituency that sent him here. 

 

So I would say to them, if you‟re going to follow, if you‟re 

going to follow our path as a party and as a former government 

in setting up this Fiscal Stabilization Fund, there‟s a lot of merit 

to it. And I‟m not saying there‟s nothing wrong with it, but I‟m 

saying that‟s not what you promised during the election. 

 

You did not say that to the people. You didn‟t say that; we said 

it. Now all of a sudden you come here to Regina, now you‟re 

saying it. So no matter how much the change that you 

broadcast, the change that you broadcast, quite frankly, quite 

frankly it isn‟t there. The more change you profess, the more 

things stay the same. 

 

And I‟ll point out, Mr. Speaker, in my final comments here 

today, is that there‟s no question in my mind that I foresee, I 

foresee that there‟s going to be a lot of problems over there and, 

despite their promise of a second term, what are you giving up 

for that promise of a second term? At the end of the day what 

are you giving up? 

 

And they can hoot and holler all they want, Mr. Speaker, but I 

know what they said during the campaign and I know what they 

spouted off from the top of their mountain of money. And all 

those words don‟t mean nothing today because they‟re doing 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

exactly opposite of what they said they‟re going to do. Exactly 

opposite of what they said they‟re going to do, Mr. Speaker, 

and that I think is a spite of democracy and that I think is going 

to catch up to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I want to make my statements well known. The 

fact is, and I pointed out earlier in many of my conversations, I 

pointed out earlier that all the good news, all the good news that 

Saskatchewan has — the booming economy, the record number 

of people working, the oil and gas sector exploding, income 

coming into the province, everything‟s going great, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to say loud and clear to the Saskatchewan 

Party government: you had absolutely nothing to do with it. 

You simply inherited. 

 

So at least make the right decisions and spend the money when 

you have it and spend the money on helping people and spend 

the money on not making cuts and all in exchange for a plan 

three years from now to say, oh, now we‟re going to give you 

all these goodies. Now we‟re going to give you all these 

goodies because, guess what? We want to buy the election. And 

that‟s what they accused the NDP of last time, Mr. Speaker. 

They accused us of trying to buy the last election, Mr. Speaker. 

And they‟re doing that again. So to me no matter how much 

they profess change, things remain the same. 

 

And I say today that the backbenchers over there, they‟ll have 

to watch what they say to the people because the people will not 

be fooled, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re actually in Regina Douglas Park, and welcome, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill that we are addressing is Bill No. 1 of the 

government. It‟s An Act respecting Saskatchewan‟s Growth 

and Financial Security and repealing certain Acts. It‟s known as 

The Growth and Financial Security Act. Bill No. 1, the very 

first Bill of the government; the very first Bill of a Sask Party 

government ever; the very first Bill, not just of a session but the 

very first Bill of what they certainly hope are many sessions to 

come; the very first Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Bill that, I guess, in a 

manner of speaking is their signature. This is the Bill by which 

they seek to become known. This is the Bill by which they seek 

to become defined, Mr. Speaker, the very first Bill of the 

Saskatchewan Party government, The Growth and Financial 

Security Act. 

 

And it‟s interesting because this is a Bill that could have gone 

in a number of different ways. This is a Bill that could have 

emulated some of the musings, the proposals by some of the 

roots of the Saskatchewan Party, most of the roots of the 

Saskatchewan Party. And I speak of proposals for balanced 

budget legislation that was put before the Assembly in the early 

1990s by the then PC [Progressive Conservative] Party, who 

sought redemption from a very sorry record in government. We 

had the member for Kindersley who was then the leader of the 

PC Party putting forward balanced budget legislation even as 

we were discussing the legislation that is proposed to be 

repealed by this Act, but putting forward legislation that frankly 

was in the, well to put it, it was just very extreme, very extreme. 

Over the top. 

 

This is a Bill that, if memory serves me correctly, said that — 

the hard right, the old PCs — it said that it had to be balanced 

every year no matter what. Things like the Finance minister, if 

he didn‟t balance it, could lose his pay, or would he be 

pilloried? I forget exactly what. You know a pillory? One of 

those wooden stocks with holes for your head and your hands 

on a post so that you could be held up for public derision. That 

was the level of thinking, that was the level of thinking that 

prevailed in your party in the early 1990s. 

 

And that was one of the directions that this Bill could have 

gone. But no, the Saskatchewan Party didn‟t go that way. But 

the Saskatchewan Party in terms of its signature, in terms of 

seeking to be defined in the very first Bill that it put forward, no 

it sought to go the route that the former NDP government had 

gone in terms of legislation. This is a Bill that deals with 

balanced budgets, a Bill that deals with the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund which is also known as a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, deals with debt retirement fund, deals with 

issue of efficient service in government. 

 

But you know it‟s ironic that this first Bill does so much to call 

into question the trust the public had placed in this government, 

because this Bill is based on and is very much based on one 

large flip-flop. Now former speakers addressed the issue about 

this is a party that‟s saying one thing in opposition, doing 

something else in government. And, Mr. Speaker, they can 

proclaim from their seats, they can heckle, they can yell all they 

like, but this is a case very simply — everyone knows it — of 

them saying one thing in opposition and doing something 

different in government. 

 

And in particular in two specific items in this Bill: one is the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund or what is now proposed to be called 

the Growth and Financial Security Fund, and the other matter is 

one of balanced budgets. Now with respect to the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund or the Growth and Financial Security Fund, 

in opposition we heard from my colleagues going on at some 

length about how, in opposition, they said the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, the NDP Fiscal Stabilization Fund was 

phony-baloney. It was smoke and mirrors, worn out old 

accounting tricks, fudge-it budget, make-believe bank account, 

voodoo economics, phony-baloney election slush fund. 

 

They jumped on a rhetorical bandwagon, Mr. Speaker, powered 

by excessive hate for the NDP. There was no doubting they 

were just driven, driven to mock, to criticize the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund and giving every indication . . . In fact some 

members clearly said they‟re not going to have a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. They were not going to have a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. If you read their campaign literature the 

inference is clear — no Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 

But now, now, now we have a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They 

call it something different, although there are days that the 

Finance minister can‟t quite articulate the name of the new fund 

which is the Growth and Financial Security Fund, and he 

himself refers to it as a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

But this is the thing that troubles the public that, how it is that a 

political party can go to such excess, such excess in its rhetoric, 

such excess in its hate in opposition, and given an opportunity 

in government to act on their beliefs, comes out with something 

completely different? This is the thing that troubles the public 

and this is why my colleagues say, this is a government that is 

saying one thing in opposition and doing something else in 

government. 

 

The other issue that the members opposite focused on, Mr. 

Speaker, was the question of balanced budgets. They said that if 

you draw on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance your 

budget, well then it‟s a deficit budget. Well that‟s what they 

said in opposition again and again and again. 

 

I believe it was the member for Silver Springs who was acting 

as the Finance critic who was merciless in attacking the NDP 

government and calling into question the sustainability of the 

budget and the fact that the government would draw down the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance its budget. But what are 

they doing now? What are they doing now, Mr. Speaker? What 

are they doing now? Now they‟re doing exactly the same . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I know it‟s getting early in the 

morning, but if members would co-operate. I know it‟s 

sometimes difficult to just sit back and listen, but there will be 

ample time to respond. Right now the member from Regina 

Douglas Park has the floor. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — It doesn‟t bother me, Mr. Speaker. I 

always was taken with the words of John Diefenbaker who said 

when someone asked him about, how can you stand all the 

heckling in the House. And he said, well when you‟re out 

hunting big game you don‟t stop to take a shot at a jackrabbit, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a party in opposition, this is a party in 

opposition who said the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, if drawn 

down on, resulted in deficit budgets. Now they‟re saying, Mr. 

Speaker, now they‟re saying, Mr. Speaker, that when you draw 

down on the same fund, now it‟s a balanced budget. 

 

In fact they went one step further. When the Finance minister 

came out with his budget, when the Finance minister came out 

with his budget, he said this was a balanced budget and referred 

to 14 previous NDP budgets as balanced budgets. Completely 

contradictory to the position that they were taking in opposition. 

Completely contradictory to the position they were taking in 

opposition. 

 

All of which raises the questions, Mr. Speaker, all of which 

raises some questions for me. Did they not know in opposition, 

were they that uninformed in opposition about government 

finance and how it works? It‟s hard to believe, given all of the 

briefings that were made available to members of the 

opposition, MLA technical briefings which were provided on 

every imaginable subject, myriad opportunities to inform 

themselves at the Public Accounts Committee and other 

committees of the legislature, to learn about public finance and 

public administration. Millions of written questions — well, 

I‟m exaggerating. Maybe thousands of written questions, Mr. 

Speaker, that were put to the government on every imaginable 

subject. High-priced advisers, accountants among them. 

And we have the word from the member of Biggar that they 

also had meetings with banks and auditors to inform them on 

government finance, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s hard to believe, it‟s 

hard to believe that they were uninformed as an opposition and 

were making these comments on an uninformed basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Which then raises the second question: were they informed and 

knew but decided to criticize the NDP government anyway 

knowing they would do essentially the same when they formed 

government? In other words, they deserve the label of 

hypocrite. That‟s another scenario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[00:15] 

 

Now there‟s a third option that one can plausibly develop. They 

were informed but didn‟t understand. In other words, they were 

stupid. Well that is certainly a plausible scenario. Either they 

were uninformed — and that‟s not very likely — or they were 

informed and chose to ignore what they knew and decided to 

criticize the NDP anyway and said, when we form the 

government, we‟re going to essentially the same, which is then 

a question of hypocrisy, or they were informed but didn‟t 

understand, and they were stupid. So they can take their poison. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think we‟re at the point where 

we‟re getting a little too carried away in reference, making it 

personal, becoming too personal, and that‟s not becoming to the 

debate in the Assembly. And I invite the member to continue 

his remarks. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I certainly wouldn‟t want to reflect 

on individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member‟s been around a 

while and understands that he is not respond to a Speaker‟s 

ruling or request for the House to come to order. I just ask the 

member to go directly to his comments. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, given their fumbling, 

stumbling as a government, given their fumbling, stumbling as 

a government, when we witness for example the question of the 

management of the House; when we witness for example the 

fumbling and stumbling by the Minister of Social Services who 

one day said, well yes this is what we‟re going to do then said, 

oh no that‟s not what we‟re going to do, oh no this is what 

we‟re going to do; given a Premier who said the fiscal 

circumstances of Saskatchewan were stark — Mr. Speaker, 

given that kind of fumbling and stumbling, when I say that that 

party was . . . Well I don‟t want to use that word, but they 

certainly seem to lack some critical thinking capacity, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is a plausible scenario. So, Mr. Speaker, they 

didn‟t know? But very unlikely. They knew and the party was 

hypocritical, saying one thing, doing another. Thirdly, Mr. 

Speaker, they just didn‟t understand. They lacked the critical 

capacity to think these things through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the three choices that the people of 

Saskatchewan have when they seek to understand why it is that 

that party would say those things in opposition yet in 

government do something completely different, contrary to 

what they said. Those are the three choices, Mr. Speaker. Well 

actually it‟s only two, because I think they were informed. So 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

those are the choices for them. 

 

And speaking of understanding, Mr. Speaker, do they know that 

the budget as it stands is illegal? That is a question that I hope 

to address tomorrow. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, at this 

point I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved this House do now 

adjourn. Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 00:20.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 888 

 Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 889 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 901 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 906 

 Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 916 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 919 

  Weekes (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................ 919 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................... 919 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 924 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 929 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 883 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


