




















































Hansard: October 22, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2008, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1325 

 October 22, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the 

Vice Regal party. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:02.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan, A Better Life 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 

Guests, and people of Saskatchewan: 

 

Welcome to the opening of the Second Session of the Twenty-

Sixth Legislature. 

 

This year has seen profound change for the better in our 

province. 

 

Saskatchewan has been enjoying a rebirth. 

 

We are in a period of growth we have not seen in decades. 

 

While other economies are experiencing a significant downturn, 

Saskatchewan continues to experience economic strength, 

opportunity and prosperity. 

 

My government has adopted a balanced approach to sustaining 

and managing this growth — an approach characterized by 

fiscal prudence, investment in infrastructure and a commitment 

to innovation. 

 

The goal of this balanced approach is to ensure that the 

prosperity and growth in our province is not just a fleeting, 

temporary phenomena but rather a permanent fixture.  

 

Our goal is a stronger Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan has been richly endowed with the gifts of 

providence. 

 

And my government feels a strong and sincere obligation to 

build a better life in which all are able to share in these 

blessings.  

 

This is the theme of the Speech from the Throne and of the 

upcoming session:  

 

A stronger Saskatchewan. 

 

A better life.  

 

This Year Country 

 

For as long as I can remember, people have called our province 

―Next Year Country.‖ 

 

Today, I am pleased to report that in our Saskatchewan, next 

year has arrived. 

  

This year, Saskatchewan is expected to lead the nation in 

economic growth.  

 

This year, Saskatchewan is number one in wholesale trade 

growth, export sales growth and retail sales growth.  

 

This year, more people are working in Saskatchewan than ever 

before.  

 

This year, our population is growing at its fastest rate in over 50 

years.  

 

This year, more of our young people are choosing to stay in 

Saskatchewan, and moving back from other provinces.  

 

Because of this tremendous growth and new economic activity, 

government revenues have grown by over $3 billion.  

 

This money rightfully belongs to everyone in Saskatchewan.  

 

This is why my government asked the people of Saskatchewan 

for advice on the next steps it should take.  

 

Many people from all across our province have responded.  

 

Their wise and steady counsel has built on my government’s 

vision for reduction of debt, lower taxes, better infrastructure 

and sound financial management. 

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Debt Reduction and 

Fiscal Prudence 

 

Saskatchewan people understand that for many years, our 

province’s growth and prosperity was held back by a crushing 

burden of debt. 

 

Recent events south of the border have served to vividly 

illustrate how unreasonable levels of debt can bring a powerful 

economy to its knees. 

 

One of the first acts of my government was to enshrine in law 

its commitment to debt reduction. 

 

The Growth and Financial Security Act dedicates one-half of 

any government surplus to debt reduction. 

 

Already, this new law, coupled with the province’s strong 

economic performance, has enabled my government to cut the 

provincial debt by one-third. 

 

Many Saskatchewan people asked us to go further – to ensure a 

stronger Saskatchewan by reducing debt, and saving millions of 

dollars in interest payments now and in the future. 

 

It was good advice. 

 

My government will commit an additional $1 billion from the 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

province’s Growth and Financial Security Fund to pay down 

debt. 

 

When my government took office, debt stood at nearly $7 

billion. 

 

By the end of this fiscal year, my government will have reduced 

the debt burden by almost 40 per cent.  

 

This act alone will save Saskatchewan taxpayers hundreds of 

millions of dollars in interest payments in the coming years. 

 

That money will stay in the province and be re-invested in 

Saskatchewan, rather than being paid to banks on Bay Street 

and Wall Street. 

 

My government will continue to work towards debt reduction 

with the goal of debt elimination. 

 

Because a debt free Saskatchewan will be a stronger 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Our province, with its rich resource and commodities base, is 

well-positioned to weather the current economic storm.  

 

My government expects continued growth.  

 

But, it is also wise to be prepared for the unexpected.  

 

Even with the significant tax relief, infrastructure and debt 

reduction measures outlined in this Throne Speech, my 

government will continue to maintain a significant cash balance 

in the Growth and Financial Security Fund.  

 

My government is currently forecasting this balance to be 

approximately $2 billion at the end of the current fiscal year.  

 

This will be the rock on which we secure Saskatchewan’s 

future. 

 

This is our province’s financial insurance policy. 

 

In today’s global economic storm, the winds of uncertainty may 

continue to blow. 

 

However, here in Saskatchewan, we are used to the wind 

blowing.  

 

And we are built to withstand these winds.  

 

We expect our economy to flourish and prosperity to continue, 

even in these unstable times.  

 

Maintaining this cash balance is a very different approach, 

when compared to the policies that contributed to the economic 

meltdown in the United States.  

 

Their government is increasing debt. 

 

My government is paying down debt.  

 

And when their government reached a point of crisis, their only 

option was to borrow even more.  

But, Saskatchewan people should feel secure in the knowledge 

that they have a $2 billion fiscal insurance policy. 

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Better Infrastructure 

 

Many Saskatchewan people also told us that debt reduction 

cannot be the only priority. 

 

They asked us to learn from other jurisdictions that allowed 

their provincial infrastructure to fall behind the pace of a 

growing economy and population. 

 

Last spring, in its first budget, my government announced an 

unprecedented $1 billion infrastructure investment called 

―Ready for Growth‖.  

 

Because of this initiative, the task of restoring roads, schools 

and hospitals after years of neglect has started in earnest.  

 

However, there is still much to do.  

 

And this is why my government will increase its commitment to 

rebuilding Saskatchewan’s infrastructure by 50 per cent in the 

2009 budget, to a total of $1.5 billion.  

 

Investing in highways, schools, universities, hospitals and other 

vital infrastructure projects will ensure a stronger Saskatchewan 

and a better life for our people. 

 

A Better Life Through Lower Taxes For Everyone  

 

Many Saskatchewan people also told us that while they are 

excited and optimistic about the growth and new activity in our 

province, they are also concerned about the rising cost of living. 

 

It costs more to fill up your car with gasoline.  

 

It costs more to buy or rent a home, and to heat that home.  

 

Everyone in our province, but in particular those on lower 

incomes, is feeling the pinch.  

 

My government believes broadly-based tax cuts are the best and 

most effective way to address the rising cost of living and 

ensure a better life for Saskatchewan people.  

 

The resources that are driving our growing surplus belong to 

everyone—the benefits should be shared by everyone. 

 

That is why my government will provide the largest one-year 

income tax cut in Saskatchewan history by raising personal 

income tax exemptions — the amount you can earn tax free 

before you start to pay income tax. 

 

A family of four in Saskatchewan will now have the highest 

level of personal tax exemptions of any province in Canada. 

 

This is a significant advantage for those who live in our 

province, and a significant advantage in attracting new people 

and families to Saskatchewan. 

 

While every taxpayer in Saskatchewan will benefit from these 

changes, the greatest positive impact will be for low income 



October 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

individuals and families – those hardest hit by the rising cost of 

living.  

 

And 80,000 Saskatchewan people will no longer pay provincial 

income taxes at all. 

 

My government also recognizes that many low income people 

in Saskatchewan — students, seniors and others — already pay 

no income tax.  

 

Since they face an increasing cost of living and pay other 

provincial taxes, they also deserve to share in our prosperity.  

 

This is why my government will introduce a new Low Income 

Tax Credit.  

 

This new tax credit will replace and significantly increase the 

current Saskatchewan Sales Tax Credit.  

 

When taken as a whole, these measures will reduce taxes for 

Saskatchewan people by $300 million per year.  

 

These measures are affordable and sustainable, because of our 

growing economy, increases in revenues and reduced interest 

payments on the debt. 

 

They will help to address the rising cost of living and help 

create a better life for Saskatchewan people.  

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Innovation 

 

The author and columnist Thomas Friedman says the most 

important renewable fuel a society can create is an eco-system 

of innovation.  

 

In a world that is starving for safe, secure and reliable sources 

of environmentally sustainable energy, Saskatchewan must 

begin creating just such an eco-system of innovation.  

 

We must have the ability to conduct research into better ways of 

generating solar, wind and nuclear power.  

 

My government has a vision for Saskatchewan leading in the 

research and production of cellulosic ethanol from grass, straw 

and forest waste products.  

 

We must take current energy production and re-imagine it with 

an urgency heretofore not seen.  

 

This will require a trained workforce. 

 

This will require a cutting-edge scientific and technical 

infrastructure at our universities.  

 

And this will require vision and leadership.  

 

To that end, my government in this session will introduce an 

Act to establish ―Innovation Saskatchewan‖ as a special 

operating agency. 

 

And my government will make a significant financial 

investment in the innovation agenda. 

 

―Innovation Saskatchewan‖ will assist in coordinating, focusing 

and supporting research activities in our province.  

 

It will place a special emphasis on facilitating the 

commercialization of innovation and technology. 

 

The goal of ―Innovation Saskatchewan‖ will be to enhance this 

province’s competitiveness and productivity, which will ensure 

growth and prosperity now and in the future. 

 

A Saskatchewan where innovation flourishes will be a stronger 

Saskatchewan.  

 

And it will allow us to build a better life, not just for the people 

of this province, but for the nation and the world.  

 

My government will also continue advancing innovation 

projects that have already been announced.  

 

There will soon be an announcement regarding the short list for 

technology suppliers under the SaskPower Clean Coal project.  

 

And, through the formation of new partnerships, Saskatchewan 

will now begin to explore the advantages and innovations that 

can come from the value-added processing of this province’s 

rich uranium resource.  

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan, a Better Life Through Workforce 

Training 

 

Saskatchewan needs to continue building a knowledge 

economy. 

 

To quote from MIT Management and Economics Professor 

Lester Thurow, ―the old foundations of success are gone‖.  

 

Societies must reorganize to generate a knowledge economy.  

 

According to Thurow, building a knowledge-based economy 

requires large public investments in education, infrastructure, 

research and development because building a knowledge 

economy is both an individual and a team sport.  

 

In Saskatchewan, we are well positioned in this regard.  

 

We have Canada’s only Synchrotron.  

 

We are home to one third of Canada’s agricultural bio-tech 

industry. 

 

We have world-class work being done at the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre, including the internationally 

renowned carbon capture and sequestration project near 

Weyburn. 

 

We have the University of Saskatchewan’s Vaccine and 

Infectious Disease Organizations — VIDO, and InterVac — 

world leaders in their fields.  

 

My government is committed to continue building on 

investments in our post-secondary education system.  

 

Work will be done to foster even greater co-operation among 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

universities, regional colleges and technical institutes. 

 

My government will reward innovative new approaches like the 

creation of co-operative and applied learning opportunities that 

help better connect our students to the labour market.  

 

My government will also introduce improvements to the 

Graduate Retention Program, so that even more post-secondary 

graduates will choose to start their careers and build their 

futures in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan has grown by over 16,000 people in the past 

year. 

 

More people are moving in than moving out, but we still have 

thousands of unfilled employment opportunities. 

 

Saskatchewan no longer has a job shortage. 

 

Today, we have a people shortage.  

 

We need more skilled workers.  

 

My government acknowledges the crucial role that First 

Nations and Métis must play in the future Saskatchewan 

workforce.  

 

To date, participation rates by this important segment of our 

population have been lower than hoped for.  

 

Most importantly, my government is committed to providing 

First Nations and Métis with the educational opportunities, the 

skills training and employment options that will provide them 

with the tools to become full partners in our common future.  

 

My government has also been active across Canada and around 

the world in efforts to recruit new employees and bring home 

former Saskatchewan residents.  

 

These efforts will continue in the coming year.  

 

Further, my government is also focused on a new immigration 

strategy. 

 

This strategy is aimed at streamlining the process for entry into 

Saskatchewan, making it easier to live in a location that holds 

the best promise of the brightest future and highest quality of 

life.  

 

Through these measures, my government will continue to 

deliver a clear message to all those who are looking to new 

opportunities in our province. 

 

Saskatchewan is a great place to make a living. 

 

It’s an even better place to make a life. 

 

A Better Life Through Education 

 

Efforts to engage First Nations and Métis students will extend 

throughout the educational system.  

 

My government recently announced that treaty education will 

become a required part of the curriculum throughout all grades 

in Saskatchewan schools. 

 

My government will also move forward through initiatives like 

the Provincial Panel on Student Achievement.  

 

Saskatchewan will also be leading the Aboriginal Education 

Summit in 2009, bringing together education ministers and 

officials from across Canada.  

 

There is no question that education is key to ensuring a stronger 

Saskatchewan and a better life. 

 

My government has already made significant progress in 

addressing the infrastructure deficit created by years of neglect 

in the education system.  

 

So far, over $117 million has been committed in the budget to 

new construction and refurbishing existing schools.  

 

An additional $60 million was announced after the budget, for 

projects that will begin in 2009. 

 

Not only does this provide our students with enhanced facilities, 

it also benefits entire communities.  

 

My government is committed to ensuring our schools have the 

best technology available and our children have the knowledge 

and the skills to meet the challenges of life in the 21
st
 century. 

 

My government is also committed to assuring our libraries have 

the best available technology to assist in the important role they 

play in providing early learning programs, literacy training and 

support for community development.  

 

To that end, my government will soon be announcing an 

important new initiative that will ensure libraries and schools 

are able to meet these growing challenges.  

 

A Better Life for Children and their Parents  

 

Our youngest citizens and their parents also need our continued 

support.  

 

We know that these investments in the earliest years pay the 

largest dividends. 

 

Growth and continued prosperity will mean increasing demand 

for child care spaces.  

 

This is why my government has already invested in 500 new 

child care spaces, which are opening right now in communities 

across the province.  

 

An additional investment of $1.7 million in the 2008-2009 

budget year will increase the number of licensed child care 

spaces to 10,400. 

 

Parents wishing to participate in Saskatchewan’s growing 

economy, or wishing to further their education, will continue to 

have a safe place to take their children.  

 

My government is also in the process of increasing the number 



October 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

of pre-kindergarten programs by almost 25 per cent. 

 

That brings the total number of these programs to 193, serving 

over 3,000 children. 

 

This is work that is in progress, and work that will continue.  

 

Another important priority of my government is to fulfill its 

promise to reduce the education portion of property taxes.  

 

This too will help sustain economic growth and ensure all 

women and men across the province benefit from our 

prosperity.  

 

The Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education 

continues to work diligently on this issue.  

 

He has conducted meetings with people and organizations in the 

education field and has also made a call for submissions from 

those who want to have a further opportunity to make their 

voices heard.  

 

A final report on this important issue will be delivered to the 

Minister of Education in early 2009 – a report that will establish 

the basis for reforming the education tax system and reducing 

the education portion of property tax. 

 

A Better Life For People With Disabilities  

 

Over the past decade, an unacceptable situation was allowed to 

develop regarding access to needed support programs for 

people with disabilities.  

 

A wait list for these programs has grown to include over four 

hundred women and men. 

 

The problem has largely been ignored, until now. 

 

During this session, my government will announce a plan to 

address this wait list and ensure persons with disabilities receive 

the support they need. 

 

In the next budget year, it is the intention of my government 

also to provide equitable income support for women and men 

with disabilities.  

 

My government is also committed to ensuring persons receiving 

social assistance can become more independent, and that our 

system itself is not a barrier to independence. 

 

Changes will be introduced to increase the amount people can 

earn before their support payments are reduced.  

 

My government will continue to consult with persons with 

disabilities, to make sure they have a voice in the development 

of new measures to address their needs. 

 

A Better Life for Seniors  

 

My government desires a better life for Saskatchewan seniors.  

 

However, some are facing significant challenges as costs 

increase.  

The Saskatchewan Income Assistance program was designed to 

help low income seniors maintain their quality of life.  

 

Sadly, the benefit provided to seniors under this program has 

not been increased since 1992.  

 

That is not good enough. 

 

During this session, my government will provide an increase to 

this important support program. 

 

A Better Life for At Risk Children 

 

Poverty is placing Saskatchewan children at risk.  

 

Children of poor families aren’t as healthy.  

 

They aren’t as successful in school.  

 

They have a higher risk of getting involved in dangerous 

activities.  

 

Right now in Saskatchewan, some 20 per cent of our 43,000 

children live in poverty.  

 

This cannot be allowed to continue.  

 

The tax changes my government has announced represent the 

most aggressive public policy initiative available for reducing 

child poverty.  

 

Putting more money back in the hands of parents will help them 

address their children’s needs. 

 

However, my government will not stop there.  

 

It will continue efforts aimed at improving programs and 

services for at risk children in Saskatchewan.  

 

As part of this effort, Saskatchewan’s The Children and Family 

Services Act, as well as The Adoption Act will be renewed and 

improved.  

 

A Better Life Through Affordable, Accessible Housing 

 

My government responded earlier this year to the housing 

challenges facing Saskatchewan people with the Affordable 

Housing Task Force. 

 

That report was well received, and an aggressive initial 

response was undertaken.  

 

Shelter rates for low income renters were increased.  

 

Living allowances under the integrated student loan program 

were also increased. 

 

So were per diem rates paid to organizations operating 

emergency shelters. 

 

During this session, my government will continue responding to 

the Task Force’s recommendations.  

 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

Legislation will be introduced to create a new, modern and 

more responsive board for the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation.  

 

Further, my government will also be developing a new capital 

program for the Housing Corporation in the upcoming year.  

 

Another recommendation of the Task Force was better 

protection for renters facing a rent increase.  

 

My government will address this recommendation through 

amendments to The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. 

 

Community Based Organizations—Building Better Lives  

 

Agencies that provide vital services for vulnerable people have 

received considerable attention from my government.  

 

These agencies and the 6,000 people who work in them across 

Saskatchewan are on the front line of providing much-needed 

services to some of the most vulnerable people in our province. 

 

Earlier this fall, these organizations were the recipients of the 

largest ever single year increase to assist in the recruitment of 

new staff, and the retention of existing staff.  

 

Starting with the 2009-2010 budget, my government will enter 

into long term stable funding agreements with these important 

partners.  

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Better Heath Care 

 

For over a decade, Saskatchewan’s health care infrastructure 

has been decaying due to neglect and under-funding.  

 

Repairing these hospitals, clinics and long-term care facilities is 

now an urgent priority. 

 

That is why my government has invested $100 million into 

improving health care facilities, for the benefit of patients and 

the people who work in these facilities.  

 

My government will soon be making further announcements 

regarding much needed health capital projects in our province.  

 

My government has also been working diligently on its promise 

to increase the number of nurses and doctors in our health care 

system.  

 

By the end of March 2009, the Ministry anticipates all 400 

Filipino nurses recently offered employment to be working in 

Saskatchewan.  

 

The task of resolving long-standing workplace and nursing 

shortage issues will also continue through the Nursing 

Partnership Table—the only one of its kind in Canada.  

 

Nurses are a critical component of the health care system.  

 

So too are doctors.  

 

Increasing the supply of locally trained physicians is a priority 

for the Ministry of Health.  

My government has already added 24 new undergraduate seats 

and 24 new residency seats.  

 

Soon, it will be unveiling plans to meet the commitment for 

adding 40 new undergraduate seats and 60 new residency 

positions.  

 

My government will introduce a comprehensive physician 

recruitment strategy that will include accelerated training and 

licensing of international medical graduates. 

 

There will also be mechanisms put in place to better support 

rural doctors.  

 

However, the most important person in the health care system is 

the person the system serves – the patient. 

 

Rather than continuing with a system that asks patients to fit in, 

work will soon begin on redesigning health care to better match 

the needs of patients.  

 

The vehicle for achieving this goal will be the ―Patient First 

Review‖. 

 

My government will also fulfill its promise to implement 

patient exit surveys to measure the quality of the patient’s 

experience with the health care system.  

 

These two initiatives will shed a spotlight on the needs of 

patients and help develop a strategy to fill any existing gaps in 

care.  

 

A health care system that puts the patient first will mean a 

better life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

A Better Life, A Greener Environment 

 

My government believes that the goals of a growing economy 

and a greener province go hand in hand.  

 

That is why we are committed to exploring alternative energy 

sources, like clean coal and nuclear power.  

 

These alternatives have the potential to create tremendous 

economic activity and growth, while at the same time 

significantly reducing our environmental footprint. 

 

Saskatchewan residents also have an opportunity to do their 

part—and save money—by accessing a comprehensive list of 

energy conservation programs.  

 

In the weeks ahead, my government will be expanding that list 

to include a new program that encourages homeowners to 

install geothermal heating systems.  

 

During this session, my government will unveil an effective 

response to the challenges facing Saskatchewan as a result of 

efforts to control greenhouse gas emissions in our country.  

 

The goal of my government is to ensure that carbon offsets or 

penalties imposed by the federal government on heavy 

greenhouse gas emitters will stay in our province to fund 

research into innovative new measures that will actually lead to 



October 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

a reduction in these emissions.  

 

Fresh, clean water is essential for a high quality of life in our 

province. 

 

People all across Saskatchewan need to know they will have 

access to safe and reliable water, now and in the future.  

 

My government will begin work on a comprehensive water 

management plan, to meet this important need.  

 

A Better Life For First Nations and Métis  

 

My government is keenly aware that various ministries, through 

their initiatives and activities, touch the lives of many First 

Nations and Métis on an almost daily basis.  

 

Therefore, my government will direct that each Ministry 

embraces this reality as they go about their daily activities.  

 

For the past year, my government has been working in close co-

operation with First Nations, Métis and industry leaders on the 

development of new consultation guidelines for future projects.  

 

Important results from these consultations are expected during 

this session. 

 

My government will also work with First Nations and Métis, 

the federal government as well as other provinces and territories 

to ensure that Jordan’s Principle becomes the guiding principle 

for providing care to our children.  

 

This principle holds that no child should be denied medical or 

other necessary services because of a dispute with governments 

over who has jurisdiction.  

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Safer Highways  

 

This year, my government made a significant commitment to 

rebuilding our province’s crumbling highway system. 

 

Over 1,400 kilometers of work has been done this construction 

year.  

 

However, much more work needs to be done.  

 

A significant portion of my government’s $1.5 billion 

infrastructure commitment will go toward fixing our highways. 

 

However, better long-term planning is also needed. 

 

During this session of the Legislature, my government will 

introduce its promised five-year rolling plan for highway 

construction, and the expansion of the primary weight highway 

network.  

 

This plan will use clearly defined criteria to establish a method 

of determining the order in which highways should be repaired.  

 

Safe highways remain a top priority of my government, as does 

my government’s commitment to provide historic funding 

increases to our transportation system, including rural roads, to 

address the inherited infrastructure deficit. 

Stronger Crowns — Building a Better Saskatchewan 

 

Saskatchewan’s Crown Corporations must have a clear focus on 

providing the best possible service to Saskatchewan people at 

the lowest possible cost. 

 

In recent years, this focus has been diverted by money-losing 

ventures outside Saskatchewan’s borders. 

 

During this session, my government will introduce a new policy 

for Crown Corporation investments — one that shifts the focus 

to development within the province. 

 

In the past, governments have adopted an out-of-province 

investment strategy that saw millions of taxpayers’ dollars 

gambled and lost in other parts of Canada and around the world.  

 

In the coming weeks, my government will be releasing a report 

showing how, for the most part, these investments were not 

successful and did not benefit the people of Saskatchewan.  

 

Building a stronger Saskatchewan will require a change in 

approach – a ―Saskatchewan First‖ investment policy. 

 

Soon, my government will also be receiving the findings of a 

feasibility study into nuclear power by a leading company in 

nuclear energy, Bruce Power.  

 

My government believes it is time for fulsome consideration of 

the potential of nuclear power in Saskatchewan.  

 

A Stronger Agriculture Sector, A Better Life for Farm 

Families 

 

After much hard work and effort, the busy fall harvest season is, 

for the most part, over for Saskatchewan’s farm families.  

 

Yields are good, but input costs have increased.  

 

One cost that my government can influence is property taxes.  

 

Farm families should look forward to our report on the 

education tax system, and the reduction of the education portion 

of property taxes.  

 

My government plans to participate fully and immediately in 

federal programs designed to help farm families.  

 

The Ministry of Agriculture will move ahead with plans to 

bring administration of AgriStability (formerly known as CAIS) 

to Saskatchewan.  

 

This will result in a better program—one that is more 

responsive to the unique needs and challenges facing 

Saskatchewan producers.  

 

My government is also committed to strengthening Crop 

Insurance, giving better value to those who rely on this 

important program.  

 

Improvements will be introduced in the New Year.  

These improvements will be based on the input received during 

the recent review of the Crop Insurance program.  



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

Some sectors of Saskatchewan’s livestock industry are facing 

economic challenges.  

 

This is particularly true of the cattle and hog sectors.  

 

Long-term strategies for growth must be developed in co-

operation with industry.  

 

This work is underway.  

 

My government has demonstrated its support for agriculture 

with its commitment to providing long-term, secure water 

supplies in Saskatchewan’s south-west.  

 

This is an area of our province where producers have endured a 

number of years of drought.  

 

Compensation levels have been increased under the Farm and 

Ranch Water Infrastructure Program. 

 

My government will also expand Extension Services in rural 

Saskatchewan.  

 

Stronger Communities By Working With Municipalities 

 

My government is working with Saskatchewan municipalities 

to help them serve their citizens and meet the challenges and 

opportunities of growth. 

 

Communities across Saskatchewan recently received the first 

round of funding under the Saskatchewan Infrastructure Growth 

Initiative. 

 

$75 million in interest-free loans were distributed to 

communities to help them meet the growing demand for more 

residential lots and infrastructure. 

 

This first year of the program was extremely successful.  

 

As a result, my government will move forward in future years, 

confident that this program meets important municipal 

priorities.  

 

My government recognizes that many municipalities are dealing 

with an infrastructure deficit, just like the provincial 

government. 

 

This is largely a result of many years of significant cuts to 

municipal revenue sharing. 

 

That is why my government increased revenue sharing in its 

first budget, and provided a further increase after the budget, 

when revenue numbers showed improvement.  

 

That is why my government is committed to a long-term 

solution by creating a new revenue sharing agreement with 

municipalities that ties municipal revenue sharing to the 

province’s own source revenue. 

 

My government expects to have a new revenue sharing formula 

in place by the 2009 budget. 

 

 

A Stronger Democracy 
 

During the course of the last election, my government promised 

fairer elections by removing the advantages held by the 

governing party – advantages that led to political 

gamesmanship and voter cynicism. 

 

Last session, my government fulfilled its promise to establish 

set election dates. 

 

This session, my government will fulfill its promise to restrict 

the amount of government advertising in the period leading up 

to an election. 

 

Such a move will eliminate the possibility of future 

governments attempting to increase that level of advertising to 

gain a political advantage.  

 

During this session, my government will also introduce 

legislation allowing the people of our province to elect the next 

nominee to the Senate.  

 

With this process, we are placing an important democratic tool 

into the hands of our citizens, and taking an important step in 

moving toward a democratic, elected Senate. 

 

A Better, Safer Life in Saskatchewan 

 

My government is committed to cracking down on crime 

stemming from the activities of gangs.  

 

Often, victims of gang violence and those with information 

about gangs are reluctant to step forward.  

 

These witnesses may have information that is valuable to these 

cases, but they may not qualify under witness protection 

programs offered by the federal government.  

 

To rectify this situation, my government will introduce a new 

Witness Protection Act.  

 

The goal of this legislation will be to protect potential witnesses 

from threats of violence and intimidation.  

 

My government will also strengthen existing laws relating to 

the seizure of property used in the commission of crimes, or the 

proceeds of crime.  

 

This is another important measure in fighting organized crime 

and gang activity in our province. 

 

These improvements come in addition to initiatives now in 

place, including the designation of full time security 

intelligence officers in correctional centres.  

 

This change has made the management of gangs within 

correctional centres more focused and coordinated with police 

forces.  

 

The Corrections, Public Safety and Policing ministry is also 

conducting a province-wide case file review of all serious 

violent offenders serving sentences in the community.  

 



October 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

Some of these offenders may be involved in gang activity.  

 

The purpose of the review is to ensure these offenders are 

receiving high levels of supervision and help identify possible 

gaps in service.  

 

The Ministry is also working with Saskatchewan Police 

Services and the Criminal Intelligence Services of 

Saskatchewan to develop a gang database that will assist police 

services in the identification and tracking of gang members.  

 

My government also remains committed to ensuring a greater 

police presence throughout Saskatchewan.  

 

It is taking another step this year to keep a promise to fund 120 

new police officers over the course of the four year mandate.  

 

In the current budget year, provision has been made for 30 new 

officers, nine of which are directed to a specialized 

investigation unit that gathers intelligence used to combat 

organized crime and gangs.  

 

In the upcoming budget year, the ministry will again be funding 

at least 30 new officers.  

 

Further, several of the new positions will be used to form part 

of a province-wide policing strategy, aimed at combating gang 

violence.  

 

The new policing strategy will be announced in detail, later this 

year.  

 

My government is aware these criminal organizations do not 

respect provincial or international boundaries.  

 

This is why it is working with our neighbours to tackle the gang 

problem together.  

 

A stronger Saskatchewan is one where law-abiding citizens are 

safe from the scourge of crime.  

 

These measures are another step down that road.  

 

My government will also keep another promise focused on the 

safety of seniors.  

 

This initiative will help low income seniors make their homes 

safer through a complimentary home security audit, and the 

installation of basic security devices, like deadbolts and window 

latches. 

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan Through Better Communications 

 

All of Saskatchewan requires access to high-speed internet and 

other services that make it easier to operate a business. 

 

My government will develop a five-year plan to encourage the 

expansion and availability of broadband services to rural 

communities to enhance their prosperity and quality of life.  

 

My government is committed to making it easier for businesses 

to get information and assistance from ministries.  

 

This is why work is being done now on a project that will 

provide easy, one stop access to information, programs and 

services.  

 

This project will see the creation of a web-based government-

wide gateway that is aligned with the needs of the business 

community.  

 

This will make it easier to start or expand a business in 

Saskatchewan.  

 

A Better Life Through Tourism and Arts 

 

Our Saskatchewan provincial parks are a real treasure.  

 

They offer nearby recreational opportunities for our residents, at 

a reasonable cost.  

 

The number of visits to our provincial parks jumped by 11 per 

cent in 2008, exceeding the three million visit mark for the first 

time. 

 

My government will continue to upgrade our provincial parks 

so that they attract even more visitors. 

 

My government will also keep its commitment for increased 

tourism funding. 

 

During this session, my government is committed to the 

introduction of a new ―Arts Professions Act.‖  

 

This Act will increase protection for artists and their intellectual 

property.  

 

It will require written contracts between those who engage the 

services of artists and the artists themselves.  

 

And it will require that these contracts acknowledge clearly the 

transfer of any rights from professional artists. 

 

A Tribute  

 

While 2008 has been a tremendous year for our province, we 

have also been reminded that the freedom and way of life that 

we enjoy comes with a cost. 

 

We are truly blessed to have so many brave young men and 

women willing to pay that cost on our behalf. 

 

Today, the people of Saskatchewan and my government say 

thank you. 

 

Thank you to all who serve our country. 

 

And thank you to Sergeant Prescott Shipway, Corporal Dustin 

Wasden, and Master Corporal Josh Roberts, all of whom made 

the supreme sacrifice this past year while serving our country in 

Afghanistan. 

 

Saskatchewan’s history is replete with examples of men and 

women who have sacrificed everything for the betterment of 

others.  

 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 2008 

Their names are engraved on the war memorials and cenotaphs 

across our province, but their real legacy is etched into the lives 

and the freedoms that each one of us enjoys everyday, here, in 

the best province in the best country in the world. 

 

We honour them today and pray that their remaining loved ones 

and friends find comfort in years ahead, by knowing this 

sacrifice was not in vain.  

 

As a further tribute, during this session my government will 

introduce measures to honour returning soldiers as well as the 

sons and daughters of those who have made the ultimate 

sacrifice.  

 

This will take the form of a scholarship for post-secondary 

education.  

 

CONCLUSION  

 

During this session the Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, 

together with the Estimates for the new year commencing April 

1, 2009, will also be submitted to you.  

 

The French aviator and author, Antoine de Saint Exupery said 

this:  

 

Your task is not to foresee the future, but to enable it. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan people are transforming our province – 

from stagnation to growth, from a have-not to a have province, 

from a place where more people move out to a place where 

more people move in. 

 

This transformation is evident everywhere you go in our great 

province. 

 

There is tremendous optimism in Saskatchewan today, and we 

don’t ever want to turn back. 

 

My government’s role is to enable the future, to enable 

Saskatchewan people to continue this fundamental positive 

change in our province. 

 

My government’s role is to ensure Saskatchewan people have 

the tools and the resources they need to chart their own course 

and follow their own dreams. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, our people have a million different 

dreams. 

 

Actually, 1,015,985 to be exact. 

 

But in one way or another, we all share the same dream – the 

dream of a stronger Saskatchewan, and a better life. 

 

And everyday in the new Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan people 

are making that dream come true. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. 

 

May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 

this Assembly in all of its deliberations.  

 

God Bless Saskatchewan. God Bless Canada. And God Save 

the Queen.  

 

The Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen, we’ll begin with our 

traditional Assembly prayer and I’d ask you to rise. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I’m pleased to invite Elder Ken 

Goodwill to offer a prayer. 

 

Elder Goodwill: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want first of all 

to acknowledge the tobacco that was presented to me and I 

would like all of you to help me pray. 

 

I’m going to pray in my own language which is Dakota, not 

because it’s a better language but it’s simply truer to my own 

heritage. 

 

Please help me. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you Elder Goodwill. 

 

Please remain standing for the departure of Their Honours. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:54.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill 

respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Brianne Coffey, Megan Fraser, Tanessa 

Johnson, Samantha Kerr, Desiree McPartlin, and Raegan 

Woods. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



October 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Thursday, October 23, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Thursday, October 23, 2008. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

First of all, I wish to thank all the guests and members of the 

public for joining us today. 

 

I want to thank the Hon. J. Klebuc, Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan; the Hon. C.A. Snell, Chief Judge of the 

Provincial Court; and the members of the judiciary for your 

attendance this afternoon. 

 

I would also like to thank Elder Ken Goodwill from the 

Standing Buffalo First Nation for taking part in our ceremony 

today. 

 

Welcome also to the S.T.A.R.S. Choir. They are seated in the 

west gallery and I will be calling on them to sing for us in a few 

moments. 

 

I would like as well to thank the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the guard of honour earlier this afternoon: 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, 17 Wing Detachment Dundurn HMCS 

Queen, HMCS Unicorn, Saskatchewan Dragoons, Royal Regina 

Rifles, North Saskatchewan Regiment, 16 Service Battalion, 

and 16 Field Ambulance. As well I would like to thank the 10 

Field Regiment and the Royal Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun 

salute, the Royal Canadian Artillery band and the Snowbirds 

and 15 Wing for the flypast. 

 

I would like to invite each and everyone of you to join Their 

Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and 

members of the Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea 

which will take place immediately following the Chamber 

ceremony. The tea will be held in two locations — room 218 in 

the west wing on your left as you exit the front doors, and the 

library reading room in the east wing to your right as you exit 

the front doors. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

It is my pleasure to welcome from Weyburn Comprehensive 

School, the S.T.A.R.S. Show Choir. S.T.A.R.S. — Singers 

Taking and Raising Spirits — performs in and around their 

community. This year they were part of the opening act for 

Telemiracle 2008 and in 2009 they will take part in the Canada 

Day celebrations on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. The choir is 

under the direction of Colleen Weimer and accompanied by 

Mikyla Jensen. Rogan Milatz will be joining them on the guitar 

later in the Rotunda. 

 

The choir this afternoon will sing two selections for us — ―One 

Small Voice‖ and ―Why We Sing.‖ Ladies and gentlemen, 

S.T.A.R.S. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you S.T.A.R.S. Choir on behalf of all 

present. Your youthful, vibrant voices have truly added to our 

afternoon ceremonies. And quite possibly it might be 

appropriate to call upon you for that song ―One Small Voice‖ 

when we get into major debate in the near future. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, you’ll have the honour of again hearing 

these lovely voices as they’ll be singing in the Rotunda a little 

later. 

 

One final announcement. I would ask that members and guests 

observe the following order when departing from the Chamber: 

Speaker’s party will be followed by His Honour’s party, 

Premier and Mrs. Wall, Leader of the Opposition and Mrs. 

Calvert, judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and 

Provincial Court, members of the cabinet and their spouses, 

other members of the Legislative Assembly and their spouses, 

and guests. Please enjoy the tea. 

 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:58.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 1325 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1334 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1334 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1335 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


